                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12530
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                              Project ID:    P151447
                            Project Name:     Ghana: Public Financial Management Reform Project (P151447)
                            Task Team         Ismaila B. Ceesay
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         26-Feb-2015                        Estimated   21-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGODR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         45.00                Total Bank Financing:      45.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               45.00
                              Total                                                                                     45.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the budget management, financial control
                           and reporting of the Government of Ghana.
                            3. Project Description
                           The main objective of the project is to assist the Government of Ghana in improving the budget
                           management, financial control and reporting. As such, it has four components and related sub-

                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         components, as elaborated below.

                         Component 1: Enhancing Budget Credibility (US$1.7 million). The objective of this component is to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improve budget management and strengthen credibility of the national budget.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening Budgetary Planning and Macro-Fiscal Management (US$0.6
                         million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to establish and strengthen controls on all claims
                         on fiscal resources.
                         Current Status. Sector Medium Term Development Plans (SMTDP) fail to provide a clear linkage
                         between national planning and resources allocated in the budget and are a source of pressure on
                         budget resources. The PFM Reform Strategy notes that accurate costing of plans is a significant
                         weakness, and that SMTDPs are not resource constrained, resulting in over-ambitious “wish-lists”
                         that cannot be reconciled with the Medium Term Fiscal Framework (MTFF). These plans are not
                         integrated with the preparation of budget strategy or the formulation of budget ceilings.
                         Fiscal forecasts prepared each year by the Economic Research and Forecasting Division (ERFD)
                         need further strengthening. Forecasts are undertaken as a collaborative effort with the GRA, Budget
                         Department, DMD, External Resource Mobilization Unit, Bank of Ghana, and other stakeholders.
                         Initial estimates are prepared in June, and are used for the purpose of preparing Budget Ceilings for
                         the following year’s budget. Reforecasting takes place in November and these estimates are used in
                         the budget documentation. The PFM reform strategy lists the following as weaknesses in this system:
                         revenue forecasts can often include proposals for new revenue initiatives that are not subsequently
                         implemented or are delayed; inadequate data is available to forecasters on potential tax payers and
                         the levels of tax compliance; unanticipated external shocks can diminish the accuracy of estimates;
                         and wage negotiations are often finalized after the budget, making forecasting difficult.
                         Debt management needs strengthening to ensure that data on accruing debt is well maintained and
                         debt is appropriately sourced and sustainable. The recent ECF arrangement with the IMF has placed
                         limits on the extent to which BoG financing can be used and these requirements will place more
                         pressure on the Debt Management Division (DMD) of the Ministry of Finance (MoF), which already
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has limited capacity.
                         Activities to be Financed. The project proposes the following interventions to assist the Government
                         to improve planning and forecasting performance. i) Review and strengthen Cabinet’s formal
                         engagement in the budget process and design a “budget charter” that would establish the principles,
                         roles and obligations of key stakeholders in a sound budget process; ii) design a strengthened budget
                         framework paper to be used as a vehicle for obtaining Cabinet approval to medium term forecasts of
                         fiscal space; iii) build MDA capacity to develop costed sector strategies and sector medium-term
                         development plans (SMTDPs); iv) strengthen technical linkages and information sharing between
                         fiscal forecasting and analysis and the budget formulation and execution processes; and specialist on-
                         going training for forecasters in ERFD; v) provide technical training to ERFD forecasting staff; and
                         vi) Strengthen capacity in the DMD. In addition, the project will support the Minister of Finance’s
                         critical role in managing expectations of his cabinet colleagues and other key stakeholders regarding
                         the affordability of line ministry’s capital and recurrent spending plans, through the change
                         management component of the project.
                         Expected Outcome. By the end of the project it is expected that: a) budget discipline will be
                         strengthened by review and strengthening of fiscal strategy presentation in the Budget Framework
                         Paper and clarification of shared Cabinet responsibilities and the necessity of a joint application of
                         the MTFF; and b) Sector medium term strategy plans will be comprehensively costed and provide a
                         sound input for the development of annual budget ceilings.



                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Public Investment Management Capacity (US$0.3 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to ensure that all investment projects for financing
                         through the budget are selected, appraised and prioritized in relation to available fiscal space.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Current Status. The Public Investment Program in Ghana is still experiencing serious problems due
                         to weak systems, budgetary indiscipline, and weak capacity. Implementation of projects is slow, cost
                         blow-outs are frequent and many projects remain uncompleted . Serious reform to systems and
                         practices are necessary and capacity needs to be ungraded.
                         The Public Investment Division (PID) in the MoF has a formal responsibility for project appraisal
                         and prioritization and for providing inputs to the budget process. However, this function appears
                         fragmented. The PID is still trying to find its feet and suffers from lack of budgetary resources (e.g.
                         to engage consultants for appraisal of projects, feasibility studies, etc.) and a lack of specific project
                         appraisal capacity.
                         The PID has recently received assistance from DFID as well as USAID to develop the Public
                         Investment Management System (PIMS). The database contains all contract information and can
                         identify outstanding payments for current projects, and is interfaced with the budget preparation
                         module of GIFMIS. PID is managed by the Public Investment Unit, which comprises six officers.
                         These officers, while trained economists, require specialist skills in project appraisal. PID has also
                         received support from the World Bank to develop a draft Public Investment Management Policy.
                         Government has not yet approved the policy.
                         Activities to be Financed. The main activities will be: i) improving capacity to ensure effective
                         evaluation and ‘whole-of-Government’ prioritization of projects before they enter the budget process,
                         by engaging TA to provide a 4-6 week course, to the staff of Public Investment Unit (of PID) and up
                         to 24 staff of other MDAs; ii) improving coordination of PIM with the budget process developing by
                         a detailed procedural manual for the PIM and training MoF and MDAs in the process; iii) reviewing
                         the functionality of the Public Investment Management System (PIMS) to ensure that the system will
                         adequately support the determined processes. This will be complemented by policy actions in the
                         DPF operations strengthen the role of the Ministry of Finance in ensuring that capital projects that
                         are financed are both useful and affordable.
                         Expected Outcome. By the end of the project an orderly process should be established to ensure that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         all projects submitted are appropriately prepared for funding through the budget and prioritized
                         within clearly defined resource limits; the rate of timely completion of projects within budgets should
                         be increased as a result.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening the Budget Operational Framework (US$0.6 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to implement improved management practices to
                         improve the performance of public spending at MDA level while ensuring that the predictability of
                         resource flows for budget implementation is improved.
                         Current Status. The 2015 Budget was prepared using the Hyperion module linked to Oracle, using
                         the common national chart of accounts to ensure seamless loading to the General Ledger for
                         execution, and appropriation was in a program format. Program structures have been developed for
                         all MDAs along with program and sub-program narratives and key performance measures and
                         targets. Program appropriations will be managed in budget execution for the first time during 2015,
                         so performance improvements have yet to materialize in spending units. It is also clear that the
                         benefits of PBB will not materialize until basic controls over inputs (cash, people and assets) are
                         operational.
                         Activities to be Financed. The activities funded through the project will include: i) TA to advise the
                         Budget Department on the changes required to ensure the benefits of PBB are maximized; ii) TA to
                         review MDA program structures, performance measures and targets, and narratives over the period
                         of the project; and refresher training for MDAs implementing PBB; and iii) on-going training for

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         MDAs in PBB, and iv) facilitation of an intense engagement between MoF and MDAs with a view to
                         identify service delivery problems in MDAs and to use PBB as a tool to address these progressively,
                         through the change management component (see below).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected Outcome. By the end of the project, it is expected that a) management by programs will be
                         embedded in MoF and MDA systems and processes and all stakeholders will have confidence in the
                         program structure, performance measures and targets; and b) there will be improvements in service
                         delivery performance in at least two MDAs.

                         Sub-component 1.4: Fiscal Risk Management and Reporting (US$0.2 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to establish comprehensive systems for monitoring
                         and review of all sources of risk to the planned budget out-turn to enable timely mitigation of these
                         risks.
                         Current Status. Although risks, particularly from external shocks, are taken into account in fiscal
                         forecasting, no mechanism is in place nor have organizational responsibilities been allocated for
                         surveying all potential risks to the budget and fiscal position and taking these risks into account.
                         Responsibilities for assessing some aspects of risk are distributed among various MoF departments
                         (including PIM, which also covers financial appraisal of state holdings in corporate entities).
                         Proposals to establish a single entity to monitor financial risks from the state enterprise sector,
                         including augmentation of the role of the DMD, are under consideration.
                         Activities to be financed. The main activities will be as follows: i) Designate an entity and develop a
                         comprehensive system for monitoring expenditure arrears and other risks arising from the CF, SOEs,
                         and other sources; ii) TA to review current risk analysis and reporting practices by existing entities
                         and recommend an appropriate organization and mandate to take over the function of risk analysis
                         and development of risk mitigation policy; iii) Build capacity and establish the authority for the
                         entity to carry out its functions effectively; and iv) develop a fiscal risk statement as a regular part of
                         the budget presentation.
                         Expected outcome. The main outcome will be that fiscal risk monitoring will become
                         institutionalized as an established as part of the budget process. This will both strengthen the
                         authority of the responsible entity and demonstrate the commitment of the Government to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         comprehensive management of fiscal risks.

                         Component 2: Public Financial Management Systems and Control (US$33.7 million). The objective
                         of this component is to support the design, development, implementation and coverage of the
                         Government’s PFM systems and control.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening Government Information Systems (US$29.0 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to complete the work started in the previous
                         project on the design, development, implementation and coverage of the GIFMIS (IFMIS, HRMIS,
                         Hyperion, Payroll and systems interfaces) to enable them to function as tools for improved fiscal
                         management and budgetary control, cash and debt management, timely and accurate reporting for
                         better economic management and effective service delivery.
                         Current Status. A summary of the key achievements of the previous project are: implementation of a
                         Harmonized Chart of Accounts compliant with international standards, for all financial transactions
                         at all levels of Government, throughout the country; progress towards setting up a Treasury Single
                         Account (TSA); implementation of a state of the art GIFMIS to serve as the official system of record
                         to meet the GoG’s budget, financial accounting and reporting, disbursements, internal controls, and
                         auditing requirements. The GIFMIS covers both the Budget Preparation (Hyperion) and the full
                         range of activities in Budget Execution and also includes modules for Payroll preparation and
                         HRMIS, details on system deployment and other technical aspects are given at Annex 2. GIFMIS

                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                         did not aim to cover the design of policies but only their implementation through the provision of the
                         requisite tools and enabling facilitation.
                         Activities to be Financed. The GIFMIS has established a transaction-processing platform for budget
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management, but gaps remain in coverage of this transaction processing which limit the delivery of
                         comprehensive and credible information required for the financial operations and the economic
                         management and statutory reporting layers. The new project will enhance the coverage to address
                         these gaps, so as to improve the quality of fiscal and statutory reporting for better economic
                         management. The key activities to be undertaken in this area can be divided into three groups:
                         a.       (I) Enhancements in the coverage of the Budget and Financial Systems Modules of the
                         GIFMIS including: (a) roll out of Budget Preparation module (Hyperion) to the MDAs; (b) extending
                         GIFMIS footprint, including the P2P process, to capture and track transactions related to the IGFs,
                         statutory funds and donor funds; (c) extending GIFMIS roll-out to all the remaining MMDAs -
                         around 216 in total; (d) Public Investment Management – executing the planning process for public
                         investment management through Hyperion- currently being supported through PIMS; (e) recording
                         of long-term commitments; (f) implementation of electronic bank reconciliation for the main treasury
                         account as well as the sub-consolidated fund accounts; (g) operationalization of GIFMIS interfaces
                         with other key Government systems, including TRIPS for tax management, e-Monitor for non-tax
                         receipts, GCMS for customs revenue management. Details are given in Annex 1.
                         b.       (II) HRMIS roll-out: The focus will be on completing the establishment registers for the
                         remaining Government workforce, completing the rollout of the HRMIS core application, including
                         establishment and profile management, to enhance its coverage to all MDAs, service commissions
                         and 10 regions, and implementation of additional HR core applications; Talent management modules
                         like e-Recruitment, learning management and performance management will be out of scope;
                         development of interface between HRMIS and Hyperion to exchange establishment information.
                         c.       (III) Technology Infrastructure: This will include hardware and implementation services for
                         setting-up the disaster recovery systems (retroactive financing); refurbishment of primary data
                         center; improving and extending network connectivity through National Information Technology
                         Authority (NITA); other hardware/software enhancements; maintenance fee for the software
                         licenses; technical support. In each of the above areas, the Bank will support the expenditures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consulting services, hardware, software, training, and capacity building as given in the Annex 3.
                         Expected Outcome. The system enhancements listed above will strengthen capacity to address the
                         key budget management issues highlighted by the authorities in the PFM Reform Strategy.
                         Enhancements in the coverage and usage of the budgeting and financial modules of the GIFMIS will
                         support actions to develop a credible budget and monitor expenditures against Government programs
                         and projects; GIFMIS functionality is critical to the provision of comprehensive and timely
                         information Government wide on commitments and expenditure arrears, expenditures and receipts
                         including, the Consolidated Fund (CF), the Internally Generated Funds (IGFs), the Statutory Funds
                         (SFs) and Donor Funds, and also the actual cash position of the Government. Technical investments
                         in these areas will not in and of themselves be sufficient to address the underlying issues related to
                         recruitment, promotion and remuneration in the public sector; as well as to discipline in budget
                         management. The change management component of the project will focus on translating these
                         technical investments into behavioral changes through a problem driven approach. The project will
                         also benefit from complementary policy and institutional reforms from the Bank DPF operation and
                         the IMF program.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Cash and Treasury Management (USS$0.2 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the management of cash and debt to
                         minimize net interest cost, ensure cash is available to meet commitments and obligations for service
                         delivery and eliminate CF arrears accumulation.

                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                         Current Status. Good progress is being made in establishing a TSA to reduce net borrowing and
                         improve cash management. As of June, 2014 over 11,500 bank accounts have been identified across
                         all Government institutions for rationalization. Of this number, 2000 have been closed and 700 have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         been earmarked for the TSA and the remaining 8,800 includes Commercial Bank accounts used for
                         managing IGFs, Donor Funds and statutory funds across MDAs and MMDAs. Cash forecasting, cash
                         and debt management, and controlling warrant release in line with forecast cash, however, remain
                         very weak; the most critical weakness is that warrants are released beyond the available cash, giving
                         rise to commitments that are likely not to be met during the year and accumulation of expenditure
                         years.
                         Activities to be Financed. The main activities under this sub-component will be (i) developing a cash
                         flow forecasting model, better forecasts of MDA requirements, and a cash management database; (ii)
                         strengthening capacity of the Cash Management Working Group (CMWG) to improve control of
                         budget execution by issuing expenditure warrants only on the basis of cash availability; (iii)
                         broadening the coverage of the TSA; and (iv) implement electronic bank reconciliation for CF and
                         sub-CF accounts.
                         Expected Outcome. Control of warrant release within expected cash receipts combined with
                         progressive improvement in cash flow forecasting, will halt the accumulation of arrears and send
                         strong signals to MDAs that spending plans must be adjusted. Establishing a comprehensive TSA
                         will reduce borrowing requirements and costs for the GoG. This will be complemented by a credible
                         commitment from the Ministry of Finance to only honor invoices supported by commitments made
                         in the GIFMIS, going forward.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Strengthening Internal Audit Capacity (US$0.8 million)
                         Objective. The primary objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the internal audit function at
                         the Internal Audit Agency (IAA) and across MDAs & MMDAs with particular emphasis on
                         providing technical assistance in the form of targeted ICT enhancement capacity building and reset
                         the focus of internal auditing to a more risk based approach and equip the auditors with the skills to
                         audit through the automated systems.
                         Current Status. As at the end of December 2014, there were 390 Internal Audit Units (IAUs)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         established out of a possible 395 and 333 ARICs out of a possible 395 across MDAs and MMDAs.
                         Over the years, many IAUs have concentrated on carrying out pre-auditing of Payment Vouchers at
                         the detriment of internal control review and evaluations. To a large extent, these issues reflect lack of
                         capacity. In the case of MMDAs, however, IAUs are required by law to do pre-audit of payment
                         vouchers. A substantial effort will therefore be required to improve technical capacity and move
                         towards meeting International Standards for the Professional Practice in Internal Auditing.
                         Activities to be Financed. The activities to be financed include TA support for strengthening internal
                         audit functions. These include: (i) providing additional operational resources and tools (e.g.
                         computers: hardware) to roll out the training and capacity building programs for improving the ICT
                         skill of staff of IAA and IAU in the MDAs & MMDAs; (ii) designing, developing and roll out of
                         quality assurance programs; (iii) strengthening the role of ARICs in follow- up- actions on internal
                         audit reports as part of the oversight function; (iv) training IAU management to support
                         Government’s efforts at implementing Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) across MMDAs; and (v)
                         provide consultancy and operational support in the conduct of specialized audits in collaboration
                         with GAS to assist IAUs in undertaking procurement audits, payroll audits, system based audit and
                         risk based audits, etc.
                         Expected Outcome. It is expected that the interventions under the project will provide the necessary
                         hardware for each Internal Audit Unit in order to gain access to Computer Assisted Auditing
                         Techniques (CAATs) tools, and develop competencies in the use of these applications. Key staff will
                         be identified as candidates to become Certified Information Systems Auditors (CISA). Review of

                                                                       Page 6 of 13
                         linkages between the IAA, the Auditor General, parliamentary committees, and the ARICs should
                         ensure that stronger measures are taken to follow-up audit findings. Such capacity will enable
                         auditors to test program controls and large volumes of data at related location. Application of Value
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for Money (VFM) audit will help assess cost-effectiveness of Government operations.

                         Sub-component 2.4: Public Procurement Planning, Management and Capacity (US$2.0 million)
                         Objective. The overall objective of this sub-component is to improve procurement planning and
                         enhancement of economy, efficiency, transparency and accountability of the procurement process.
                         Current Status. Under the leadership of the Public Procurement Authority (PPA), Ghana procurement
                         reforms have progressed well over the years with the following notable achievements: preparation of
                         procurement tools including draft procurement regulations, Manuals, Standard Bidding Documents
                         and various Policy Guidelines; establishment of information systems; development and delivery of
                         various training programs to public and private sector practitioners and policy makers including
                         contractors, suppliers and consultants; development of a Public Procurement Model of Excellence
                         (PPME) tool for measuring performance of procuring entities; establishment of an Appeals and
                         Complaints Panel for the successful administrative review; introduction and implementation of the
                         Sustainable Public Procurement concept; Publication and Launch of the Scheme of Service for
                         Procurement Class of the Civil/Local Government Service; and preparation for the introduction of e-
                         procurement.
                         Notwithstanding the above achievements, the procurement system in Ghana has a number of
                         weaknesses and bottlenecks which need to be addressed as soon as possible. These weaknesses
                         include: weak procurement planning; weak procurement capacity in the public and private sectors,
                         and third party monitoring organizations; lack of reference price data base for infrastructure; lack of
                         private sector confidence in public procurement resulting in low competition; perceived existence of
                         fraud and corruption in the procurement process; and weak/non-functional procurement units in
                         many procuring entities.
                         Activities to be Financed. The following activities will be financed under the sub-component to
                         address the weaknesses identified: (a): enhancing the existing Online Procurement Planning (PP)
                         Tool and linking it to the Hyperion Budget Planning Tool that is already linked to the GFMIS using
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance and goods; (b) integrating/interfacing the e-procurement system, when
                         completed under the e-Transform project, with the GIFMIS; (c) implementing the Amendments to
                         the Public Procurement Act, 2003 through dissemination and training; (d) carrying out Procurement
                         Value Chain Analysis through consultancy services; (e) establishing Unit Cost of Infrastructure in
                         Ghana through consultancy services; (f) establishing Functional Procurement Units in Procuring
                         Entities through training and consultancy services; (g) outreaching the local private sector to build
                         capacity of contractors, suppliers and consultants to be able to submit responsive tenders through
                         dissemination workshops; (h) enhancing Legal and Regulatory Capacity of PPA Staff through
                         purchase of goods, training and consultancies; and (j) preparing a framework for carrying out
                         Procurement Audits through consultancies and training.
                         Expected Outcome. The overall outcome expected from these activities is the achievement of
                         improved efficiency and integrity in the procurement process and value for money in budget
                         execution.

                         Sub-component 2.5: Strengthening Payroll and Pensions Management (US$0.9 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this component is to enhance the integrity of payroll and its compliance
                         with the approved establishments.
                         Current Status. Payroll has been upgraded from Oracle V 11 to V 12; integration of payroll with
                         GIFMIS completed; integration of establishment registers with the payroll in advance stages of
                         completion; Payroll Cleaning Plan has been prepared and is being implemented.

                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                         Activities to be Financed. The focus will be to support the Government in implementing the Payroll
                         Cleaning Plan, approved by the Cabinet, and already being implemented by the CAGD, under
                         supervision of the Ministerial Committee of the Cabinet. Key activities include consultancies for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         payroll and personnel verification audits to remove ghost workers and to further strengthening of
                         systems controls in support of unification of education and pension payroll (IPPD3) with the main
                         Government payroll (IPPD2) on GIFMIS under sub-component 2.1.
                         Expected Outcomes: The outcome of this would be enhanced fiscal sustainability through control on
                         the wage bill in compliance with the budget. This will be complemented by actions under the IMF
                         program, and Government own efforts outlined in the CAGD strategy on payroll controls.

                         Sub-component 2.6: Improving Financial Reporting and Asset Management (US$0.8 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to improve Government financial reporting in
                         terms of completeness, consistency, and compliance with international standards.
                         Current Status. A roadmap for migration from the current modified cash framework being used by
                         GoG to accruals IPSAS has been put in place by the MoF’s Working Group but limited progress has
                         been achieved. Currently the Controller and Accountant General’s Department (CAGD) financial
                         reporting is restricted to reporting CF transactions, but, as noted in other activities, steps are being
                         taken to exercise the option of broader reporting on all budgeted funds including IGFs and SFs. In
                         the longer term, reporting requirements will be revised as part of a comprehensive review of the
                         Finance Act and Financial Administration Regulations (see Component 1). Little emphasis has yet
                         been given to establishing systems for effective management of Government fixed assets, though a
                         beginning has been made to establish a fixed assets register using the GIFMIS fixed assets module,.
                         Activities to be Financed. Under the implementation authority of the CAGD, and with collaboration
                         from the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Ghana (ICAG), the sub-component will finance
                         capacity building activities relating to financial reporting and implementation of International Public
                         Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), including: (i) development and implementation of a national
                         professional qualification curriculum at the ICAG for public sector accountants and auditors that
                         includes IPSAS; (ii) development and implementation of IPSAS-based Continuing Professional
                         Development (CPD) program; (iii) development and implementation of certification program on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         practical application of IPSAS; (iv) establishment of a laboratory at the ICAG for providing practical
                         training to trainee accountants through simulation techniques; (vi) upgrade of ICAG’s website to
                         provide technical knowledge and access to latest learning materials to all professionals in the
                         country; (vii) and technical assistance on IPSAS rollout and implementation. On asset management,
                         the project will support continuing steps to establish a basis for management of Government fixed
                         assets through (i) wider deployment of the GIFMIS Fixed Assets module; (ii) development of a
                         national policy for management of Government assets; and (iii) incorporation of adequate legal
                         provisions in revised PFM legislation and regulations.
                         Expected Outcome. The project will support to transition the GoG towards IPSAS compliance
                         through the creation of a stronger cadre of public sector accountants and auditors to apply and
                         monitor these standards, and also establish a sound basis for monitoring and managing its stock of
                         fixed assets.

                         Component 3: Reinforcing Financial Oversight and Accountability (US$2.0 million). The objective
                         is to enhance external audit capacity as well as legislative oversight over budget management.

                         Sub-component 3.1: External Audit Capacity Strengthening (US$1.4 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the financial oversight role of the
                         GAS to enable them to carry out comprehensive performance and systems-based audit on
                         Government financial operations. Broadly speaking the component aims at building the capacity of

                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                         GAS for effective scrutiny and transparency in the management of public finances, and facilitating
                         collaboration between GAS and other accountability agencies such as the Parliamentary Oversight
                         Committees (POC).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Current Status. Given the ongoing reforms, and other related activities on the public financial
                         management landscape in Ghana, suchas the introduction of the financial information system
                         (GIFMIS), adoption of international accounting standards (IPSAS), move to accrual accounting and
                         more commitment towards fiscal decentralization, etc., these have a direct impact upon the GAS’s
                         ways of working. There is thus the need for targeted and more focus support by donors in supporting
                         the GAS better perform its oversight role and mandate.
                         Activities to be Financed. The following specific activities shall be financed under this sub-
                         component: (i) provision of continuous training of GAS staff in electronic audit techniques; (ii)
                         acquisition, installation and deployment of appropriate CAATs and other Audit Management
                         Information System (AMIS); (iii) undertaking of selected performance and specialized audits using
                         the electronic tools; (iv) strengthening capacity of the audit teams in completing audits of MMDAs
                         within the statutory deadline of six months after end of fiscal year, through additional bought-out
                         technical assistance; (v) technical assistance and consultancy for the improving the collaboration of
                         the oversight functions of GAS and other accountability agencies; and (vi) support the funding of
                         joint or partnership audits.
                         Expected Outcome. It is expected that the project will be able to build the capacity of GAS for timely
                         completion of MMDA audits and improved coverage of audits through ICT-based audits, and
                         strengthen engagement with Parliamentary oversight committees to effectively discharge their
                         oversight functions, with a strong focus on compliance with financial controls.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Legislative Oversight (US$0.6 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to enhance the capacity of the Legislature to
                         exercise appropriate oversight over both upstream and downstream PFM processes to ensure
                         transparency and accountability in public financial management.
                         Current status: Legislative Oversight of PFM is the responsibility of Parliament since it is the
                         ultimate authority of Accountability in the country. The function of oversight on financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transparency and accountability is led by the Finance Committee (budget preparation and review)
                         and the Public Accounts Committee (review of audit reports/ ex post accountability).
                         Activities to be Financed. These activities will focus on strengthening the operational capacity and
                         effectiveness of the Finance Committee (FC) and the Public Accounts Committee (PAC) of
                         Parliament. It will support the Parliament’s capacity to scrutinize the budget documents, fiscal
                         reports (and accompanying documents), and audit reports as required under the Government
                         Financial Administration Act (Act 654) and the Financial Administration Regulations (LI 1802).
                         Specific activities to be financed include: technical assistance to strengthen the technical capacity to
                         support Parliamentarians in performing budget analysis as well as analysis of audited public accounts
                         and reporting on audit report reviews/hearings; enhancing the technical and professional capacity of
                         clerks of the two committees, equipment support and website improvement.
                         Expected Outcome. Enhanced legislative oversight leading to improved accountability of the
                         executive in the management of public finances.

                         Component 4: PFM Reform Coordination and Change Management (US$7.6 million). The objective
                         of this component is to provide a continuing institutional and coordination basis for overseeing the
                         implementation of the PFM Reform Strategy as a whole, as well as manage the implementation of
                         the proposed project.

                         Sub-component 4.1: Project Management and Reform Coordination (US$2.1 million)

                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to provide the administrative and operational
                         structure for the seamless management and coordination of implementation of activities of the
                         project by the various component managers. It will also be responsible for providing technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         leadership in articulating, guiding and monitoring the overall PFM reforms across the Government of
                         Ghana Status. The PFM reform Coordination Unit (PFMCU) established under the Chief Director’s
                         office, MoF will be the focal point for coordinating the PFM reforms under the PFM reform strategy.
                         The GIFMIS project secretariat evolves into a project directorate for this PFM reform project. There
                         is therefore a Government-led Project management unit which will continue, as under the GIFMIS,
                         to carry out the overall coordination of the implementation of all the project components through the
                         various program managers.
                         Activities to be financed. These will include technical assistance support to the PFMCU, goods
                         including computers and accessories, operational expenses, and training/sensitization.
                         Expected Outcomes of the sub-component will be the availability of a strong coordination of the
                         overall PFM reform and the reforms supported under the project.

                         Sub-component 4.2: Monitoring, Evaluation and Communication (US$0.4 million)
                         Objective. The objective of this sub-component is to support management of the PFMRP and more
                         generally implementation of the Public Financial Management Reform Strategy (PFMRS) through
                         effective tracking of project activities to allow continuous assessment of performance, and provide
                         quality feedback to project and program management, and all stakeholders and the public.
                         Current Status. A good basis for both Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) and Communication has
                         been established under GIFMIS. The lessons learned through the successful implementation of the
                         GIFMIS platform will be transferable to the next phase of PFM development, but technical
                         assistance will be needed to ensure successful application of the techniques to the broader scope of
                         PFM management.
                         Activities to be Financed. M&E and Communication will play critical roles in a range of tasks:
                         implementing the PFMRP; overall monitoring of the implementation of the PFMRS; guiding the
                         establishment of M&E processes in all projects undertaken as part of PFMRS; and ensuring regular
                         reliable reports to management and stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support under this sub-component will include the following activities: (i) Strengthening M&E
                         capacity to coordinate work plans and identify key indicators of progress for each activity, and report
                         to management and DPs on implementation of all activities, with a particular emphasis on indicators
                         defined in the PFMRP Results Framework; (ii) Strengthening Public Financial Management
                         Coordination Unit (PFMCU) and M&E capacity to develop the PFMRS Action Plan as a basis for
                         reaching agreement on financial support for all activities envisaged in the PFMRS over an
                         appropriate timeframe and within available resources; and (iii) Strengthening Communication to link
                         closely with M&E by responding to areas of slow progress with appropriate change management
                         activities, and by developing strong communication skills with regard to publicizing progress on the
                         PFMRP and the overall progress of the PFMRS.
                         Expected Outcome. Establish an M&E and Communication capacity within the project to guide
                         implementation and which can be sustained as a key element of the PFMRCU (and, in the longer
                         term, for the MoF) to implement the current PFMRS and provide a basis for continuing development
                         of the PFMRS and engagement of Development Partners in a coordinated process.

                         Sub-component 4.3: Project Financial Management and Procurement (US$0.1 million)
                         This sub-component will support the implementation of the financial management and procurement
                         arrangements for the project. Financial reporting under the project will follow the current GoG Chart
                         of Accounts and other reporting templates and formats as recommended by CAGD. Procurement will
                         be carried out in accordance with World Bank’s Guidelines. Activities to be financed will be limited

                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                         to short-term procurement consultants to support preparation of complex procurement
                         documentations under the project. Financial management will be carried out using the GoG
                         accountants at no cost to the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 4.4: Just-in-time Change Management (US$5.0 million)
                         Objective. The focus of this sub-component is to provide the just-in-time interventions in new and
                         arising reform activities that would be critical to leveraging the achievements of each of the
                         components and sub-components of the project.
                         Current Status. The lessons learned in the implementation of the GIFMIS demonstrate that a number
                         of critical stakeholder engagements were not capable of being funded out of the various sub-
                         components due to the discrete nature of the funded activities. There was no focus on support to
                         improving PFM at service delivery agencies beyond the provision of the tools and basic training in
                         the use of the tools for budgeting and budget execution. The approach taken was primarily technical
                         in the past, whereas the root causes of most PFM problems are clearly political in nature. This
                         therefore necessitates the introduction of a new sub-component that will bring a problem-driven
                         outlook to the reform effort.
                         Activities to be Financed. The sub-component, through consultancies, provision of goods, and
                         dissemination workshops and targeted training, will finance: (a) in-depth PFM support for key
                         service delivery agencies like Ghana Education and Ghana Health Service, through the identification
                         of critical problems they experience in expenditure management processes at the centralized and
                         decentralized levels, as well as the collective definition of home-grown, context-sensitive solutions to
                         these problems; (b) stakeholders’ workshops for better dissemination of PFM reform actions across
                         all frontiers supported under the project; (c) ad hoc implementation needs, necessitated by changes in
                         Government policy, across each of the first three components; and (d) support to the Government to
                         implement policy reform changes introduced under development policy financing operations of
                         donors as well as those introduced under the IMF Program.
                         Expected Outcome. Implementation of the sub-component will address the financing shortfalls for
                         new and emerging activities that will contribute to delivering on the full intermediate and/or final
                         outcomes under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will not have a physical footprint or prepare activities that may have a physical footprint.
                         Therefore, no Safeguard Policies have been triggered.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No




                                                                      Page 11 of 13
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                      Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ismaila B. Ceesay
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 09-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Renaud Seligmann (PMGR)                       Date: 09-Apr-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
