                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA8851

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Feb-2014, 15-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Nicaragua                         Project ID:    P146845
                                                       Parent         P123447
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project
                     (P146845)
   Parent Project    Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project (P123447)
   Name:
   Task Team       Stephen Muzira
   Leader:
   Estimated       27-Jan-2014                         Estimated   25-Jun-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: LCSTR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), General transportation sector
                     (10%), Public administration- Transportation (5%), Agr o-industry, marketing,
                     and trade (5%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                     support (20%), Infrastructure services for private secto r development (15%),
                     Natural disaster management (5%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      66.47           Total Bank Financing:               57.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       9.47
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              2.90
     IDA Grant                                                                               54.10
     Total                                                                                   66.47
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:


                                            Page 1 of 11
 Is this a          No
 Repeater
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objectives are to: (a) improve the access of the rural population living
   in the Project areas to markets, and to social and administrative services through: (i) the carrying
   out of improvements in the Recipient's road infrastructure, and (ii) the strengthening of MTI's
   institutional capacity for asset and disaster risk management; and (b) support the generation of
   short-term employment opportunities for the rural population living in the Project areas.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The original project PDO is being revised to: (a) improve the access of the rural population living
   in the Project areas to markets, and to social and administrative services through: (i) the carrying
   out of improvements in the Recipient's road infrastructure, and (ii) the strengthening of MTI's and
   FOMAV’s institutional capacity for road asset and disaster risk management; (b) support the
   generation of short-term employment opportunities for the rural population living in the Project
   areas; and (c) to improve the country’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible
   emergency.
 3. Project Description
Revisions to the project’s components are being proposed: introduction of a new sub-component 1.3:
results based routine maintenance; and new component 4: Immediate Response Mechanism as
summarized below.

Sub-component 1.3 Results based routine maintenance (with a US$ 1.0 million allocation): FOMAV
has taken on increased responsibility for maintenance of the paved road network. It is currently
piloting the results based routine maintenance on the adoquines roads by converting MCA members
into small micro-enterprises. This is a welcome endeavor that would give sustainability to the MCA
model, and also ensure the long-term preservation of project investments. For these reasons, this new
sub-component is proposed for inclusion into the Project, targeting a total of 75 km of result based
routine maintenance.

Component 4: Immediate Response Mechanism (With an initial zero allocation. In case this
component is activated, it will be completely financed with IDA funds): Given that Nicaragua is a
country that is highly prone and greatly vulnerable to natural disasters, this component is being
proposed for incorporation into the project with zero allocation. This component allows for the
possibility to access IDA resources for eligible expenditures in case of a natural disaster.

With the Additional Financing, an extra financial allocation has been made to components 1, 2 and 3.
As a result, the physical targets for component 1 have also been revised. These details are indicated
in the Project Paper.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)

                                             Page 2 of 11
The project is being developed as a road improvement program for the main agriculture, livestock,
and fisheries producing regions of the country. Taking geographical equity, local demand
prioritization, and the existence of financing available under previous or current projects into
consideration, MTI under the parent project had identified five key departments (Rivas, Matagalpa,
Leon, Granada, Managua) with seven priority road sections totaling 88km. With Additional
Financing, the Project will expand the geographic focus to include Jinotega, Boaco and Chontales
plus others potentially to be determined during implementation for a combined total estimate of
185km of rural roads to be paved.

Road sections identified to date to be financed under the AF with funds of this sub-component
include: El Cua – San Jose Bocay (10 km); El Portillo – El Cua (11.58 km); Santa Lucia – Boaco
(4.8 km); and Esquipulas – Empalme San Dionisio, sub-section San Dionisio-Planta Ocalca (11.2
km). The recipient has prepared site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESAs)
which include the respective Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) for each of
these sub-projects. Screening has confirmed that none of these sib-projects pass through any
environmentally sensitive zones. Under the parent project, all road works took place within the
existing right of way without any need to acquire land or displace any physical assets. Furthermore,
there were no indigenous peoples present in any of the project areas. As the Additional Financing
will be used to upgrade and maintain a set of unspecified additional road sections, two new
safeguards policies (OP 4.10, and OP 4.12) have been triggered and will be applied.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
Jason Jacques Paiement (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             For the parent project, an Environmental and
BP 4.01                                             Social Assessment (ESA) was conducted within
                                                    each of the seven areas of influence of the
                                                    proposed roads to be resurfaced through the
                                                    Project. These assessments have been cleared by
                                                    the Bank. Public consultations and disclosure of
                                                    the ESAs have been conducted for each of the
                                                    seven road sections. Public consultations
                                                    included a wide range of stakeholders such as
                                                    local residents, authorities, public service
                                                    providers, agricultural producers, etc.

                                                    Similarly, Environmental and Social Assessments
                                                    (ESAs) have been prepared for all sub-projects to
                                                    be funded through the Additional Financing. The
                                                    same model of consultations was also used for
                                                    the projects identified under additional financing.
                                                    Screening has determined that none of the
                                                    projects traverse environmentally sensitive zones.
                                                    Only relatively minor negative impacts are
                                                    expected as a result of the project, and appropriate



                                            Page 3 of 11
        mitigation measures have been put in
        place to reduce them.

        Based on OP 4.01, the parent project was
        classified as Category B, as the associated
        potential environmental and social impacts are
        moderate to low, site specific, and expected
        primarily during construction. As a result of the
        project there will be positive impacts such as
        reduction on suspended dust from unpaved roads,
        noise and travel time reductions. The road
        maintenance component will also improve road
        surface conditions
        and drainage, and reduce road erosion.
        Maintenance works involve minor activities such
        as surface cleaning, repairing of drainage
        structures, patching of potholes, and resurfacing
        of asphalt, none of which are expected to have
        any significant impact.

         A Valoración Ambiental y Social
        (Environmental and Social Assessment ESA) has
        been prepared for each of the seven
        road sections under the parent project. Each ESA
        was prepared by a special unit within the MTI,
        the Environmental and Social Management
        Division (DGA). The ESAs have been submitted
        to the Bank, consulted on with the relevant
        stakeholders, and disclosed. The corresponding
        environmental license, issued by the departmental
        delegation of the MARENA (Ministerio del
        Ambiente y los Recursos Naturales, Environment
        and Natural Resources
        Ministry), was acquired previous to the beginning
        of works. Each ESA includes an Environmental
        Management Plan (EMP) for construction and
        operation, which details mitigation measures,
        monitoring, responsibilities and specific
        procedures (such as waste management plans,
        encampment plans, and borrow pit management
        plans when applicable).

        The DGA , which has benefitted from direct
        training on Bank safeguards over the years, and
        has also attended capacity building workshops
        for Bank financed projects, will be overseeing
        environment and social related project activities



Page 4 of 11
                                                both for the rural road works improvement
                                                component and the periodic maintenance works.
                                                Both the DGA and FOMAV attended special
                                                training on Bank social and environmental
                                                policies, held in Nicaragua in 2013.

                                                The DGA and FOMAV have a positive and
                                                improving track record of implementation
                                                evaluated throughout the years with their
                                                continuous involvement in four previous IDA
                                                operations, and the parent of this project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           OP 4.04 is triggered only on a precautionary
                                                basis. No project components or activities are
                                                expected to directly or indirectly cause any
                                                significant conversion of or loss to any existing
                                                natural habitats. However, there are some road
                                                sections with river crossings, which require
                                                protection of river beds and/or reforestation to
                                                reduce erosion and landslides. In cases where the
                                                road may be in the close vicinity of national
                                                reserves, (while not traversing them or being
                                                directly adjacent), appropriate measures to protect
                                                biodiversity will be implemented.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This policy is not triggered as any impacts are
                                                likely to be small scale and will not affect the
                                                welfare of forest dependent communities or the
                                                management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09           No            No pesticide or herbicide will be utilized during
                                                road construction or road maintenance under the
                                                project. The elimination of vegetation at the edges
                                                of the roads is done mechanically or manually,
                                                with no chemicals involved.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           OP 4.11 is triggered on a precautionary basis. All
BP 4.11                                         civil works are taking place within the right of
                                                way of existing roads, and thus no impact to any
                                                physical or cultural resource (PCR) is expected.
                                                However, there will be land movements and
                                                borrow pit usage, and chance findings may occur.
                                                The ESAs submitted to IDA for the parent project
                                                already include chance finding mechanisms and
                                                corresponding protocols of action. These
                                                procedures have been incorporated into the ESAs
                                                for Additional Financing.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The original project did not trigger OP 4.10 as
                                                none of the activities financed were located in
                                                areas occupied or claimed by Indigenous Peoples.



                                        Page 5 of 11
                                               Furthermore, the five site-specific Environmental
                                               and Social Assessments (ESAs) carried out to
                                               date on road sections identified for the Additional
                                               Financing confirmed that there are no indigenous
                                               peoples present in any of the known project areas.

                                               However, as the exact locations of all project
                                               activities will only be determined during project
                                               implementation, the proposed Additional
                                               Financing could eventually result in new
                                               subprojects being selected that are located in
                                               areas occupied or claimed by Indigenous Peoples.
                                               For this reason an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                               Framework (IPPF) was prepared, consulted and
                                               disclosed as an integral part of the unified
                                               Environmental and Social Management
                                               Framework (ESMF). The IPPF will assist the
                                               MTI to determine whether indigenous peoples are
                                               present in any of the project areas, and if so, to
                                               ensure that the interested communities support the
                                               proposed activities as well as any additional
                                               measures required to maximize their culturally
                                               appropriate benefits and/or avoid potentially
                                               adverse impacts.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           Under the original project, all road works were
4.12                                           executed within the existing road way, and in the
                                               case of the proposed minor drainage and erosion
                                               control measures, within existing rights of way.
                                               Therefore, there was no need to acquire any land
                                               or displace any physical assets. The same
                                               situation was determined to apply for each of the
                                               five known road sections proposed for the
                                               Additional Financing.

                                               However, because the exact locations and design
                                               specifications for the proposed additional
                                               investments—for example, localized road
                                               realignments, the elimination of accident-prone
                                               points — remain unknown at this time, OP 4.12
                                               will apply and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                               (RPF), part of the ESMF, has been prepared,
                                               consulted and disclosed. The RPF clarifies
                                               resettlement principles, institutional
                                               arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to
                                               subprojects to be prepared during project
                                               implementation.




                                       Page 6 of 11
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              Not applicable.

   Projects on International        No                  Not applicable.
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable.
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The Environmental and Social Assessments (ESA) in the parent project underline that resurfacing
     of existing dirt roads with adoquines will generate significant positive social impacts. In addition
     to expected positive outcomes and impacts related to reduced transportation costs and increased
     accessibility to markets and public services, the project is expected to help: (i) create direct and
     indirect employment opportunities in poor regions where local residents welcome these
     opportunities to supplement their incomes; (ii) build valuable technical skills among local
     residents, including youth and women, that are essential for their productive participation in the
     new social and economic opportunities created through increased accessibility to markets and
     public services; (iii) reduce regional disparities and promote the social and physical integration of
     all residents within the project areas; (iv) improve road safety; and (v) reduce vulnerabilities to
     natural disasters, through better road designs and more efficient drainage structures.

     The social and environmental risks associated with the Project are limited due to the nature and
     location of the proposed interventions. Both the civil works and the road maintenance components
     will continue to involve a significant proportion of women who are directly employed as
     engineers, accountants, traffic controllers and maintenance workers.

     Based on OP 4.01, the parent project was classified as Category B, as the associated potential
     environmental and social impacts are moderate to low, site specific, and expected primarily during
     construction. As a result of the project there will be positive impacts such as reduction on
     suspended dust from unpaved roads, noise and travel time reductions. The road maintenance
     component will also improve road surface conditions and drainage, and reduce road erosion.
     Maintenance works involve minor activities such as surface cleaning, repairing of drainage
     structures, patching of potholes, and resurfacing of asphalt, none of which are expected to have
     any significant impact.

     No change is anticipated on the original project EA Category: B – Partial Assessment.

     Based on OP 4.01, the parent project was classified as Category B, as the associated potential
     environmental and social impacts are moderate to low, site specific, and expected primarily during
     construction. As a result of the project there will be positive impacts such as reduction on
     suspended dust from unpaved roads, noise and travel time reductions. The road maintenance
     component will also improve road surface conditions and drainage, and reduce road erosion.
     Maintenance works involve minor activities such as surface cleaning, repairing of drainage
     structures, patching of potholes, and resurfacing of asphalt, none of which are expected to have


                                                Page 7 of 11
  any significant impact.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  No specific long term or indirect negative impact is expected. The works will improve unpaved
  roads already in use by vehicles, and as such will not imply opening of new routes, or disruption
  of existing natural habitats.

  Improved access to goods and services within the project area is expected to encourage
  beneficiaries to shift to more modern farming techniques and diversify their incomesources.
  Anticipated human capital gains are also expected to lead to improved health and literacy
  outcomes, thereby improving the overall welfare and social resilience of the beneficiary
  communities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  These are all existing roads that will be rehabilitated; therefore alternative layouts are not
  applicable. The adoquines construction option has proven to be technically efficient, and is
  preferred for this type of roads over more capital-intensive road construction techniques
  particularly in consideration of its environmental impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Bank has been supporting road network improvements in Nicaragua and building the
  institutional capacity of the Ministry of Transport and Infrastructure (MTI) for over 17 years.
  Previous Bank-funded projects in the road sector (including the parent project) did not require any
  involuntary resettlement, impacts on indigenous peoples or significant adverse environmental
  impacts, and none are expected during the implementation of the proposed AF.

 The MTI will again be the implementing agency for the proposed Project. MTI has managed
 previous Bank projects satisfactorily, through a specifically created coordination unit--
 Environmental and Social Management Division (DGA), which has experience with five Bank and
 many other multi-lateral lending operations in the roads sector. This considerable experience has
 enhanced MTI officials’ knowledge of Bank policies and procedures to enable effective
 implementation and monitoring of fiduciary and safeguards issues. MTI will maintain overall
 responsibility for the Project (with line reporting to Minister and Vice Minister) from the Head of
 the coordination unit.

 Given that the scope and nature of all potentially adverse impacts are relatively minor and
 essentially restricted to the construction phase, both MTI and FOMAV institutional capacity to
 manage safeguard risks were judged to be satisfactory. Both MTI and FOMAV have now attended
 workshops to improve their environmental and social management practices, for which the parent
 project allocated specific resources under Component 2.

 As a result of MTI’ s previous exposure to Bank safeguards, the organization has developed an
 Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that details applicable legislation,
 policies, procedures and institutional responsibilities. The World Bank project team will continue
 to assist the MTI to ensure that this ESMF is fully consistent with relevant sectorial best practice
 and applicable World Bank operational policies. The MTI intends to apply this ESMF to the
 screening, selection, design, implementation and supervision of all yet to be identified additional


                                            Page 8 of 11
  road works. The DGA also prepared the environmental and social assessments required for the
  Fourth Rural Roads Project as well as the parent project and ESAs already identified under AF.
  The Road Maintenance Fund FOMAV (Fondo de Mantenimiento Vial) will need to continue to
  rely on the
  DGA for assistance. This arrangement has proven to be effective during previous projects.

  Given the appropriate capacity the government agency has demonstrated in implementing the
  original project, it is expected that the moderate safeguard risk is also adequate for the AF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Following Nicaraguan legislation, a Valoración Ambiental y Social (Environmental and Social
  Assessment ESA) has been prepared for each of the seven road sections under the parent project.
  The final ESAs have been submitted to the Bank by the DGA, and have been consulted with
  relevant stakeholders, including municipal officials, producer organizations, and local residents,
  and the results have been included in the assessments. These ESAs were consulted with local
  stakeholders and approved for publication on the MTI website and the World Bank’s Infoshop.
  MTI also prepared, consulted and disclosed an Environmental and Social Management Framework
  (ESMF) that will apply to all yet to be identified road sections. This ESMF has been re-disclosed
  as it now contains updated sections covering a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an
  Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).

  MTI also provides each of the Community Modules for Adoquines (Módulos Comunitarios de
  Adoquinado) with copies of their environmental and social manuals. MCAs are a local labor-based
  method of constructing adoquines roads. This approach generates employment opportunities in the
  short term, helps in technology transfer and builds technical skills. MCAs can also engender a
  sense of community and ownership for the roads with participation from the local mayors and
  residents, and present certain cost control advantages too since beneficiary communities’ main
  incentives is not financial gain, but rather to maximize the benefits of the roads.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       17-Jan-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    20-Jan-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       14-May-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    15-May-2014
"In country" Disclosure

 Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                           Page 9 of 11
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         14-May-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-May-2014
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Sector Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?


                                            Page 10 of 11
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Stephen Muzira
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                       Date: 15-May-2014




                                            Page 11 of 11
