                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5351
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Morocco                            Project ID:    P145529
                            Project Name:      MA-Rural Water Supply (P145529)
                            Task Team          Xavier Chauvot De Beauche
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2014                        Estimated   29-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSWA                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Water resource management (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        222.00                 Total Bank Financing:      158.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    63.40
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      158.60
                              Total                                                                                      222.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to provide access to safe and reliable drinking water
                           supply for rural communities in targeted under-served areas in the project area.
                            3. Project Description
                           A “safe water supply” is defined as a water supply service which meets the appropriate quality
                           standards, as required by the applicable Moroccan regulation. A “reliable water supply” service is a

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         continuous water service, provided 24 hours a day 7 days a week.

                         The new project substantially builds on the experience and lessons learned from on-going projects to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         further support a high-capacity borrower consolidate its Rural Water Supply service delivery in areas
                         that remain underserved, in support of Morocco’s economic and social development objectives.

                         The proposed Project aims to continue the World Bank’s support to the latest phase of Morocco’s
                         Expansion of Rural Water Supply Program by intensifying its efforts to extend access to standpipe
                         (SP) service in areas that remain underserved (component 1, consisting of 78% of Project costs); by
                         leveraging a household pre-financing mechanism to accelerate household connection (HC) service
                         deployment (component 2, consisting of 8% of Project costs, half of which is allocated to the
                         upgrading of upstream access networks that had been under-sized). Another 9% of Project costs will
                         fund technical assistance and capacity building activities. The remaining 4% will cover for physical
                         and financial contingencies.

                         During preparation, ONEE and the Bank mutually agreed to include in the proposed project
                         additional systems showing high level of readiness, resulting in the increase of the project loan
                         amount from the original Euro 50 million discussed at the concept stage to Euro 109 million. A
                         preliminary assessment of the level of readiness of the proposed additional systems has shown that
                         their preparation is advanced enough that they can be included in the proposed project without
                         impacting the level of preparation or implementation risk. The change in the loan amount is being
                         discussed between ONEE (the Borrower) and the Ministry of Finance (the Guarantor) to confirm the
                         proposed increased loan amount.

                         As such, the Project would include three components. Financing indicated below amounts to a total
                         Project cost of EURO 129 million (US$ 178 million equivalent), out of which EURO 109 million
                         (US$ 150 million equivalent) is funded through the proposed Bank loan.

                         Component 1: Extension of access to water supply through standpipes in targeted, under-served
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provinces.

                         The cost of this component, with contingencies, is estimated at EURO 105.4 million (US$ 145.4
                         million equivalent), of which EURO 86.3 million (US$ 119 million equivalent) is financed by the
                         Bank loan (82%) and EURO 19.2 million (US$ 26.4 million equivalent) is counterparts funding.
                         This component consists of developing infrastructure necessary to extend water supply to selected
                         rural areas in eight provinces: Nador and Driouch in the North of the country; Safi, Sidi Bennour, El
                         Jadida and Skhour Rehamna in the Center; and Tiznit and Chtouka Ait Baha in the South.
                         Infrastructure development will consist mostly of works including the construction of storage tanks
                         (elevated or grounded), pumping stations, rural conveyance laterals, and public standpipe delivery
                         systems in targeted villages (douars). the Communes Rurales (CR) will contribute 20% of financing
                         of all works as prescribed by the financing agreement they have entered into with ONEE. All water
                         supply infrastructure developed under the Project will be operated and maintained by ONEE. Once
                         installed, standpipes will be operated and maintained by individual caretakers under existing
                         management contracts.

                         Component 2: Supporting the shift towards water service delivery through house connections.

                         The cost of this component, with contingencies, is estimated at EURO 10 million (US$ 13.8 million
                         equivalent), of which EURO 9 million (US$ 12.4 million equivalent) is financed by the Bank loan

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         (90%) and EURO 2 million (US$ 2.6 million equivalent) is financed by counterparts.

                         This component aims at responding to the demand of an increasing share of the rural population for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         HC and will be implemented by ONEE throughout its service area. IBRD financing will contribute
                         EURO 5 million (US$ 6.9 million equivalent) to an Infrastructure Development Fund managed by
                         ONEE, set up as a revolving fund that will pre-finance a share of the cost of a household’s individual
                         connection. Installation of a household connection will only take place if a suitable household
                         sanitation system is in place, be it collective or individual. Standards for acceptable rural sanitation
                         solutions have been adopted by ONEE and will be described in detail in the Project Implementation
                         Manual.

                         This component will also comprise limited infrastructure development to increase the capacity of the
                         regional access network in areas where the regional network installed in earlier stages of Morocco's
                         Expansion of Rural Water Supply Program (PAGER) is insufficient to provide an adequate service,
                         due to lower design standards at the time (20 liters per capita per day), in prevision for HC-service
                         delivery.

                         Component 3: Implementation Support and Capacity Building

                         The cost of this component, with contingencies, is estimated at EURO 10 million (US$ 13.8 million
                         equivalent) entirely financed by the Bank loan. This component will finance consultant services to
                         provide technical assistance to ONEE for project implementation, studies and capacity building
                         activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Extension of access to water supply through standpipes under Project Component 1 will focus on
                         three areas in the last most critically under-served regions of Morocco
                         a. villages in the Northern provinces of Nador and Driouch
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b. villages in the Central provinces of Safi, Sidi Bennour, El-Jadida and Rehamna
                         c. villages in the Southern provinces of Tiznit and Chtouka Ait Baha

                         Component 2, aiming at supporting the shift towards water service delivery through house
                         connections will focus on location which are not yet know, but will focus on the entire service area
                         of ONEE where the Bank can provide support.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoul Wahabi Seini (AFTSG)
                         Khalid Anouar (MNSWA)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is classified as Category B, which is
                          BP 4.01                                              consistent with previous experience with similar
                                                                               projects. An environmental assessment (EA) has
                                                                               been submitted to the Bank for review. It covers
                                                                               for all activities planned under the proposed
                                                                               expanded scope of the Project and includes an
                                                                               Environmental and Social Management Plan



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                                                                         (ESMP). Necessary consultations were conducted
                                                                         in the additional areas, namely in the Skhour
                                                                         Rehamna province. ONEE has planned to conduct
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the consultation in the remaining Southern
                                                                         provinces in March 2014, once technical studies
                                                                         are finalized. Potential need for water supply
                                                                         production augmentation under the project is
                                                                         being studied. If and when confirmed by ONEE, a
                                                                         dedicated EIA and ESMP, consistent with Bank
                                                                         requirements in terms of content and consultation,
                                                                         Bank review and publication would be carried out
                                                                         before any work can start.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           While no involuntary resettlement is expected
                         4.12                                            under the Project, there will be permanent and
                                                                         temporary limited land acquisition. The
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                                                                         prepared and submitted by ONEE. It was
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to
                                                                         appraisal. The RPF presents applicable rules and
                                                                         format for dedicated Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                         (RAPs), which will be prepared on the basis of
                                                                         land surveys and information on affected people,
                                                                         once they are available. RAPs will be prepared in
                                                                         accordance with OP.4.12 policy requirements.
                                                                         RAPs will be submitted for safeguards review and
                                                                         will be disclosed as required by the Bank, before
                                                                         work can start. The submission of RAPs,
                                                                         acceptable to the Bank, for the two intervention
                                                                         areas where works are to start first are a
                                                                         conditions of effectiveness of the Loan.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                                           No



                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP
                            7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Project environmental risks in these areas are deemed low and manageable for (i) construction
                              nuisances, (ii) facility locations, (iii) availability and quality of water resources for potable water
                              supply, (iv) treatment chemicals storage, and (v) residuals management.
                              Potential need for water supply production augmentation under the project is being studied. If and
                              when confirmed by ONEE, a dedicated EIA and EMP, consistent with Bank requirements in terms
                              of content and consultation, Bank review and publication would be carried out before any work
                              can start.

                              In addition, no involuntary resettlement is expected to take place under the Project, but there is
                              likely to be permanent and temporary limited land acquisition. These will be handled through a
                              RPF, which was reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to appraisal. The RPF presents applicable
                              rules and format for dedicated RAPs, which will be prepared on the basis of the progress of land
                              surveys. RAPs will be submitted to the Bank for its review and will be disclosed in country and in
                              the Infoshop, in compliance with Bank requirements, before works can start.

                              ONEE had committed to provide by Appraisal RAPs for the two intervention areas where the
                              works will first start. However, land survey progress did not make this possible. The Bank
                              therefore recommended that the client (i) prepare an enhanced RPF document for each of these
                              two areas (Beddouza and Skhour Rehamna); (ii) undertake a meaningful consultation with
                              potentially affected people in the two first intervention areas to present the project and potential
                              for physical or economic resettlement, and document consultations in minutes in the enhanced
Public Disclosure Copy




                              RPFs. These documents were reviewed and cleared by the RSA and should be disclosed in country
                              and on the World Bank’s Infoshop before appraisal can start. In addition the submission of RAPs
                              for the two intervention areas was made a condition of effectiveness of the Loan and an addendum
                              to the Decision Review Meeting minutes was prepared to clarify Safeguards related aspects to be
                              met prior to Appraisal.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No long term negative impacts have been identified as part of the Project preparation. Risks
                              associated to the construction and operations phases are limited and manageable.
                              Although the project will not fund any service extension through house connection, the pre-
                              financing mechanism funded under the Project (component 2) will allow low-income households
                              to access service through house connection. Consequently, the project team assessed the issue of
                              the additional greywater discharges these house connections will generate, and the associated need
                              for appropriate sanitation solutions, be it piped or on-site. The project makes a strict eligibility
                              criterion that households benefiting from the pre-financing of HC service extension have a
                              satisfactory sanitation solution, consistent with the Moroccan regulation and ONEE's proposed
                              technical options, which were reviewed and deemed acceptable to the Bank. A description of the
                              acceptable on-site sanitation options have been attached as an Annex to the Project EA. It will also
                              be annexed to the Project Implementation Manual (PIM), which will also clarify the modalities for



                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                           households and communes to implement, monitor and document that the improved sanitation
                           solutions proposed are consistent with one of the satisfactory on-site sanitation solutions.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           ONEE is considered as a strong capacity borrower with a long experience of Bank-financed
                           projects. ONEE's past performance managing these risks is generally satisfactory. It has developed
                           and successfully applied project ESMPs and LAFs, with the support of the Technical Assistance
                           (TA) to carry out these tasks, i.e. monitor the implementation of the environment and social action
                           plans and land acquisition, consistent with the provisions of the LAFs.

                           With regard to greywater management, before engaging into HC-service extension in an area
                           requesting HC-service extension, ONEE, with support of its implementation TA consultant, will
                           carry out a comprehensive review of the level of satisfaction of the proper sanitation eligibility
                           criteria, as defined in its existing technical guidance. This review will also encompass an
                           environmental screening of the proposed area, to assess whether existing sanitation solutions are
                           acceptable and whether local environmental and technical conditions allow satisfactory sanitation
                           through on-site sanitation systems or require a piped network solution. This review will also raise
                           awareness of the CRs of the need to actively support, in accordance with the CRs mandate, the
                           development of acceptable sanitation solutions, and of the fact that it will be made explicit in the
                           delegated management agreements signed between ONEE and the CRs for the deployment of
                           household connection service that “a suitable household sanitation system should be in place, be it
                           collective or individual, before a HC could be installed”.

                           In addition, ONEE also has strict requirements in terms of the quality of the water supplied, at
                           their production sites and through the network. As any major operator, it has labs to perform
Public Disclosure Copy




                           random quality measurements in accordance with regulations.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Public consultations were organized in order to inform the beneficiary population and the different
                           stakeholders concerned by the project's activities, to associate them to the assessment of the
                           potential impacts of the project on environment and to allow them formulating comments and
                           proposals.
                           Public consultations took place in the provinces of El Jadida, Safi and Nador in 2009. Additional
                           public consultations were organized in Skhour Rhamna on July 3, 2013 and February 21, 2014,
                           and in Beddouza on February 14 and 20, 2014. Consultations in the remaining provinces of Tiznit
                           and Chtouka Ait Baha are planned for March 2014, on the basis of the technical studies in these
                           areas, which are being finalized and will inform the consultation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Nov-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      23-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          23-Jan-2014
                           Comments: RSA’s clearance received by email on January 22, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          28-Jan-2014
                           Comments: RSA’s conditional clearance received by email on January 22, 2014. Updated
                                         document taking into consideration RSA’s comments submitted to the Bank on
                                         January 28, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Xavier Chauvot De Beauche
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                    Date: 13-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (SM)                   Date: 13-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
