                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8348
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Colombia                          Project ID:    P145353
                            Project Name:     Improving Upper Secondary and Transition to Tertiary Education Project
                                              (P145353)
                            Task Team         Martha Laverde
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       09-May-2014                         Estimated   24-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSHE                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (90%), Tertiary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (10%), Education for the knowledge economy (90%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       135.00               Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                35.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  100.00
                              Total                                                                                  135.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to support the Government in designing and implementing an
                           updated upper secondary education structure in order to increase enrollment and graduation in
                           eligible upper secondary schools, and to increase the number of graduates from these schools that
                           enter tertiary education.


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         A. Project Components
                         The Project would achieve its development objective through implementation of three components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Upper secondary structure design. (Total: an estimated US$ 2.7 million; Bank: US$
                         2.7 million). The objectives of this component are to design: (i) programs to improve learning
                         conditions in schools, (ii) programs to improve access and retention in upper secondary and
                         transition to tertiary education, (iii) a school accreditation system and revised student assessment,
                         and to (iv) carry out policy research relevant to upper secondary.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Learning conditions. This would finance the design of: (i) revised curricula based
                         on core and socio-emotional competences, and exploratory areas, (ii) a school management
                         strengthening plan, (iii) an in-service teacher training program, (iv) a reformed community social
                         service program for students; (v) student professional counseling and guidance program, and (vi) a
                         framework for ethnic minorities. All these activities would be carried out during the first year of the
                         Project.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Programs for retention and transition. It would finance the design of: (i) a
                         Program to increase upper secondary enrollment and retention of upper secondary students from
                         disadvantaged backgrounds. These could include Education Grants on attendance and completion,
                         transportation, and uniforms; (ii) a tertiary education promotion program in upper secondary schools;
                         and (iii) support programs in TEIs providing, inter alia, remedial courses and mentoring during the
                         first two semesters.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Accreditation and assessment. This would finance the design of: (i) a national
                         school accreditation system to be piloted in upper secondary schools, (ii) training on evaluation
                         methods for upper secondary upper secondary school staff, and (iii) a revised assessment test for 11th
                         grade students (SABER 11).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.4: Policy research. This would finance policy research relevant to upper secondary
                         policy reform, including studies on institutional design and sustainability strategies. This research
                         would feed into the interventions planned under the upper secondary policy reform.

                         Component 2. Upper secondary structure implementation. (Total: an estimated US$ 118.6 million;
                         Bank: US$ 83.6 million). The objectives of this component are to implement, in the eligible schools
                         of the participating departments: (i) programs to improve learning conditions in schools (ref. sub-
                         component 1.1) and, (ii) programs for retention and transition to improve access and retention in
                         upper secondary and transition to tertiary education, (ref. sub-component 1.2). In addition, the
                         component would include technical assistance strategies to strengthen Departments’ institutional and
                         implementation capacity (ref. sub-component 3.1).

                         The key instrument for the implementation will be the results-based Performance Department Plans
                         (PDPs). The design and implementation of the PDPs would be framed in the context of Upper
                         Secondary Modernization Framework Agreements (Acuerdo para la Modernización de la Educación
                         Media – FAs). FAs will be signed between MEN, each participating department, and the cooperating
                         entity FINDETER. They would cover the period up to the end of the Project, and would include the
                         commitments by each of the three parties regarding the design and implementation of the PDP,
                         including department-specific goals and intermediate indicators with annual targets.


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         A total of 26 departments would participate in the Project. Targeting of participating departments
                         prioritized those with low access, low retention, and poor student outcomes, based on: (i) low net
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coverage rates in upper secondary (proxy for access), (ii) low promotion rates in upper secondary
                         (proxy for retention), (iii) low results in the SABER 11 test (proxy for quality), (iv) high secondary
                         enrollment (proxy for number of potential beneficiaries), and (v) high supply of upper secondary
                         schools. In departments with a high proportion of ethnic populations (indigenous and Afro-
                         Colombian peoples), the PDP would be tailored in the framework of an IPP and would also include
                         specific institutional arrangements to embrace local organizations that represent those groups
                         (cabildos, consejos comunitarios), as explained in the social safeguards section. A total of
                         approximately 1,600 public schools would participate in the Project, covering 45% of public schools
                         offering upper secondary education in the participating departments. Eligible schools within the
                         Participating departments would be selected based on: (i) high poverty (Colombian multidimensional
                         poverty index at the municipal level), (ii) low quality (2013 index based on SABER 11 results
                         calculated by ICFES), and (iii) high number of potential beneficiaries (enrollment in upper secondary
                         education and a minimum of institutional capacity).


                         Component 3. Capacity building, monitoring, and evaluation. (Total: an estimated US$ 13.7 million;
                         Bank: US$13.7 million). The objective of this component is to (i) provide technical assistance to
                         build the capacity of agents involved in the Project; (ii) carry out Project coordination, supervision,
                         and management activities; (iii) design and implement a monitoring and evaluation plan, and (iv)
                         design and implement a communications strategy.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Capacity building. This would finance technical assistance to be provided by
                         MEN to departments, TEIs, and schools. The technical assistance program would support the
                         drafting of a study on the status of upper secondary education in participating departments, the
                         design of PDPs, the design and revision of programs for retention and transition, school management
                         strengthening interventions, the communication strategy, and the development of EEPs, among
Public Disclosure Copy




                         others.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Project management, monitoring and impact evaluation: It would finance Project
                         coordination, supervision, and management. This subcomponent would also finance studies, applied
                         research, audits, monitoring and impact evaluation.

                         Subcomponent 3.3: Communications strategy. It would finance the development and implementation
                         of communication strategies to raise awareness of the need for an upper secondary reform among the
                         actors in the education system.

                         B. Project Financing
                         The proposed lending instrument would be Investment Project Financing (IPF).

                         Project Cost and Financing

                         Total Project financing requirements are estimated at US$135 million. The Project would be financed
                         as follows: US$100 million through a loan from the Bank, the remaining US$35 million through
                         contributions by the Departments (TEs).

                         C.      Series of Project Objective and Phases (If Applicable)

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         D.       Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design (Optional)
                         The Project design takes into account the lessons that MEN and the local governments learned upon
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementing Phases I and II of the Rural Education Project, as well as the Antioquia Upper
                         Secondary Education Project. The experiences of the Education Grants to upper secondary students
                         in the Antioquia Project provide good lessons in terms of the impact of this type of strategy to
                         increase access and retention, but also lessons in terms of administrative arrangements to manage
                         programs like this at a large scale. From the Rural Education Project the main lesson included in this
                         Project is the teacher training strategy developed and implemented during the last two years of the
                         Rural Education Project. This Project also took into account the institutional arrangements and
                         project management structure.

                         Coordination throughout all layers of government allowed each actor to specialize in what they do
                         best. MEN provided national guidelines and technical assistance, while departments, in coordination
                         with schools and municipalities, designed implementation plans tailored to local needs. Quality
                         control and progress towards goals set in the plans were ensured through the signing and enforcing of
                         agreements between schools, subnational governments, and MEN.

                         34.     The Project would also revisit the strategy of comprehensive intervention in schools, as seen
                         in the Antioquia Upper Secondary Education Project and the Rural Education Project. The strategy
                         focuses on strengthening school capacity at all levels, improving classroom management and
                         teaching practices through in-service coaching and training, while providing training and technical
                         assistance to school management.

                         Moreover, performance agreements like those used in the Rural Education Project have been built-in
                         to ensure both the needs of the subnational entities and to the national development priorities, based
                         on agreed results and accountability mechanisms. Bank best practice experiences from other
                         countries in the region and the world would be incorporated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Finally, the design and implementation of this upper secondary reform would benefit from recent and
                         successful experiences worldwide. During preparation, the experiences of Poland, Finland, Mexico,
                         and other OECD countries were taken as valuable references, and the Bank has played a key role in
                         facilitating knowledge exchange. This Project has paid particular attention to the cases of Poland and
                         Finland, specifically on the delay of technical education tracking, and the focus on providing all
                         upper secondary students with a common set of skills, thus giving everyone the opportunity to reach
                         tertiary education.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Indigenous peoples, afro-Colombians and the socioeconomically disadvantaged population are
                         among the main beneficiaries of the Project. The average age for the indigenous and afro-Colombian
                         population is lower than the national average; the distribution is especially skewed towards the
                         bottom of the pyramid, thus making the indigenous and afro-Colombian school and college-aged
                         cohorts larger relative to the rest of the age groups. The school attendance levels for these two groups
                         are lower than the national average: In 2005, whereas nationwide school attendance for 12-17 year
                         olds was 77.8%, the figure was 58.8% and 77.1% for indigenous peoples and afro-Colombians
                         respectively. Attendance is equally low for 18-24 year olds, with only 16.9% of the indigenous
                         population and 23.7% of afro-Colombians currently attending school or HEIs, compared to 27.1%
                         nationwide. The indigenous population has the lowest level of literacy (71.4%), followed by Afro-


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         Colombians, who show results similar to the national average (88.8%). The poor results for the
                         indigenous population are partly due to inadequate education infrastructure in indigenous areas,
                         generally limited to primary education. There is additionally a latent tension between the Western-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         style education and the indigenous structures, which is evidenced in different curricula and
                         educational methods, together with the perception among indigenous people that enrolling in upper
                         secondary means abandoning their traditional customs and way of life.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        No              This policy is not triggered as the nature and
                         BP 4.01                                             scope of the Project activities are not expected to
                                                                             generate adverse environmental impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                             expected on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                                             will not finance activities that affect forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No              This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                             will not finance the purchase or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The policy is not triggered because there are no
                         BP 4.11                                             Project activities that will impact the quality or
                                                                             management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                             defined under the policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             The policy is triggered because indigenous
                                                                             peoples (and Afro-Colombians) are present in the
                                                                             Project area and could benefit from targeted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             activities within the Project.

                                                                             The social assessment identified measures to
                                                                             improve access, retention and outcomes for
                                                                             indigenous peoples and afro-Colombians.

                                                                             Based on the social assessment, an IPMF was
                                                                             prepared, which will focus on further
                                                                             strengthening the Borrower's safeguards capacity
                                                                             where it is necessary and laying out the measures
                                                                             and policies that should be expanded or
                                                                             discontinued.

                                                                             The IPMF was consulted with relevant national
                                                                             indigenous and afro-Colombian organizations and
                                                                             incorporated their feedback and recommendations
                                                                             accordingly and in line with the Project's scope.
                                                                             The IPMF will be disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                                                             EEPs (ethnic education plans) would be
                                                                             developed in parallel to the Department Plans,


                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                                                                               with the objective of adapting the Project
                                                                               activities to the needs and context of each ethnic
                                                                               group. They would also include specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               institutional arrangements to embrace local
                                                                               organizations that represent those groups
                                                                               (cabildos, consejos comunitarios). For the
                                                                               purpose of the policy EEPs are considered
                                                                               Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPPs)
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No              This policy is not triggered because the Project
                            4.12                                               activities will not require the involuntary taking
                                                                               of land that would result in the impacts covered
                                                                               under OP 4.12.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                               will not support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                                               of dams nor will it support investments which
                                                                               rely on the operation of existing dams.
                            Projects on International          No              The policy is not triggered since the Project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               not affect any international waterways as defined
                                                                               under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                The policy is not triggered because the Project
                            7.60                                               will not affect disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                               policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project aims to improve learning conditions, increase upper secondary access and retention,
                              and increase transition to tertiary education, including for ethnic populations. Whereas the
                              probability of negative impacts is considered low, the following issues should be kept in mind
                              during implementation: (i) the creation of false expectations or misinformation among these
                              minorities of the scope and timing of benefits that they will receive from the Project, and in
                              particular from the IPMF, (ii) the activities implemented within the IPMF are considered marginal,
                              and fail to address the systematic barriers to access, retention, and learning conditions of upper
                              secondary education for indigenous peoples.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              From a social safeguards perspective the only potential long term indirect impact related to the
                              Project would be if the increased access and opportunities for indigenous peoples and Afro-
                              Colombians to education were to result in a human resource drain from indigenous territories and
                              a cumulative and gradual loss of cultural identity.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not relevant.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                         assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                         A Social Assessment (SA) was carried out during the preparation stage of the Project. This SA,
                         focusing on potential beneficiaries, but especially on members of ethnic groups, identified risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and made recommendations and suggestions consistent with the policy of the MEN and the Bank.
                         The SA considered three research phases: (i) characterization of youths currently enrolled in
                         school, (ii) gauging, through analytical work and field interviews (including focus groups), of
                         expectations and perceptions of upper secondary and tertiary education, (iii) feedback from
                         indigenous and Afro-Colombian organizations through meetings and workshops, (iv) design of
                         mitigation measures, based on the potential heterogeneity of Project impact. The results indicate
                         that there is a gap between urban (84.5 %) and rural (54.5%) educational coverage, a situation
                         exacerbated by greater difficulties in finding a job, and thus higher unemployment, in rural areas.
                         Gender equality continues to be a challenge, but progress has been made. Participation in
                         secondary education is higher for women, who also show lower attrition rates. However, women
                         score lower in achievement tests (SABER 11), which is linked to lower wages and higher
                         unemployment later on.

                         The SA focused on students belonging to ethnic minorities (Indigenous: 3.43 % and Afro-
                         Colombians: 10.62%), finding that the indigenous population has the lowest level of literacy
                         (71.4%), followed by Afro-Colombians, who show results similar to the national average (88.8%).
                         The poor results for the indigenous population are partly due to inadequate education
                         infrastructure in indigenous areas, generally limited to primary education. There is additionally a
                         latent tension between the Western-style education and the indigenous structures, which is
                         evidenced in different curricula and educational methods, together with the perception among
                         indigenous people that enrolling in upper secondary means abandoning their traditional customs
                         and way of life.

                         Safeguards. An existing MEN report on the demographics and educational coverage of ethnic
                         groups identified ten departments with significant ethnic minority populations. Of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         departments, some have indigenous populations, others are mixed, and others have a
                         predominantly Afro-Colombian ethnic population. Thus, the Indigenous Peoples Safeguard (OP
                         4.10) would be triggered, with a special emphasis on the collective and participatory design of
                         EEPsfor upper secondary education. As a first stage, before Project Appraisal, an Indigenous
                         People Management Framework (IPMF) was formulated and consulted with a representative
                         group of ethnic organizations. The IPMF details the processes and steps to develop the upper
                         secondary EEPs in each Department, which would be considered as the IPPs for the purpose of
                         Bank policy.

                         The Project Triggers OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) because indigenous peoples (and afro-
                         Colombians) are present in the project area and could benefit from improved targeting of systems
                         for upper education financing. EEPs. The design and implementation of EEPs would follow four
                         steps: (i) dialogue and consultation with indigenous organizations on the concept design of the
                         EEP, pedagogical model, implementation arrangements and community involvement; (ii) design
                         of the EEP, including revised curricula, study guides, and selection of schools, teachers, and
                         administrators; (iii) piloting and implementation of EEPs in eligible schools; (iv) implementation
                         of training plans for indigenous teachers and administrators, this last step being applicable only to
                         communities that already have an EEP and wish to adapt it to the Project. The Project would also
                         include an impact evaluation of EEPs and the drafting of general guidelines to be applied in future
                         EEPs. For coordinating the design and implementation of EEPs, MEN would sign bilateral


                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                           agreements with 4 indigenous and 4 Afro-Colombian organizations for the design and
                           implementation of EEPs, all of which must have voluntarily chosen to participate in the Project.
                           Organizations would be selected based on their previous experience in the preparation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           execution of EEPs. Lessons learned from the Rural Education Project would provide useful
                           insights.

                           The Project is classified as category C. It does not include construction or rehabilitation of
                           infrastructure, therefore the OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is not triggered
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The IPMF is being consulted with organizations representing ethnic groups at the national level.
                           One workshop has been carried out with Afro-Colombian organizations and one with indigenous
                           organizations. The first phase of the consultation would include the presentation of the Project and
                           a draft IPMF, and the gathering of feedback and recommendations from participants to adapt the
                           Project to ethnic sociocultural contexts. During the second phase, the Project would be presented
                           again in the ten departments with significant ethnic populations, and consulted with regional
                           organizations. The inputs and feedback received during this second consultation will be reflected
                           in the IPMF. During the implementation phase, the EEPs which will be collectively designed and
                           consulted with the ethnic organizations that choose to participate in the Project. The Project would
                           also consider additional plans for minority ethnic groups within Participating departments that
                           choose to participate in the Project.

                           The MEN has an Ethnic Group Attention Office, in charge of monitoring and assisting DSEs and
                           ethnic groups in the design, implementation and scaling up of Ethnic Education Programs (EEPs)
                           for primary and lower secondary levels. Those EEPs contain the vision, curriculum, expectations
                           and academic pathways for the education of children and youths belonging to ethnic groups,
                           always with the objective of respecting their sociocultural context. To date, the Office has
                           developed and implemented 40 EEPs for primary and lower secondary education, mostly for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           indigenous peoples; in 20 of these pedagogical structures have been formulated and are being
                           piloted. This Office would assist Project management during preparation and implementation,
                           especially in terms of organizing consultations with indigenous and Afro-Colombian groups. The
                           Office is institutionally strong because it leads the national working group on education, where
                           five national-level ethnic organizations are represented (Confederación Indígena Tayrona - CIT;
                           Organización de los Pueblos Indígenas de la Amazonia Colombiana - OPIAC; Organización
                           Nacional Indígena - ONIC; Autoridades Indígenas de Colombia – AICO; y ASCOBA,
                           Corporación Jorge Artel, Old Town Raizal y FEDECAP, representante de los afrocolombianos,
                           raizales y palenqueros).). The ongoing Rural Education Project has a large experience working
                           with these ethnic organizations and has supported more than 40 indigenous and afro Colombian
                           sub-projects.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                19-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                             24-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Colombia                                                   24-Jun-2014
                           Comments: http://www.mineducacion.gov.co/1621/w3-article-235111.html


                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Martha Laverde
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Reema Nayar (SM)                              Date: 28-Jun-2014




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
