                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA1172

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Maldives                          Project ID:    P153958
                                                       Parent         P108078
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Maldives Environmental Management Project Additional Financing (P153958)
   Parent Project    Maldives Environmental Management Project (P108078)
   Name:
   Task Team         Marinela E. Dado
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         25-Feb-2015                       Estimated   21-Apr-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GENDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Solid waste management (50%), Central government administration (50%)
   Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (33%), Pollution management and
                     environmental health (33%), Biodiversity (17%), Climate chan ge (17%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       3.48           Total Bank Financing:                3.30
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.18
     International Development Association (IDA)                                            3.30
     Total                                                                                  3.48
   Environmental A - Full Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                            Page 1 of 14
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The main aim of the Project is to provide the Republic of Maldives with the capacity to
   effectively manage environmental risks and threats to fragile coral reefs as well as marine habitats
   resulting from tourism development, increased solid waste disposal, fisheries and global climate
   change. Accordingly, this Project has two development objectives. The first Project Development
   Objective is that a solid waste management system is established and that inhabitants on targeted
   islands use solid waste management facilities, reducing the risks of contamination associated with
   accumulated wastes and sea dumping. The second Project Development Objective is to build
   human and technical capacity for environmental management so that the environmental
   dimension is integrated in the planning process using information and expertise developed in the
   Project.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The (original) PDOs of the parent project will apply to the Additional Financing.

A description of the project’s four components is provided below.

Component 1: Regional solid waste management program. This is the most significant component of
the project as it comprises 60% of total costs. It was designed to achieve the PDO associated with
the establishment of a regional solid waste management (RSWM) system and its use by the
participating inhabited islands as well as by tourist resort islands in the North Central Region. The
following activities have been carried out: (i) community participation and mobilization; (ii)
formulation of the best practicable environmental option (BPEO) for site and technology selection;
(iii) design and construction of island waste management centers (IWMCs) and of the regional waste
management facility (RWMF) in the island of Vandhoo; (v) creation of a regional transfer system for
transporting residual waste to the RWMF; and (vii) development of suitable institutional
arrangements for operationalizing the RSWM system.

Component 2: Capacity building for environmental management. The component aimed to build a
cadre of environmental specialists to help manage the country's environmental pressures. The
activities were completed in 2013. Specifically, they included: (i) an undergraduate degree program
in environmental management at the Maldives National University; (ii) targeted overseas
scholarships at the post-graduate and undergraduate levels; and (iii) community training for solid
waste management and marine monitoring.

Component 3: Technical assistance for strengthened environmental management and monitoring.
This component is aimed at expanding the knowledge base regarding critical natural resources on
which the country's ecosystem and economy depend and enhancing coordination among disparate
agencies in addressing environmental pressures. It has supported the following: (i) training of
community monitors on vegetation cover and coastal erosion; (ii) compilation, data analysis and
reporting on erosion and the terrestrial environment; (iii) studies and monitoring of the coral reef
ecosystem and bait fishery management; and (iv) development of spatial database and planning
capacity in order to integrate the environmental dimension in the country's planning. Nearly all of


                                             Page 2 of 14
the activities were completed in 2013.

Component 4: Project Management and Communications. This component comprises support for the
Project Management Unit (PMU) to carry out overall project management, coordination with other
agencies and programs, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation and project
communications.

The project was restructured in February 2014 with no changes to the PDO. The restructuring
allowed for: (i) a reallocation of project funds among existing disbursement categories; (ii) a one-
year extension of the (original) closing date from June 30, 2014 to June 30, 2015; and (iii) related
revisions to certain project activities. Specifically, they included the streamlining and
discontinuation of some activities and the reallocation of the associated funds out of the IDA credit to
Component 1 to enable the achievement of the relevant PDO. No significant changes to the
components were introduced. Some revisions to the results framework were made to reflect
revisions of some intermediate outcome indicators targets and target values related to the
implementation of Components 1 and 3.

Project status: Since the parent project became effective in late 2008, considerable progress was
made in meeting the PDO associated with capacity building for environmental management and
monitoring. The activities under Components 2 and 3 were completed by 2013 and the related PDO
was achieved. The Government is working to sustain the achievement through the continuation of
the Bachelors of Environmental Management program at the Maldives National University, the
monitoring of the coastal and terrestrial ecosystems and the use of the national geographic
information system (NGIS) database by government agencies for planning.

As to the PDO associated with the establishment and use of the RSWM system, encouraging results
have emerged. Waste segregation and composting is taking place in 20% of the participating islands
compared to the target of 20% by FY14. The payment of user fees by households is occurring in
40% of participating islands compared to the FY14 target of 50%. That percentage is expected to
increase following the completion of additional island waste management centers (IWMCs) in the
coming months. As far as other physical achievements are concerned, the construction of the
regional waste management facility (RWMF) in the island of Vandhoo – consisting of the engineered
landfill for ash disposal, landing point for the waste transfer vessel and other facilities – was finished
ahead of schedule. The installation and operationalization of the incinerator at the RWMF,
completion of the IWMCs in the participating islands and delivery of the waste transfer vessel are
expected in February 2015.

The proposed Additional Financing will fund cost overruns outside of the Government's control in
order to pave the way for the achievement of the PDO related to the waste management program.
Without the Additional Financing, the PDO will not be achieved. To allow for the completion of
activities related to the integrated regional solid waste management (RSWM) system, the
Government also requested an extension of the closing date to December 31, 2015.

At the time of the preparation of the parent project, information on the costs of an integrated RSWM
system in Maldives was not available. The cost estimates in the Project Appraisal Document (PAD)
were based on data for solid waste management in South Asian countries and other small island
states. After the completion of the technical study and the selection of the technology that were
carried out during the implementation of the parent project, the Government found that creating the
RSWM system is much more expensive in Maldives than in other SAR countries or small island

                                              Page 3 of 14
states largely because of the challenges of its unique physical geography. With the country’s
population spread across numerous little islands, there is little scope for harnessing economies of
scale. The high costs of sea transport and low volumes of waste raise the costs of service delivery.
The scarce land area of any island in the archipelago puts a premium on the value of land and limits
on the landfill method traditionally used in many parts of the world.

When the procurement of the infrastructure for the RWMF, IWMCs, incinerator and waste transfer
vessel began in 2011, the bids came at a staggering 30% (on average) over the cost estimates at the
time of appraisal. In addition, the Government faced a significant cumulative loss in the US dollar
value of the International Development Association (IDA) credit that supported the parent project.

The additional IDA credit would finance: (i) the remaining civil works and operational support for
the IWMCs; (ii) the remaining activities to complete the RWMF infrastructure; (iii) the construction
of the foundation pad for the incinerator; (iv) the purchase of essential equipment for the RWMF and
IWMCs; (v) the provision of operational support, including international TA to the Fenaka
Corporation – the designated entity for the management and operation of the RSWM system; (vi) the
acquisition of a second waste transfer vessel; and (vii) minor RSWM related costs.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Maldives is an island nation in the Indian Ocean formed by a double chain of twenty-six atolls
oriented north-south off India's Lakshadweep Islands. The country’s atolls encompass a territory
spread over roughly 90,000 square kilometers, making it one of the world's most geographically
dispersed countries. Its population of 328,536 (2012) inhabits 200 of its 1,192 islands. The average
ground level is 1.5 meters above sea level.

The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submarine ridge 960
kilometers long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean. The reefs are composed of
coral debris and living coral. They act as natural barriers against the sea by forming lagoons. Other
islands set at a distance and parallel to the reef have their own protective fringe of reef.

The islands are made of 15 cm thick layer of humus that forms the top layer of soil. Below the humus
layer are 60 cm of sandstone, followed by sand and then fresh water. Due to the high levels of salt in
the soil near the beach, vegetation is limited to a few plants such as shrubs, flowering plants, and
small hedges. In the interior of the islands, more vegetation, such as mangrove and banyan grow.
Coconut palms (the national tree) are able to grow almost everywhere on the islands and are integral
to the lifestyle of the population. The ground water of almost all inhabited islands is polluted and the
current supply of potable water is from rainwater harvesting and/or desalination of sea water.

The temperature ranges between 24 °C and 33 °C throughout the year. Although the humidity is
relatively high, the constant cool sea breezes keep the air moving and mitigate the heat. The weather
is affected by the large landmass of South Asia to the north which causes differential heating of land
and water. These factors set off a rush of moisture-rich air from the Indian Ocean over South Asia,
resulting in the southwest monsoon. Two seasons dominate the weather: the dry season associated
with the winter northeastern monsoon and the rainy season which brings strong winds and storms.
The shift from the moist southwest monsoon to the dry northeast monsoon occurs during April and
May. During this period, the northeast winds contribute to the formation of the northeast monsoon
which reaches Maldives at the beginning of June and lasts until the end of August. However, the
weather patterns do not always conform to the monsoon patterns of South Asia. The annual rainfall


                                             Page 4 of 14
averages 254 cm in the north and 381 cm in the south.

The target area of the RSWM component is the North Central Region. The RWMF is located on the
eastern end of the uninhabited island of Vandhoo which is located in Raa Atoll (Maalhosmadulu).
The island has a total area of 0.38km². A land area of 0.15km² was set aside for the RWMF site and
necessary supporting infrastructure. One half of that area (or 0.0764km²) required for the site. Based
on the findings of the ESIA, the majority of biodiversity in Vandhoo are nationally common and not
protected. They are not considered globally threatened species. Some parts of the island are known
to provide refuge to breeding hawksbill turtles.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment         Yes            This policy remains triggered to ensure that the
OP/BP 4.01                                      impacts related to the regional solid waste
                                                management program are mitigated through the
                                                agreed actions under the ESMF and other site-
                                                specific environmental and social instruments.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      Yes            This policy remains triggered because all of the
                                                country’s islands are surrounded by coral reefs which
                                                are significant natural habitats. Also, with this
                                                policy, negative impacts on the island vegetation
                                                especially at the RWMF are reduced. The site-
                                                specific environmental instruments (IEEs, EIAs and
                                                EMPs) include adequate measures to reduce the
                                                impacts to the coral reefs, island vegetation and
                                                associated fauna and flora.
Forests OP/BP 4.36               No             There are no areas classified as forests in Maldives.
                                                Any potential impacts on island vegetation are
                                                covered through OP/BP 4.04.
Pest Management OP 4.09          No             It is possible that some activities may create
                                                mosquito breeding sites due to unmanaged waste.
                                                The risk is mitigated by the establishment of the
                                                RSWM system with island based and regional
                                                disposal facilities. Under the recently concluded
                                                solid waste management pilot project administered
                                                by the Bank and funded under the Maldives Climate
                                                Change Trust Fund, it was confirmed that Maldives
                                                does not face the problems of other types of pests (e.
                                                g. rodents) at waste sites. Thus, the policy is not
                                                triggered. However, as part of the monitoring of the
                                                site during operations, possible movement of pests
                                                will be also monitored and recorded for potential
                                                invasions.
Physical Cultural Resources      No             There are no PCRs at the project sites. Hence the
OP/BP 4.11                                      policy is not triggered.



                                            Page 5 of 14
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP        No             There are no indigenous peoples in Maldives.
   4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/    No             IWMCs are built for the purpose of waste
   BP 4.12                                        management only and they are always located away
                                                  from human habitation. Because the state provides
                                                  housing for all, the country does not have squatter
                                                  issues. The RWMF was established in an
                                                  uninhabited island. In addition,the project activities
                                                  have not caused and will not give rise to any impacts
                                                  to island community assets. Hence, this policy is not
                                                  applicable.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No             The country does not have dams and the project does
                                                  not support water retention structures so this policy
                                                  does not apply.
   Projects on International       No             The project activities are implemented on land. The
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           construction of the landing site for the RWMF does
                                                  not have any impact on international waters.
                                                  Therefore, this policy is not applicable.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No              The policy is not applicable because there are no
   BP 7.60                                        disputed areas in Maldives.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The Additional Financing does not entail any changes to the safeguards category or the originally
     triggered.

    Overall, the project activities would result in improved environmental management in Maldives.
    However, the project was classified as safeguards category “A” as it was envisaged that the
    implementation of the regional solid waste management (RSWM) component – involving
    community-based waste recycling, island based resource recovery and composting facilities in the
    islands (island waste management centers) and establishment of a regional waste management
    facility (RWMF) for the disposal of residual municipal solid waste and medical wastes – could
    have potential adverse environmental impacts.

    Island waste management centers (IWMCs): The construction and operation of the IWMCs have
    some environmental impacts. Most IWMCs were existing facilities that required expansion/
    renovation and improvement to allow for the composting of the organic fraction of the waste and
    to improve waste handling at the centers. The lessons from experience of the IWMCs built prior
    to this project pointed to the importance of community participation for the effective operation and
    long-term sustainability of the IWMCs. Therefore, extensive community consultations and
    involvement in the selection of recycling and resource recovery activities at the IWMCs were
    undertaken during implementation. Hence, the specific activities at the IWMCs were decided by
    the relevant communities.



                                              Page 6 of 14
Initial environmental examinations (IEEs) and environmental impact assessments (EIAs) were
conducted for the IWMCs and environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) were
prepared for implementation. The assessments identified that organized solid waste collection
systems do not exist in many islands, resulting in the disposal of waste by some community
members in the foreshore or coastal areas and uncontrolled open burning of waste. These
practices were due to the lack of proper recycling, waste treatment, or other disposal methods at
the IWMCs. Overfilled IWMCs were periodically cleared by transporting waste being transported
to the island of Thilafushi (the only functioning landfill in the country). However, disposal at
Thilafushi is carried out through uncontrolled open dumping and open burning. When waste
transfer to Thilafushi is not possible, island communities tend to bury the residual waste or let it
spill over into the lagoon, reef or sea.

The IEEs and EIAs of project-supported IWMCs indicate that the island based waste management
system under the project – segregation of wastes into recyclables, composting the organic fraction
of the waste at the IWMCs and transport of the non-degradable residue and recyclables to the
RWMF – would generate minimal adverse environmental effects and no irreversible impacts.
Island level waste recycling and resource recovery combined with composting of the organic
fraction of the waste would lead to the discontinuation of disposal of wastes from the islands into
the ocean. Additionally, the regular removal of the residual waste from the islands to the RWMF
would eliminate the need for open burning of waste on the islands. The operation of the RSWM
system will prevent significant environmental damage and destruction to the coral reefs
particularly by reducing the amount of plastics and lubricants in the waste stream that often end up
contaminating sensitive reef systems as well as by eliminating the large quantities of food waste
that are currently dumped in the ocean that lead to the change in the nutrient levels of the water
and to algal growths that suffocate the live corals.

With the operationalization of the IWMCs, it is planned that the recyclable material will be
segregated at the IWMCs and stored temporarily for transport to the RWMF. The residual waste
and medical wastes generated in the islands will be stored securely for transport and disposal at the
RWMF. The largest component in the waste stream is the organic fraction which exceeds two-
thirds of the total waste stream and it will be composted at the IWMC using a low cost, low
technology composting system already operational in one island in Maldives. This model organic
waste composting facility – supported under the Ari Atoll Solid Waste Management Project which
was funded by the European Union and administered by the World Bank – has been operating for
almost two years. It is also being used to train IWMC staff and island communities on
composting. In addition, Island Council members and IWMC in most of the participating islands
received training in composting at the Weligama Composting Facility in Sri Lanka which has been
functioning since 2006. The residue to be sent to the RWMF will be non-recyclable and non-
degradable waste and they will be transferred on a regular basis so that there will be no significant
waste accumulation in the IWMCs. Hence, there will be no ocean spills or ad hoc disposal of
waste once the integrated RSWM system is operational.

Regional Waste Management Facility: The site selection and the identification of the technology
for the RWMF were carried out through a vigorous and consultative process by using the best
practicable environmental option (BPEO) methodology. The BPEO aimed to reduce the
environmental and social impacts of the RWMF to the extent possible within the Maldivian
context while ensuring technical and economical soundness. Specifically, the island selection
applied the following criteria:
(a) Island is on a known navigable inter/intra atoll maritime transport route

                                          Page 7 of 14
(b) Island is near/ accessible to a population center (urban area)
(c) Island has a defined land mass and a large internal lagoon area
(d) Island has no obvious significant residential settlement (approved or unapproved)
(e) Island where other land use is compatible with solid waste management activities (agricultural
islands may be considered at this time)
(f) Island is not designated for future land use which may be incompatible with solid waste
management activities (islands on a reef system designated for a future resort, or an island
designated for future population relocation should not be considered but islands that are designated
for industrial activity may be considered)
(g) Island is not protected, or designated as an environmentally significant/ sensitive site
(terrestrial); and
(h) Island should not be part of or adjacent to a protected reef system or designated as an
environmentally significant/ sensitive site (marine)

Based on this process, the uninhabited island of Vandhoo in Raa Atoll was identified as the most
suitable site for the proposed RWMF. An environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) for
Vandhoo and the RWMF site was conducted in accordance with OP/BP 4.01 to identify and
propose mitigation measures for any potential adverse environmental impacts. The ESIA
identified potential impacts and specified the mitigation and enhancement measures to be put in
place during the construction of the RWMF and its operations.

Vandhoo is an uninhabited island identified for economic activities (such as manufacturing, etc.)
by the Government. Vandhoo has been intermittently used by the communities of the nearby
islands for recreation and agriculture activities. The evidence collected by ESIA indicated that
there appeared to be significant continuous disturbance to the coral reef around the boat access
sites used by people in the past, remnants of fire wood cooking, disturbed nature of the land with
agricultural perennial plants and sparse secondary growth undergrowth.

The assessment indicated that the island flora was typical of Maldivian poor soil, secondary and
dis-climax vegetation. Beach and rocky coast vegetation was found to be lacking significance in
species diversity and common in the Maldives. Typical climax forest plant species was absent.
Out of the 19 plant species on the island, six were found to be invasive and only one was identified
as native while no information, both nationally and globally, is available for the rest. The
designated area of the RWMF (approximately 1/3rd of the island land mass) includes an
unmanaged coconut grove in disuse with sparse ground vegetation. The ground vegetation consists
of Ocrosia oppositifolia with no record of its status both locally, nationally or globally. This area
was not identified as a natural habitat. There is also a small (less than 0.5m high) immature
mangrove plants of the species Bruguira cylindrica outside the land area identified for the RWMF
which was proposed to be demarcated and protected together with the existing vegetation of about
7.6 ha of land around the facility in recognition of the possible ecosystem service it may produce
through protection. There are no mature mangroves found on the island and this particular strand
may have grown from seeds transported by currents from another island in the vicinity. The fauna
associated with terrestrial vegetation was found to be common to Maldives and not globally
threatened. The post vegetation cleared survey indicated that 7.1 ha were cleared (less than the
designed area of 7.6 ha as given in ESIA). A buffer of vegetation belt established at the seas-side
periphery of 15 ha area has been protected. This buffer area under protection also includes the
small section of a wetland. Natural regeneration between the protected buffer zone and various
structures of the RWMF has already taken place. The project also plans undertake additional
replanting with native plant species in the southern and eastern ends of the site.

                                          Page 8 of 14
Some parts of the beach were found to be nesting sites for hawksbill turtles (Eretmochelys
imbricata) which are common to Maldives but are considered globally to be critically endangered.
While the RWMF will not directly impact the turtle nesting sites (as there are possibilities of
indirect impacts), the ESIA identified the need to introduce necessary measures to reduce the
disturbances and protect such sites. Based on the data collected on the likely sites used by the
turtles for nesting, it was proposed that those beach areas (eastern side of the facility) will be
demarcated and put under protection with the agreement of the Ministry of Fisheries and
Agriculture who has the mandate to protect turtles in Maldives.

Following the ESIA’s completion in 2013, three monitoring visits took place in 2014 to monitor
the implementation of the ESMP. According to the findings of the monitoring visits and evidence
provided by the contractor staff of the RWMF, there have been occasional indications of turtle
movements on the beach but there has not been any evidence of nesting. The north western
boundary of the facility is already fenced and the project will put up signage to restrict movement
in that part of the island. During the most recent monitoring visit in October 2014 when Bank staff
participated, it was observed that the beach areas where the turtle movements are noted are
polluted due to waste that are being washed to the beach from other islands, making the site
unsuitable for turtle nesting. Based on the discussions with the technical staff, the waste
accumulation from the waste dumped by other islands is seasonal due to changing currents. This
further emphasized the need to get the RWMF operationalized as soon as possible to curtail the
illegal waste dumping by inhabited islands into the sea.

Since long-term continuous monitoring that has taken place confirmed that Vandoo may not be a
significant turtle nesting habitat, it will not be necessary to formally protect the site. The current
protection status as part of the existing moratorium prohibits collection of turtle eggs from Vandoo
and therefore assessed to be adequate to ensure protection even if there will be nesting in the
future.

Since the long-term continuous monitoring that has taken place confirmed that Vandoo may not be
a significant turtle nesting habitat, it will not be necessary to formally protect the site.
The coral reef biodiversity was found to be common to Maldives with no site endemics and
globally significant species. The landing site which was already used by island communities to
access the island was found to be highly disturbed with low level of regeneration due to
continuous disturbances in the past. The permanent loss of more than 3000 m2 (0.3 ha) of coral
reef on the north side of the island due to the necessary dredging for an access channel which goes
over the already disturbed site and for waste-carrying boats to enter the Vandhoo lagoon were
found to be unavoidable. Compensation was proposed as a mitigation measure where at least one
third of the reefs surrounding the entire island are set aside as a protected area and no-take fishery
zone to compensate for the dredged reef. The protected area will also help re-establish some of the
predatory fishes eliminated from Vandhoo and many of the other islands due to ongoing fishing
activities while also compensating for loss of biodiversity in the landing area. However, formal
protection agreed for the coral reef habitat as per the approved ESIA has not yet been declared and
specific milestones will be included in the ESMP to ensure that the declaration takes place before
project closure.

The post-monitoring reports indicate that the health of the reef system improved significantly
compared to the 2012 baseline. The reef community structure changed significantly over the two-
year period since the EIA baseline in February 2012. Live coral cover has increased on both sites

                                           Page 9 of 14
 where the baseline was established but a more significant increase was found in the site close to
 the harbor, despite the harbor construction and deepening of the entrance channel to the harbor
 basin. There is also a significant increase in coralline algae cover in parallel with a decrease in
 rock, rubble and sand. This is mainly due to the deposit of coralline algae on rock and rubble
 surfaces. The increase in coralline algae is an indicator of the health of the reef where coralline
 algae potentially provide suitable substrate for newly settling corals.

 The impact of sedimentation from the dredging related work appears to have caused little negative
 impact to the coral community except for the direct removal of coral in the path of entrance
 channel. Sedimentation has not caused significant damage to the coral community due to the
 nature of the coral community at the site as Porites dominated it. The coral is known to be
 relatively more tolerant than Acropora corals and hence to persistent sedimentation. In addition,
 the ambient environmental condition, timing of excavation and duration of excavation played a
 positive role in the positive outcomes of the coral community at the reef. It was noted that there
 was no significant difference between the fish diversity and composition of the fish community.
 Reef grazers, browsers and scrapers that play an important ecological function in the coral reef by
 producing reef sediments and controlling algae and encrusting sponge growth that might otherwise
 blanket the corals are also at a healthy level.

 Seawater samples from two sites were taken and analyzed to compare with the same parameters
 tested for water quality during the baseline data collected as part of ESIA. The seawater
 surrounding the site is currently free from contamination. Large amounts of sand deposition were
 observed on the eastern side of the harbor basin which is spilling over the quay wall into the
 harbor basin as if sediment movement is obstructed by the construction of the harbor across the
 beach. Typically, without significant obstruction, beach sediment moves towards either end of the
 island associated with prevailing long shore current aided with waves. Significant erosion was
 also recorded in the 2014 survey (high tideline) at the shoreline on the west side of harbor basin.
 The influence of the harbor basin on sediment movement along the northern shoreline of the island
 needs to be monitored periodically. Protection to the harbor basin was provided through the
 construction of 50-meter long revetments on either side of the harbor.

  Air pollution from waste incineration activities could increase ambient levels of greenhouse gases
  and heavy metals unless the chimney and the equipment used to remove these pollutants were
  properly designed. However, the net effect – due to the operations of the RWMF when compared
  to the current practices in the inhabited and resort islands – would be a significant improvement.
  The literature shows that the proposed incineration system when used with the quality and quantity
  of waste sent to the RWMF would meet the emissions standards that are acceptable to the World
  Health Organization (WHO) and IFC-World Bank standards for all the compounds involved in
  this study (NO2, SO2, TSP, PM10 and dioxins/furans) if the smokestack is kept at a height of 22.5
  m with a good pollutant removal equipment which was included in the incinerator design. In
  doing so, the impact on the closest inhabited island will be lower than the WHO standards for all
  parameters with the concentration of dioxins/furans expected to be below the thresholds
  established by international guidelines. The incinerator was procured in accordance with the
  mentioned standards and its installation commenced in January 2015.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Since the project would result in the establishment and operation of an effective RSWM system in
  the North Central Region, its long-term impact would be environmentally beneficial. The


                                           Page 10 of 14
  Government awarded leases for several new resorts in the target region and the improved RSWM
  system would reduce sea dumping of waste and contamination of reef ecosystems which draw
  tourists to the country. Reef monitoring and other environmental monitoring programs supported
  under the project are guiding the land use planning process to help ensure better management of
  the environment and natural resources. As previously mentioned, the site selection and the
  identification of the technology for the RWMF were conducted through a rigorous BPEO study in
  order to reduce environmental and social impacts of the RWMF to the extent possible within the
  Maldivian context.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The BPEO exercise led to the selection of eight different options for the RSWM system.

 A1: Collection and transportation of waste from the islands and land filling with gas management
 system
 A2: Collection and transportation of waste from the islands, compostingof organic waste and land
 filling of compost rejects
 A3: Collection and transportation of waste from the islands, incineration of waste and disposal of
 rejects in landfill/land reclamation
 Processing at island level
 A4: Composting of organic waste at the island, transportation of rejects to RWMF for landfill
 A5: Composting of organic waste at the island, incineration of balance waste through waste to
 energy (WTE) and land filling of rejects at RWMF
 A6: Composting of organic waste at the island, incineration of remaining waste through WTE and
 land reclamation of rejects at RWMF
 A7: Composting of organic waste at the island level, simple incineration of remaining waste and
 land filling of rejects at RWMF
 A8: Composting of organic waste at the island level, simple incineration of remaining waste and
 land reclamation with rejects at RWMF

 A7 was identified as the best option.

 An incinerator which complies with the standards recommended was procured and installation is
 underway and will be completed in early 2015.

  The choice of Vandhoo as the site for the RWMF was made after a long screening process.
  Because of its central location vis-á-vis other islands in the region and its proximity to an island
  dedicated for shipbuilding yards, Vandhoo was recommended as the best option. The ESIA also
  found Vandhoo to be the most suitable location for the RWMF. The island is large enough to
  accommodate both waste management and boat construction while two thirds of the island (with
  somewhat nutrient-rich soils for vegetation and wildlife) is left untouched. Boat building is a
  specialty of Raa Atoll which is well known for its carpenters. Fiberglass vessels are currently
  being constructed in nearby inhabited islands. The islanders of Innamaadhoo, In’guraidhoo and
  Rasmaadhoo expressed their interest to use Vandhoo for boat building and preliminary slipway
  initiatives were undertaken. The slipway was granted as a concession to a private contractor. The
  island of Alifushi is too far to the north to benefit from boat building.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The location of the RWMF, catchment area, participating islands and technology for the RWMF

                                            Page 11 of 14
 were not determined during project preparation because of the need to conduct thorough
 investigations, detailed assessments and studies. Hence, the environmental assessment (EA) for
 the RWMF could not be carried out during project preparation. Therefore, an Environmental and
 Social Assessment Framework (ESMF) was prepared by the Government in lieu of a project-
 specific EA. The ESMF served as a template for undertaking project-specific EAs after specific
 works were identified. The framework is: (i) comprehensive, (ii) highly detailed and (iii) contains
 precise time-bound action plans to assure compliance. After the identification of the technology
 and the selection of the IWMCs and the RWMF site, initial environmental examinations/
 environmental impacts assessments, a social impact assessment for IWMCs and an environmental
 and social impact assessment for RWMF were undertaken to identify safeguard impacts and
 mitigation measures. The Bank cleared the assessments in 2013. Since the due diligence required
 by the Maldives regulations is more stringent than that proposed under the ESMF, the
 construction, upgrading and operation of the IWMCs financed by the Government in the target
 region will meet the Bank’s safeguard requirements. The IWMCs and RWMF will be operational
 in 2015.

  Maldives has a sound track record of implementing the Environmental Impact Assessment
  process. The technical capacity of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is reasonably
  good. However, the Government agreed to hire a qualified consultant to help EPA undertake the
  regular monitoring of the system during project implementation, i.e., when the IWMCs are
  operational and the RWMF is completed. In addition, EPA assumed the responsibility for
  monitoring the implementation of the clearance conditions of the environmental assessments
  associated with the project. A consultant was hired in early 2014 to undertake the regular
  monitoring of the RWMF. Three monitoring visits and reporting were carried out in 2014. The
  consultant’s work will continue until the end of the project and the responsibility will be handed
  over to EPA for continuity in accordance with national regulations.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The main stakeholders of the regional solid waste management program are the island
  communities in the North Central Region (i.e., the atolls of Raa, Baa, Noonu and Lahviyani). The
  primary social issues relate to the need for strong community participation in and ownership of the
  project. Public participation in waste management issues is critical, especially in the less
  populated islands where the participation by the local population in the separation, collection,
  management and disposition of wastes is essential. Past experience in Maldives pointed to the
  significance of community participation in successful waste management in outlying islands with
  small populations. This would depend not only on effective communication but also on providing
  the right incentives which were carried out during project implementation. In addition, the resorts
  are key stakeholders because they would benefit from improved solid waste management. Other
  stakeholders are the island officials, atoll administrations and the Ministry of Environment and
  Energy (MEE).

 The project is implemented with a strong participatory approach. As part of the social impact
 assessment, extensive consultations were undertaken with communities of 46 islands in the four
 atolls. Subsequently, as part of the BPEO, a number of consultations were held to identify the
 suitable technology and site for RWMF. The ESIA also entailed consultations with stakeholders
 in islands close to Vandhoo and other stakeholders. The RWMF operator, Atoll Offices, MEE and
 EPA made reasonable efforts to consult relevant stakeholders in the implementation of the RWMF
 activities during the construction phase. The consultations were carried out in a way that takes


                                           Page 12 of 14
  into account cultural, gender based and other differences among stakeholders. The public
  consultation process continues to be carried out during implementation.

  The ESMF of the parent project which continues to be applicable under the Additional Financing
  was disclosed to the public in 2008. The subsequent safeguard documents prepared during
  implementation period to date were also disclosed to the public. The Additional Financing does
  not require any further instruments because it is intended to support cost overruns and no new
  activities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Dec-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Mar-2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      25-Feb-2008
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Maldives                                                         17-Mar-2008
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?



                                          Page 13 of 14
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marinela E. Dado
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 21-Feb-2015
   Advisor:
   Practice Manager/    Name: Herbert Acquay (PMGR)                         Date: 21-Feb-2015
   Manager:




                                            Page 14 of 14
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
