                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1132

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cambodia                        Project ID:      P146160
                            Project Name:      Voice and Action: Social Accountability for Improved Service Delivery
                                               (P146160)
                            Task Team          Janelle Plummer
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       30-Jan-2015                        Estimated        09-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSURR                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sub-national government administration (40%), Primary education (30%),
                                               Health (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Decentralization (20%), Other social development (20%), Education for all
                                               (20%), Health system performance (20%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                               (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5.00                    Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Japan Social Development Fund                                               5.00
                              Total                                                                       5.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO is to help support the improvement of service delivery in schools, health centers and
                           communes, for rural households in selected districts. This will be achieved by local government and
                         service providers engaging with communities in the ISAF process (access to information, open
                         budgets, citizen monitoring) to improve performance and responsiveness.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed grant will support the development and implementation of an innovative approach to
                         social accountability to improve local level services and functions in Cambodia. The Social
                         Accountability Framework, which the proposed grant will implement and test, links together demand
                         side activity (that will be carried out by civil society) and supply side activity (that will be carried out
                         by national and local government) around three substantive strategies that have the possibility of
                         transforming local governance processes:

                         ‒        Access to information on rights, standards, targets and performance. Entirely new
                         information flows to communities will be executed by government through “information for
                         citizens” (I4C) packs generated nationally and locally. Public display materials on rights and
                         standards, together with guidelines are all complete. The simplification of templates to post
                         performance information is complete and the instructions for districts to generate data locally are in
                         place. Then ISAF, rightly, allocates the task of information generation and display to government
                         but the awareness building to civil society. The grant will finance all the I4C awareness building
                         activities for citizens (men, women and youth) to access and use information. It will also finance
                         local level capacity building facilitating joint state – non-state capacity development and dialogue.

                         ‒       Open local budgets. The ISAF intends that budgets and expenditures in communes/districts,
                         schools and health centers will be systematically published and posted by government. In 2014, the
                         processes were developed and tested by government to start roll-out in 2015. The grant will facilitate
                         the processes of budget literacy and strengthening inquiry of these budgets and expenditures with
                         regards to service delivery needs.

                         ‒        Citizen monitoring and action plans. Citizen monitoring builds on the previous stages that
                         have informed and empowered citizens with information on service standards and rights, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         introduces a facilitated citizen monitoring mechanism to obtain grass-roots feedback from women,
                         children, youth as well as men and village leadership, in three areas –health centres, schools and
                         communes. The citizen monitoring process in the ISAF is a community scorecard, which will result
                         in a Joint Accountability Action Plan. The grant will finance local NGO partners to facilitate these
                         processes including the development of a cadre of 4-6 community accountability facilitators in each
                         commune (60% women).

                         The information and budget dissemination and awareness building have been programmed by
                         government and civil society to take place January-April, and citizen monitoring from May-July, this
                         ensures their completion prior to the commune/district planning/budgeting process.

                         Through Save the Children and local partners, working in different provinces, the activities will
                         reach 2.094 million beneficiaries in 35 districts in the provinces of Preah Vihear, Prey Veng, Stueng
                         Treng, Kratie and Pursat (see Annex 2). Save the Shildren are already well established in these
                         provinces through education, governance, nutrition and health programming. The footprint of Save
                         the Children is focused at targeting the poorest in Cambodia. Save the Children will implement the
                         activities defined by the ISAF with a particular focus of the role of children/youth in the SAF
                         activities, and measure the impacts for all citizens and children/youth as citizens. Save the Children
                         will carry out this grant within the context of their world-recognized Child Rights Governance
                         programming. This will ensure integration in their organizational programming as well as longer
                         term sustainability. Through other selected NGOs, the Voice and Action Project will reach 1.49
                         million men, women, children/youth in the target provinces of Ratanakiri, Mondulkiri, Koh Kong,
                         Kampong Cham and Kampong Chhnang (See Annex 1) which include those with the highest rates
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of poverty and disadvantage in Cambodia where a majority of citizens suffer from social and
                         economic marginalization through gender, ethnicity, remoteness and lack of access to quality
                         services. These problems are particularly acute in the northeast, in Ratanakiri and Mondulkiri where
                         a substantial majority of the population are indigenous minorities and innovative approaches and
                         additional efforts are required to include ethnic minorities and women. CARE’s women’s
                         empowerment framework will be used to ensure accountability practices have a primary focus on the
                         needs of women and girls. Indicators will specifically measure this impact.

                         The grants will support demand-side social accountability activities to engage with citizens and work
                         in partnership with civil society for improved service delivery. The activities are not freestanding,
                         they are a part of annual government processes to (shown in figure 1). Synchronized complementary
                         government activity focused on enhanced transparency and the accountability actions that respond to
                         citizens are to be financed through the annual work plan and budget of the coordinating arm of
                         government for subnational democratic development. The largest area of grant support will be for the
                         regularized community monitoring of commune, health centerand school services and functions, for
                         building awareness of information on standards/ entitlements, targets and performance and for the
                         budget literacy activities needed to make “open local budgets” effective. Care and Save the Children
                         will with work with local NGO partners, and guide a process of capacity development of local
                         NGOs, CBOs and community accountability facilitators.

                         COMPONENT SUMMARY

                         Component A: Access to Information and Budgets, and Citizen Monitoring

                         Component A of the proposed Voice and Action Project aims to provide support to local civil society
                         to implement the defined information, budget and citizen monitoring activities in 65 districts in th e
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ten target provinces.

                         The IAs will initiate the proposed grant with local CSO partners through community engagement and
                         mobilization strategies that emphasize the roles of women, and children/youth. In the first year,
                         twenty districts will be selected based on existing abilities and capacities of governments and
                         partners to initiate and undertake the ISAF processes. The project will be extended to the remaining
                         45 districts over the following two years, will allow for incorporation of learning from
                         implementation in previous years and further refining approaches and tools. Ongoing support for the
                         cycle of activities will continue for each participating district/commune for the remaining duration of
                         the project.

                         Activities will be carefully coordinated with all government I-SAF activities. As above, civil society
                         will lead activities which support: (i) the awareness building of Information for Citizens (I4C) –
                         promoting the understanding and use of local information sets to empower citizens, and promoting
                         budget literacy; (ii) the citizen monitoring, a facilitated process of participatory monitoring on
                         commune/district functions, health centers and schools, to be undertaken through a community
                         scorecard process; and (iii) the processes of feedback to councilors, service providers and line
                         ministry officials through the development and dissemination of results and joint accountability
                         action plans (JAAPs) for community, service provider, commune and district department action.
                         Underpinning these processes, all activities to build a cadre of local facilitators is planned in
                         Component B below. Implementation is an integral part of the commune/district calendar and service
                         delivery planning and budgeting cycles.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Information, education and communication materials for the awareness activities will be developed,
                         including in ethnic minority languages. Visual aids will be developed to engage and empower
                         women and children/youth, and will be appropriate to populations with low levels of literacy. The
                         IAs will use proven community engagement and mobilization strategies, with an explicit and
                         monitored focus on the poor and vulnerable, and ensuring gender and disability inclusion.

                         Component B: Capacity Building and Facilitation

                         Component B aims to enhance the capacity and empowerment of the local level stakeholders (state
                         and non-state) to implement the activities (outlined in para. 18). Specifically, it will: (i) create a cadre
                         of trained local community facilitators; (ii) build the capacity of local civil society partners to mentor
                         and coach the community facilitators to carry out the planned information, budget and community
                         monitoring activities; (iii) provide a platform, model interventions and a toolkit for continuing
                         dialogue between government service providers and citizens, mediated by commune councils and
                         local CSOs.

                         Under component B, the proposed grant will provide capacity building and ongoing technical support
                         for the anticipated district level partner CSOs in the target districts. Each local partner has on-the-
                         ground experience and presence, understanding of their local communities and, importantly for the
                         northeast of Cambodia, ability to engage with ethnic minority communities in their own languages.

                         Community facilitators (CAFs) and local CSO partners will be supported and trained to be “brokers”
                         of social accountability tools, including the scorecard/JAAP, and ensure that the social accountability
                         process continues to meet the needs of community members. The facilitators will be volunteers, are
                         expected to have good literacy levels, and in ethnic minority areas, be able to communicate in local
                         languages. As a result, many will be young women and men that will have finished elementary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         schooling. Master trainers in each province will deliver training using the materials and methods
                         developed to date, but the mentoring approach will be critical to ongoing skills development.
                         The IAs will incorporate specialized approaches to working with women and children. This includes
                         developing customized gender modules that will maximize female participation and voice, involve
                         community leaders and male relative s to examine and address the traditional roles of men and
                         women in the community, and engage with local authorities and other stakeholders to ensure the
                         inclusion of the voices of women and girls. The IAs will also pay particular attention to the
                         governance of children and youth through approaches in working with communities, including local
                         authorities and children and young people. These approaches will identify constraints to the
                         participation of children/youth and consider power relations affecting participation in local decision
                         making forums.

                         Of the community accountability facilitators, it is planned that 50-60% will be women in all districts.
                         They will become certified as community facilitators increasing gender and youth inclusion in the
                         processes of local governance and service delivery. CSOs and community accountability facilitators
                         will be trained to use gender and child/youth sensitive approaches, and the SAF process will be
                         adapted as required to ensure inclusion of the needs of marginalized ethnic minorities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The project is located in 10 provinces of Cambodia, and three of these provinces (Ratanakiri,
                           Mondulkiri and Stoeung Treng) will involve the implementing agencies working to develop the
                           capacity of indigenous peoples to engage as citizens in processes intended to improve local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           governance and local service delivery in communes, health centers and schools. These three
                           provinces are home to indigenous minorities (Highland Peoples) among them Tampuan, Kuy, Jaria,
                           Phnong, Kreung, Kavaet, Brou, Stieng, Lun and others with their own cultural uniqueness and non-
                           Khmer languages. The program’s objectives coincide with the IP policy (see section 22 , items c, d,
                           and f) as it is inclusive, it addresses gender and intergenerational issues, including special needs of
                           women, and strengthens the capacity of IP communities to prepare, implement, monitor, and evaluate
                           development programs. To satisfy the requirements of OP 4.10, the Task Team will incorporate the
                           elements of the IP policy in the project documents (PAD) by including a specific engagement
                           protocol to be used in consultations and subsequent activities in indigenous communities which
                           explicitly meets the key requirements of the IP policy.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The capacity of the Borrower and IAs to implement and adhere to the bank safeguard policies is
                           high. Save the Children and Care are implementing agencies with a sound reputation, and track
                           record in working with indigenous groups. The PCN sets out the activities that will be undertaken to
                           adapt the social accountability framework to local languages and build awareness among non-Khmer
                           speakinggroups.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         No
                           OP/BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09          No

                           Physical Cultural Resources      No
                           OP/BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP         Yes            Yes      Three of the project target provinces
                           4.10                                            (Ratanakiri, Mondulkiri and Stoeung Treng) are
                                                                           home to indigenous minorities (Highland Peoples),
                                                                           These groups, among them Tampuan, Kuy, Jaria,
                                                                           Phnong, Kreung, Kavaet, Brou, Stieng, Lun and
                                                                           others have their own cultural uniqueness and non-
                                                                           Khmer languages. The program’s objectives
                                                                           coincide with the IP policy (see section 22 , items c,
                                                                           d, and f) as it is inclusive, it addresses gender and
                                                                           intergenerational issues, including special needs of
                                                                                                                        women, and strengthens the capacity of IP
                                                                                                                        communities to prepare, implement, monitor, and
                                                                                                                        evaluate development programs. To satisfy the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        requirements of OP 4.10, the Task Team will
                                                                                                                        incorporate the elements of the IP policy in the
                                                                                                                        project documents (PAD) by including a specific
                                                                                                                        engagement protocol to be used in consultations and
                                                                                                                        subsequent activities in indigenous communities
                                                                                                                        which explicitly meets the key requirements of the IP
                                                                                                                        policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      1/15/2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Janelle Plummer

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                                                                                   Date: 11-Dec-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Jan Weetjens (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 15-Dec-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
