                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7501
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                             Project ID:    P128919
                            Project Name:     Zhengzhou Urban Rail Project (P128919)
                            Task Team         Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         24-Mar-2014                       Estimated   23-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      3005.33                 Total Bank Financing: 250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                             2755.33
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 250.00
                              Total                                                                                3005.33
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve urban mobility for the population
                           of Zhengzhou located along the catchment area of Line 3 from Xin Liu Lu Station to Hang Hai Dong
                           Lu Station.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project would support the development of Line 3 of the Zhengzhou urban rail system from Xin

                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         Liu Lu Station to Hang Hai Dong Lu Station. The project consists the following four components:

                         Component 1: Construction of Line 3. This component includes all construction activities for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zhengzhou Urban Rail Line 3 (about 25.2 km). Line 3 will connect the city center of Zhengzhou
                         with the northwest and southeast development areas. It will start from the Line 3 parking yard,
                         located nearby the Provincial Sports Center, go through Xin Liu Lu Station in the northwest corner
                         of the city, run down along Nanyang Road to Erqi Plaza in the city center, then move east along the
                         West-East Street and Zhengbian Road towards Bo Xue Lu Station, turn south onto Chenyang Road
                         towards Hang Hai Dong Lu Station in the southeast corner of the city, and end at the Line 3 depot,
                         located east of the G4 Expressway. Line 3 includes 21 stations, which will all be located
                         underground and connected by tunnels. The Line 3 depot for maintenance and stabling will be
                         located above ground at one end of Line 3 in southeast Zhengzhou, and the parking yard will be
                         located above ground at the other end of Line 3 in northwest Zhengzhou. Six interchange stations to
                         be constructed by 2019 will provide convenient interchange with other urban rail lines. This line is
                         fully self-standing and not dependent on future extensions, which may take place after 2020. The
                         Bank loan will support the construction of five stations and five tunnels in between, which are
                         located at the southeast end of the line.

                         Component 2: Equipment for Line 3. This component includes all the equipment necessary to the
                         successful operation of Line 3, such as rolling stock, power supply, control system, signaling system,
                         communication system, monitoring system, fare collection system, safety and security system,
                         ventilation and air conditioning system, water supply, sewerage and fire protection system, and
                         station auxiliary equipment.

                         Component 3: Design, Construction Management and Technical Assistance. This component
                         includes (i) activities for design and preparation of the project; (ii) activities for construction
                         management and quality assurance; and (iii) technical assistance and capacity building to relevant
                         staff in Zhengzhou Municipality and URC. The Bank loan will support the technical assistance and
                         capacity building activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Safeguards and Other Construction Costs. This component will include the land
                         acquisition and resettlement costs, construction site preparation (environmental mitigation measures)
                         as well as other project related construction costs such as engineering insurance, work safety
                         assurance, inspection and acceptance, and project cost estimation. This component will be 100%
                         financed by the local counterpart funding.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Zhengzhou City, capital city of Henan Province in central China.
                         Zhengzhou is located in the transition zone between the North China Plain and the easternmost range
                         of the Qinling Mountains. The proposed Zhengzhou Urban Rail Line 3 is located in the urban built-
                         up area of Zhengzhou which is located in the east side of the flat land area. The entire 25.2 km line
                         will be underground.

                         The proposed project passes through densely populated urban areas including the core city center and
                         connects several major commercial areas. The line will pass nearby or underneath some cultural
                         relics including Shang Dynasty City Wall Relics, Erqi Tower, and Zhengzhou Wen Temple and Peng
                         Xiangqian Ancestral Temple among others.



                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         According to its topographic feature and geotechnical properties, the project area can be divided into
                         two categories: Zone A (K0+0.000~K23+200) is part of the alluvial plain of the Yellow River; Zone
                         B (K23+200~K31+350.000) is known as an aeolian dune microrelief of the alluvial plain of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yellow River. Zhengzhou has a temperate continental climate, with cool, dry winters and hot, humid
                         summers. The annual mean temperature is 14.9 °C, the monthly average temperature ranges from 0.3
                         °C in January to 27.8 °C in July. Average annual precipitation is 640 mm and most of the rainfall
                         occurs in summer.

                         The groundwater within the region along the line are mainly of three types: perched ground water,
                         quaternary loose rock type hole water and bedrock crevice water. The quaternary loose rock type
                         hole water forms the majority of groundwater. The groundwater is mainly supplied from surface
                         waters (including Jinshui River, Xionger River, Chaohe River) with limited impact from artificial
                         exploitation.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Yiren Feng (EASCS)
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             OP4.01 is triggered due to the scale of tunnel and
                         BP 4.01                                             stations construction, waste disposal and potential
                                                                             environmental and social impacts from
                                                                             construction and operations in the urban context.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              Given the urban context, and as confirmed by site
                                                                             visits, the project will not affect any natural
                                                                             habitats or critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project will not cause conversion or
                                                                             degradation of natural forests.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project will not involve procurement of
                                                                             pesticide or have any impact on pest management
                                                                             practice.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             The proposed Line 3 rail project will pass nearby
                         BP 4.11                                             or pass underneath some cultural relics including
                                                                             Shang Dynasty City Wall Relics, Erqi Tower, and
                                                                             Zhengzhou Wen Temple and Peng Xiangqian
                                                                             Ancestral Temple among others. Therefore, there
                                                                             is a potential risk of impact from tunnel
                                                                             excavation during construction and vibration
                                                                             during operation. The PCR policy is therefore
                                                                             triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The Social Specialist visited the project area to
                                                                             conduct a screening to determine whether ethnic
                                                                             minority peoples are present in, or have collective
                                                                             attachment to, the project area. A small Hui
                                                                             district is located in the city center of Zhengzhou.
                                                                             The Hui people is an officially recognized
                                                                             national minority and include all historic muslim


                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                                                                                 communities in People's Republic of China not
                                                                                 included in China's other Muslim groups. Hui
                                                                                 people speak Chinese, do not have their own
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 traditional language and are mainly entrepreneurs
                                                                                 in Zhengzhou. The project will be constructed
                                                                                 within the downtown of Zhengzhou City and no
                                                                                 indigenous people groups as defined in Bank’s
                                                                                 OP4.10 have been identified within the project
                                                                                 area. The Social Specialist concluded that no
                                                                                 indigenous people groups as defined in Bank’s
                                                                                 OP4.10 is present in, or have collective
                                                                                 attachment to the project area. Therefore, this
                                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes             Based on the site visit and primary project
                            4.12                                                 alignment, land taking caused by the project
                                                                                 construction will be unavoidable. The main
                                                                                 involuntary resettlement impact will include
                                                                                 urban house demolition, removal of shops/
                                                                                 restaurant and other public facilities. Therefore,
                                                                                 the Bank’s Social Safeguards policy on
                                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered and a
                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared by
                                                                                 the client in both English and Chinese, and an
                                                                                 experienced consultant was hired to assist the
                                                                                 RAP preparation. The RAP covers all
                                                                                 resettlement impacts caused by the Line 3 from
                                                                                 Xin Liu Lu Station to Hang Hai Dong Lu Station.
                                                                                 On the mission, no linkage project has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 identified.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                 policy.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project is not located in any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways as defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project is not located in any known disputed
                            7.60                                                 areas as defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              As a public transport oriented project, the project will bring significant net positive environmental
                              benefits through the promotion of mass public transportation, reduction of traffic congestion and
                              consequent reduction of vehicle emissions and improvement of overall quality of life in the
                              Zhengzhou Metropolitan Area.



                                                                         Page 4 of 10
                          The potential negative environmental and social impacts related to the project will occur mainly
                          during the construction phase. These potential impacts include: disruption of traffic; reduced
                          accessibility to business and non-motorized vehicle/pedestrian access around metro stations during
Public Disclosure Copy




                          construction; construction accidents linked in particular to ground water and geological risk;
                          potential damage to surrounding buildings and physical cultural sites; improper transportation and
                          disposal of spoil material, potential water pollution, dust, vibration, noise nuisance during
                          construction; and land acquisition and demolition of structures like houses or enterprises . Other
                          impacts during operation include noise and vibration, odor and water pollution, potential
                          inadequate aesthetics integration, and waste management from rail operation facilities. The
                          relevant mitigation measures were incorporated into the EIA/ESMP.

                          The project has significant social benefits and is an integral part of the public transportation
                          system of the city. The project is expected to benefit the local communities by enhancing the
                          options for affordable, safe and fast public transportation in the vicinity of the project line. All
                          stations will have a universal accessibility design with barrier free passage for wheelchairs,
                          including at least one elevator per station, and guidance on sidewalks and in station for blind
                          people.

                           The project will have social impacts related to the need for land acquisition and demolition of a
                           number of structures like houses or enterprises. About 767 people from 239 families will be
                           affected by the acquisition of 52.4 ha of collective owned land; about 1,308 people from 449
                           families will be affected by the demolition of 35,347 m2 of private houses; and about 1,026
                           employees from 264 enterprises, institutes and small shops will be affected by the demolition of
                           66,313 m2 of structures.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The proposed project supports the development of a major urban rail line as part of the Zhengzhou
                           urban rail network. The future development of the rail network will have significant impacts on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Zhengzhou, leading to more compact and transit-oriented urban development accompanied by
                           land use change. The project is mainly laid along the urban main roads of Zhengzhou except for its
                           extremities located in the periurban area of Zhengzhou. The construction of Line 3 is expected to
                           be accompanied by a speed up in the urbanization development process and gradual changes in
                           land use along the line. The main change will be a conversion from farmland and forest land in the
                           extremities of the line into land used for residential, commercial and educational purpose, and a
                           gradual densification of land use around the 21 stations along the line, especially along the
                           Nanyang Road.
                           After the project is put into operation, it is expected to attract a large volume of passengers, and
                           reduce some of the traffic on roads along the alignment, compared to a situation without project.
                           The project will be accompanied by some adjustments in the public transport routes, leveraging
                           the new line. The preparation and implementation of reasonable bus-rail integral program will
                           facilitate the use of Line 3 by the public, enhance public traffic utilization rate in Zhengzhou and
                           finally improve overall urban traffic.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project has been subject to intense analysis of alternative options including a project-no
                           project scenarios, various options for rail line alignments, location of stations and construction
                           methods, as well as consideration of different engineering technology alternatives.



                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                           During the design phase, the EA teams worked closely with project planners/ owners and the
                           feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives. The EA identified, evaluated and
                           compared various options for alignment selection, station location selection, and construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           method selection, and optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of (or least
                           adverse) social and environmental impacts, as well as other engineering technology alternatives,
                           and financial considerations for least cost solutions. A “no project” scenario was also considered
                           as an alternative. Adequate engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the expected
                           impacts, including noise barriers, vibration reduction equipment, intensive greening plan,
                           landscape design for stations, and parking/depot site.

                           As a result, the alignment, station location and construction method were optimized so as to reduce
                           the land acquisition, decrease construction risks, minimize resettlement, avoid environmental and
                           cultural sensitive sites, reduce disruption of traffic and increase the accessibility and convenience
                           of public transport transfer, integrate with the overall public transport plan, and with less cost.
                           Further optimization will be conducted during preliminary design and detailed design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project is classified as a Category A project as per OP4.01, due to the scale of tunnel
                           construction, waste disposal and potential environmental and social impacts from construction and
                           operation in an urban context. Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in accordance
                           with relevant national laws, regulations, and technical guidelines and standards applicable to the
                           project, as well as the World Bank Safeguards Policies. The reports include (a) an EA Executive
                           Summary, (b) an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), and (c) an Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (ESMP). The EA reports have been prepared, incorporating the Bank’s
                           comments, and found to be satisfactory.

                           The potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are thoroughly addressed
                           in the EIA report, and necessary mitigation measures have been developed in the ESMP. It is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           concluded that these adverse environmental and social impact can be adequately avoided,
                           minimized and mitigated with good management practice and mitigation measures as developed in
                           EIA/ESMP. The main conclusions of impact and mitigation measures are summarized as follows:

                           Construction Phase. To address the potential adverse impacts as mentioned above, preventive and
                           mitigation measures during the construction phase have been developed in the ESMP to
                           adequately avoid, minimize and mitigate these adverse environmental and social impacts. These
                           impacts will be avoided, minimized or mitigated by the following measures, including (but not
                           limited to): implementation of city procedures for traffic diversion and utility relocation;
                           coordination with the police department; provision of prior notice through public media; proper
                           fencing of the construction site for safety; setup of temporary access roads; public consultation
                           throughout the construction period to address public concerns and improve construction activities;
                           proper management of wastes; use of low noise equipment and construction technologies; careful
                           scheduling of construction activities near sensitive sites; installation of a temporary noise
                           reduction facility at sensitive sites; restricting night-time construction; and requiring prior public
                           notice, as well as night-time construction permit from the city Environmental Protection Bureau,
                           for activities that need continuous construction during the night. Further, shield tunneling and
                           cover-and-cut methods will be used for tunnels and most of the stations to minimize noise and
                           vibration impacts, and measures will be taken for air and wastewater pollutant control, as well as a
                           risks assessment and Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) measures.


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         Operations Phase. To address potential impacts during the operations phase, mitigation measures
                         that will be adopted include (but are not limited to) the following. For the land use change,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zhengzhou city has mature institutions and procedures to manage the land development to ensure
                         that land development induced from the rail network is in line with urban master plan and
                         conducted in an orderly and legal process. For the noise-sensitive sites, noise barriers will be
                         installed, and ventilation shafts will be installed with low noise equipment and silencers and will
                         be located at least 15 meters from nearby residential areas. For vibration sensitive sites, vibration-
                         reduction facilities will be installed. Measures for air quality, wastewater and solid wastes have
                         also been formulated.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The proposed Line 3 rail project will pass nearby or pass
                         underneath some cultural relics including Shang Dynasty City Wall Relics, ErqiTower , and
                         Zhengzhou Wen Temple and Peng Xiangqian Ancestral Temple among others. Therefore, there is
                         a potential risk of impact from tunnel excavation during construction and vibration during
                         operation. Adequate site survey and consultation with the relevant cultural relic bureau was
                         conducted during EA preparation to ensure all the relevant cultural relics along the rail are
                         identified, and the potential impacts were carefully addressed through project design, selection of
                         alignment and construction technologies, good construction management including monitoring of
                         settlement, and other mitigation measures, to ensure all the relevant cultural relics along the rail
                         are identified, and mitigation measures are incorporated into the design, construction and
                         operation appropriately. Procedures for cultural findings will include provisions and procedures
                         stipulated in the Cultural Property Law and will be included in bidding documents and contracts.

                         A stand-alone ESMP has been developed that describes the policies, applicable environmental
                         standards, environmental management organization and responsibilities, mitigation measures,
                         capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of ESMP implementation. The
                         ESMP measures were developed in consistency with WBG EHS Guidelines. ESMP measures will
                         be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts in order to ensure effective implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Zhengzhou Urban Rail Company (ZURC) has been established to manage the construction
                         and operation of the proposed urban rail system in Zhengzhou. Environmental management is
                         built into the overall management setup in the company, and the construction of line 1 and 2 has
                         demonstrated successful environmental management performance in terms of construction site
                         management, traffic diversion, and provision of access to public, safety, dust control, spoil
                         material disposal, information disclosure and public consultation. As the project implementing
                         agency, ZURC is responsible for overall environmental and social management during
                         construction. Internal environmental management involves three parties, i.e. the project owner,
                         supervision institutes including engineering supervision and risk management supervision, and
                         contractors. The contractors are crucial for the implementation of the various environmental
                         protection measures specified in the ESMP. Consultants will provide timely professional services
                         in particular on the ESMP implementation, for design and risk management. Meanwhile, the
                         project will be supervised and inspected by national, provincial and municipal environmental
                         authorities, as well as by supervision missions from the World Bank. ZURC will also carry over
                         its responsibilities in environmental management during operational stage. The main
                         responsibilities include public environmental awareness, implementation of ESMP in operational
                         phase, maintenance of environmental facilities such sewage/wastewater treatment, vibration and
                         noise control.



                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                          To ensure effective implementation of the ESMP, environmental training will be provided to staff
                          involved in the project management, engineering supervision, and construction workers. The
                          training during construction phase will be conducted before commencement of the construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and focus on: (1) national and local regulations on environmental protection; (2) good
                          management practice related to minimize environmental impact; (3) related requirements of
                          environment, health and, safety (EHS); and (4) environmental mitigation measures included in the
                          ESMP. During operation stage, the ZURC will incorporate environmental protection into its
                          management system.

                           Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                           Resettlement, the Zhengzhou PMO has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to address
                           involuntary resettlement impacts caused by project construction. A Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) was also prepared for components that might change their locations during
                           project implementation. The resettlement planning work was carried out by the line agencies under
                           the guidance of a team from Wuhan University with prior experience in resettlement planning for
                           World Bank financed Projects. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social
                           economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation measures. For
                           Project Affected Persons (PAPs) affected by collective land acquisition, cash compensation will be
                           arranged. Land acquisition compensation will include land compensation, a resettlement subsidy,
                           and compensation for standing crops. For PAPs affected by house demolition, the options of cash
                           compensation and house property exchange scheme have been arranged. The compensation rates
                           for structures and public facilities are determined based on their full replacement costs. The
                           affected enterprises, institutes and shops will be compensated at full replacement cost and the
                           business losses caused by demolition will be compensated as well.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during the EA preparation. The first round was
                           conducted from April to December 2012 through meetings, field interviews and questionnaire
Public Disclosure Copy




                           surveys among project-affected people, local residential and village committees, schools and
                           hospitals, and through a telephone hotline. The main concerns raised by the public are resettlement
                           compensation, information disclosure, disturbance of traffic, night time construction noise etc. All
                           these concerns were addressed in the RAP and EIA/ESMP.

                          The second round of public consultation was conducted in August 2013 after the draft EIA report
                          had been prepared. During the consultation, the key findings of draft EIA report and proposed
                          mitigation measures were explained, as well as the responses to the questions raised from the first
                          round consultation. The majority of those consulted expressed strong support for the project.

                          Information about the project was disclosed following both the domestic and Bank requirements.
                          The availability of the EA reports, and how to access to them, was announced in a local major
                          newspaper (DongFangJingBo Newspaper) on July 8, 2013. The EA reports were disclosed on the
                          Zhengzhou Government Website (http://www.zzdrc.gov.cn) on May 17, 2012 and August 19,
                          2013, respectively, and the EA reports were disclosed in the World Bank’s Infoshop on January
                          29, 2014.

                          The RAP and RPF were disclosed to local people via Zhengzhou Government Website and
                          ZURC’s website on January 28, 2014; and the English versions of the documents were disclosed
                          on the World Bank’s Infoshop on January 29, 2014.


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          16-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       29-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          14-Mar-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                                19-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          23-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       29-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                                28-Jan-2014
                           Comments: If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources
                                         policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
                                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 12-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                           Date: 13-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
