                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6318

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Jamaica                         Project ID:      P148013
                            Project Name:      JM Youth Employment in Digital and Creative Industries (P148013)
                            Task Team          Fabio Pittaluga
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          31-Jan-2014                     Estimated        22-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSSO                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Education (25%), Information technology (25%), Other
                                               social services (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Social Inclusion (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                    Total Bank Financing:         20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       20.00
                              Total                                                                       20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Proposed Development Objective for this operation is to create an enabling environment in the
                           digital and animation industries in Jamaica for: a) youth employment in the virtual Global Economy,
                           b) youth entrepreneurship and self-employment.
                           C. Project Description
                           In order to address the pressing unemployment rates Jamaica is experiencing, the proposed operation
                         will be implementing a double-strategy of: 1) improving skills for accessing opportunities in the
                         virtual global economy to foster employability and entrepreneurship, and 2) build a favorable
                         ecosystem for the emergence and growth of youth-led startup enterprises with a focus on the digital
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and animation to generate new jobs in the local market. Employment, in the context of this operation,
                         will be thus defined as more than “jobs,? thus including various forms of online work (e.g. by task)
                         as well as self-employment.

                         The proposed operation will be designed in an innovative manner, leveraging significant private
                         sector participation during the preparation and implementation phases of the project. In addition to
                         the Bank team, the operation will also use crowd-design methodologies to leverage knowledge and
                         experiences from global experts. Details are spelled out in the components below.

                         Component 1. Skills and capacity to enhance employability, innovation and entrepreneurship (4.5
                         million). This component will include the following activities:

                         A.       Training programs for accessing online work opportunities via micro-work and e-lancing
                         platforms. This will consist of specialized workshops to provide an experiential learning opportunity
                         for young people to test various platforms available to earn an income online.
                         B.       Training and capacity building for early stage companies and startups with a focus on
                         helping them to move “from ideas to products to markets?. Such programs will differ from standard
                         business skills offered by regular educational institutions. Key areas of training will include aspects
                         of branding, investment readiness, accessing global markets, accessing crowdfunding and
                         crowdsourcing opportunities, monetizing content (including online), innovative marketing solutions
                         (including social media-based solutions), etc. Trainers will be identified through Jamaican diaspora
                         networks, national and international private sector companies and partnerships with other global
                         incubators and accelerators programs.
                         C.       Training and capacity building activities for animators and animation studios for expansion.
                         Activities under this component will include: 1) strengthening of the animation training program at
                         the University of the West Indies (UWI), through the increased participation of the private sector; 2)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of a 2-year curriculum program for a degree in animation at UWI, in collaboration with
                         international animation companies and colleges, and which includes an internship component or
                         hiring program; 3) design of joint degree programs and student exchange programs with key
                         international animation colleges; 4) support the “acceleration? of existing businesses through
                         business trainings, presentations at international festivals (Ottawa, Kidscreen in NYC, MIPCOM in
                         Cannes), attracting international companies and investors for outsourcing of contracts, and
                         competitions for development of new IP products for local, regional and international markets; 5)
                         trainings on business skills for aspiring entrepreneurs in the animation industry.
                         D.       Organization of yearly events such as Digital Jam and KingstOOn to identify talented youth
                         in the digital and animation sectors that can be further trained for jobs and/or build startup
                         companies. Participation will be free and open to all, with a particular effort to reach out to lower
                         income communities via collaboration with partners operating there (e.g. JSIF, SDC, USAID) .
                         E.       Scholarship fund for facilitating the participation of bottom 40% of youth population in the
                         trainings and programs mentioned above as well as for participating in international training
                         programs (e.g. Tech Crunch, Startup Weekends abroad).

                         In all sub-components above (A to E) the project will seek to establish strong partnerships with
                         national and international private sector companies for the provision of mentors, connections with
                         key networks, and provision of concrete “problem statements? for the development of possible
                         products and services.
                         Component 2. Establishment of the Caribbean Digital and Animation industries hubin Kingston
                         (USD 10 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component envisions the establishment of a physical hub as a critical catalyzing factor in the
                         strengthening of a viable ecosystem to support the growth of the digital and animation industries in
                         Jamaica and the Caribbean. Creation of new companies and expansion of existing ones will be
                         crucial for job creation and employment generation among youths. At present the digital and
                         animation industries are very fragmented and this prevents capturing the economies of scale and the
                         creation of a strong brand. Resources will be used to refurbish an existing building to provide a
                         multi-functional and modern space to house incubators and accelerator programs, training labs for
                         digital and animation skills development, venture capital and angel investor forums, events
                         organization attracting Caribbean audiences, as well as working space for private sector companies,
                         startup companies, and animation studios. The physical building will be Government property with
                         no need to acquire space or resettle people. The hub will be designed as a “smart? and “energy
                         efficient? building and will ensure accessibility for people with physical disabilities.

                         The hub will be designed in close collaboration with key stakeholders to ensure the initiative
                         responds directly to their demands and needs. Collaboration with the IFC, InfoDEV and the Growth
                         and Competitiveness project will bring to the table a significant experience in financing similar
                         industries, and provide critical inputs to improve the investment climate, legal and policy
                         frameworks on key aspects for the broader ecosystem for supporting SMEs in the design of this
                         component.

                         While the hub will be physically established in Jamaica, participation will be open to other Caribbean
                         and global companies. Experience worldwide, in fact, has shown that a critical factor in the success
                         of such initiatives is the global dimension brought in by international entrepreneurs and by the
                         creation of networks. This will also provide an opportunity for Jamaica to be recognized as a regional
                         leader in the industry, and attract talent from other countries in the region.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There is strong evience to support the establishment of a physical hub. It has been shown that
                         Collaboration and creativity are more frequent and more successful when tenants are physically
                         located under the same roof . Moreover, the geographical proximity in contexts such as incubators
                         can influence the frequency of contact and thus the development of (social) networks; the
                         environment is conducive to the cross-fertilization of ideas, advice and networking.

                         The Digital and Animation hub will be a critical component in the consolidation of the “Brand
                         Jamaica? in those two industries. This would be an important contribution to the “Startup Jamaica?
                         initiative that the Government of Jamaica is launching and also the venture capital and angel investor
                         strategic plan that the Development Bank of Jamaica has recently completed. The facility will be
                         operated by a private sector partner and owned by the Government of Jamaica .


                         Component 3. Impact fund to facilitate Youth Empowerment and Employment in the digital and
                         animation industries (USD 4 million) .

                         This component will be designed and implemented jointly with one or more Banks operating in
                         Jamaica and in the Caribbean region to constitute an impact fund. Scope of the impact fund is to
                         leverage additional resources from other sources (matching grants, angel investors, crowdfunding
                           platforms, etc.) to support startups. This component will be designed in close collaboration with
                           private sector operators that have been successful in those spaces (e.g. 500Startups, Startup Chile,
                           etc.) and will include a blend of financial and non-financial services (mentorships, B2B coaching,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           etc.) to ensure sound use of these resources.

                           Component 4. Project Management (administration, M&E, analytical work - USD 1.5 million). The
                           activities of this component will focus on ensuring the strategic and efficient management of the
                           project and the continuous monitoring and evaluation of results. Resources will also fund a solid
                           communication strategy that will target the private sector, youth, as well as the relevant stakeholders.
                           Both Digital Jam 2.0 and KingstOOn have demonstrated the importance of a targeted and well-
                           articulated communication campaign using traditional and new media. Resources will also be set
                           aside for analytical studies or activities to cover areas where gaps may be identified and policy issues
                           need to be better understood.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Because of the nature of the project, most of the activities will have no foreseeable relevant social or
                           environmental risks. The main social and environmental risk refers to the process of renovation and
                           refurbishment of the facility to be used for the hub and to the everyday management of the structure.
                           At CN the location for the building has not been selected yet.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              An environmental management plan will be put
                           BP 4.01                                               in place to ensure compliance with national and
                                                                                 WB standards on environmental aspects of the
                                                                                 refurbishing of the Hub.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       TBD
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An environmental management plan will be put in place to ensure compliance with national and
                                      WB standards on environmental aspects of the refurbishing of the Hub. This will likely be
                                      completed by 12/15/2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fabio Pittaluga

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 07-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Markus Kostner (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 07-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
