INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
SDate ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Feb-2015
9 Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Niger                      Project ID:   P153743
Project Name:    Niger - Electricity Access Expansion Project (NELACEP) (P153743)
Task Team        Manuel Luengo,Pedro E. Sanchez
Leader(s):
Estimated        06-Nov-2015                Estimated     29-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (70%), General energy sector
(30%)
Theme(s):        City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Infrastructure services for
private sector development (20%), State-owned enter prise restructuring and
privatization (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00             Total Bank Financing:    60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      60.00
Total                                                            60.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
16.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to electricity
C. Project Description
18.    The proposed Niger Electricity Access Expansion Project (NELACEP) will finance a


﻿strategic portion of Nigelec's Investment Program, focusing on the priority to address existing
network bottlenecks and pending connection requests in seven major urban areas, including the
capital Niamey.
O
)       19.    The project will also finance capacity building activities to the Ministry of Energy and
Petroleum (MEP) in the context of the current sector reform. In addition, it will provide financing to
Nigelec to improve its performance and to cover project implementation costs.
20.    The proposed project components are the following:
Component 1. Extension and reinforcement of the distribution system in urban areas. (estimated cost
$53 million)
21.    This component will support extension of the distribution system to allow the connection of
60,000 new clients in seven major urban areas (Niamey, Dosso, Maradi, Zinder, Agadez, Tahaoua
and Tillab6ry). In addition, it will finance the reinforcement of the existing grid to improve the
capacity of existing networks, thus improving the service quality for existing customers and allowing
new customers to connect to the grid. Furthermore, power system performance will be improved
allowing the reduction of system losses, frequent outages due to overloaded transformers and old
equipment, low and fluctuating voltage conditions and poor system power factors. The investments
will include adding, replacing or upgrading distribution lines and substations and medium and low
voltage equipment, meters, spare parts, and tools. The new customers will be connected by
prepayment meter and the connection charges will be subsidized through IDA financing. The
adequate subsidy will be determined based on the existing practices of the utility.
Component 2. Strengthening institutional capacity in the electricity sector (estimated cost $7 million)
22.    This component will finance capacity building activities for Nigelec as well as MEP. In
addition, it will support Nigelec in project implementation. The component will be divided into three
sub-components:
*      Sub-component 2-A: Technical assistance to MEP. Activities under this component will
include strengthening MEP capacity to develop sector policies, articulate a strategic vision for the
a       sector, and plan the efficient expansion of the sectors using the results of the LCDP financed with
IDA resources under the Kandadji project, which is currently in preparation. Other activities will
comprise the support to the Electricity Regulator once it has been created and put into place,
including the preparation of a tariff review, and the strengthening the policy making and planning
capacities of the MEP . Finally, this component would support Government's efforts to attract private
sector for electricity generation, with technical assistance to the Government on efficient evaluations
of proposals received, and legal, technical and commercial structuring of selected transactions.
*      Sub-component 2-B: Technical assistance to Nigelec. Upon review of Nigelec's
requirements for technical assistance, this component will support the implementing agency through
consultancy contracts related to: (i) Capacity strengthening in distribution system planning
(acquisition of new distribution planning software which will be linked to the GIS system to be
developed and training), and (ii) other key activities to be identified during project preparation based
on Nigelec key priorities.
*      Sub-component 2-C: Project Management. This will include the cost of managing the
project, including the audit and the hiring of experts such as a senior financial management specialist
and a senior procurement specialist.


﻿Project readiness.
23.    Technical aspects. A feasibility study, financed by a World Bank trust fund (AFREA), is
O
U       being carried out in order to define the technical specifications, cost estimates, and bidding
documents. Preliminary results are expected in January 2015 and the final bidding documents by
March 2015.
24.    Safeguards. Nigelec will finance the safeguard-related studies. An ESIA will be carried out
when the preliminary results of the technical studies provide an indication of the project footprint. It
will identify potential environmental and social impacts and devise mitigation and monitoring
measures. In addition, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will also need to be prepared once the
physical area has been preliminarily identified, as for the ESIA, to address any adverse social
impacts such as land acquisition and related resettlement and/or losses of assets or access to
resources. The project is not expected to result in major resettlement. The safeguard-related studies
will be approved by the Ministry in charge of Environment and by the World Bank, and disclosed in
the country and at the Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project's activities, in particular component 1, will be implemented in urban and peri-urban areas in
the 7 major cities: Niamey, Dosso, Maradi, Zinder, Agadez, Tahaoua and Tillab6ry.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will be implemented by Nigelec and Ministry of Energy and Petroleum (MEP), which
have limited experience implementing Bank financed projects.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Medou Lo (GENDR)
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Activities under component 1 have the potential for
OP/BP 4.01                               some localized environmental adverse impacts. An
ESIA will be will be carried out as part of project
preparation. It will be consulted upon and disclosed
before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          Project sites are urban and peri-urban areas with high
population density. Therefore, the Natural Habitats
policy is unlikely to be triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Project sites are urban and peri-urban areas with high
population density. Therefore, the forest policy is
unlikely to be triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The Project does not involve the use of pesticides or
have any impact on pest management practices.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD        The project is not expected to have an impact on or


﻿OP/BP 4.11                               affect physical cultural resources, but this will be
confirmed before appraisal. A chance-Finds
procedure will be included in the bidding documents.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Component 1 may have some limited land
BP 4.12                                  acquisition or subsequent losses of assets related to
the potential construction of distribution sub-stations
and therefore OP 4.12 is triggered to address any
adverse impacts. A RAP will be prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The project will not support construction or
rehabilitation of dams
Projects on International   No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Apr-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Launch of studies: January 2015
Completing: April 2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Manuel Luengo,Pedro E. Sanchez
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                         Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                         Date:
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


