INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 148
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nigeria                    Project ID:  P153732
Project Name:   NIGERIA FCPF REDD READINESS (P153732)
Task Team       Amos Abu
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Jul-2019
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR
Sector(s):      Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      3.80            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                        0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility        3.80
Total                                                           3.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Project Development Objective for the Readiness Preparedness Support is to support Nigeria design
a socially and environmentally sound strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest
degradation.
C. Project Description
Funding from the FCPF will provide support to National level REDD+ Readiness and state-level
REDD+ Readiness in the two new pilot states and to completing REDD+ Readiness in the Cross


﻿River State (originally supported by the UN-REDD Programme).
The FCPF support is limited to technical assistance for REDD+ Readiness pillars, analytical studies,
capacity building, consultations, meetings, and operating costs; the FCPF support does not include
O
U       the implementation of the site-specific REDD+ programs (pilots / demonstration sites).
The grant support will be organized along four components that correspond with the components and
sub-components of Nigeria's Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP).
Component 1. Strengthen National and State Level Readiness Management Arrangements (US
$884,000, all from FCPF)
The objective of this component is to support national and state-level coordination and monitoring of
the REDD+ process, including the project management costs. The component has three sub-
components: Sub-Component 1.1: National Readiness Management Arrangements; Sub-Component
1.2: State Level Management Arrangements; and Sub-Component 1.3: Monitoring and Reporting for
REDD+ Readiness process.
Component 2: Develop REDD+ Strategies and Conduct SESA (US$1,200,000, all from FCPF)
The objective of this component is to carry out analytical work feeding into formulation of a National
REDD+ Strategy and State REDD+ Strategies (including on benefit sharing) in two new pilot states
and CRS, develop the strategies themselves, to undertake the SESA that will assess the potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, both positive and negative, of the proposed REDD+
strategy and produce national level safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, and PF), and a state level
ESMF for CRS. The Component has two Sub-Components: Sub-Component 2.1: Improve Analytical
Work and Develop REDD+ Strategy at National and State Levels, and Sub-Component 2.2: SESA
and Safeguards Instruments.
Component 3: Develop Reference Emissions Level (US$900,000, all from FCPF)
The objective of this component is to develop Nigeria's national REL taking into account the
national circumstances and UNFCCC guidance
O
Component 4. Enhance Stakeholder Engagement, Communication, Consultation and Feedback for
a      REDD+ Readiness Process (US$650,000, all from FCPF)
The objective of this component is to ensure broad stakeholder engagement in REDD+ process,
establish and maintain participatory stakeholder structures at the state-level in two new states,
support communication on REDD+, conduct consultations on specific issues related to REDD+
Readiness process, and design and establish a feedback and grievance redress mechanism. The
component has four sub-components: Sub-Component 4.1: Participatory structures and stakeholder
engagement; Sub-Component 4.2: Communication on REDD+; Sub-Component 4.3. Consultations
on REDD+; and Sub-Component 4.4: Feedback and grievance redress mechanism.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness process in Nigeria do not
include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the ground. The FCPF support is limited to
analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the national and sub-national
levels.


﻿E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Recipient has several years of experience in applying and implementing World Bank projects.
There are considerable legal and institutional frameworks in the country to ensure compliance with
World Bank safeguards policies triggered by the proposed project. In Nigeria, the Federal Ministry of
Environment (FME) is responsible for setting policy guidelines on environmental issues and ensuring
compliance with national environmental standards. It has different departments with field offices in
every region of the country.
The project is implemented by the Federal Ministry of Environment, with the National REDD+
Secretariat in the Forestry Department being responsible for the day-to-day operation. An
experienced team exists inside this ministry that deals with the national environmental issues in their
daily work. Further, safeguards specialists in the World Bank team will provide additional guidance
to the Borrower's team and the Bank task team.
The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national REDD+ Readiness
process will be led by the National REDD+ Secretariat and carried out through inclusive
consultations and in close coordination with other analytical studies / processes. The exercise will be
directly supervised by the SESA Working Group and the National Technical Committee on REDD+.
Whenever possible, the SESA will build upon existing knowledge and institutions that currently
carry out similar studies to inform strategic, sectoral planning or other relevant impact assessments.
A capacity assessment will help to identify the specific stakeholders that are most relevant to the
SESA and identify the priority areas for institutional strengthening that are needed for the realization
of the SESA. This assessment will also gain information on where to focus future capacity building
to support implementation of recommendations arising from the SESA, i.e. through focused
personnel training or institutional strengthening. In order for the relevant stakeholders to fully engage
with the SESA team, a series of educational or training sessions must first occur. The exact nature
and content of these training sessions will be determined via a capacity assessment. Training and
awareness material to enable the informed engagement of local communities and various target
groups in the SESA will be developed in collaboration the Forestry Department and relevant
stakeholders including NGOs/ CSOs Platforms.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Haddy Jatou Sey (GCCGT)
Joseph Ese Akpokodje (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         In line with the nature of the REDD+ Readiness
OP/BP 4.01                              preparation activities, the Government of Nigeria
will prepare a Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) to be carried out under the
project. The SESA will serve to identify, avoid,
mitigate and compensate the potential negative
environmental and social impacts associated with
future activities to be supported by the final REDD+


﻿strategy by providing guidance and key elements for
the preparation of a national Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF). The SESA
will also influence the final national REDD+
strategy, by ensuring that social and environmental
risks are factored into the preparation of the REDD+
Strategy.
An ESMF for the CRS will also be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed, alongside the CRS
REDD+ Strategy.
The future investments and carbon finance
transactions will require specific environmental and
social assessments (ESAs) but these will benefit
from the strategy context created by the SESA and
the ESMFs. The ESMFs will include standing
methods and procedures, along with appropriate
institutional arrangements for screening, reviewing,
implementing, and monitoring specific ESAs to
prevent adverse impacts, as well as cumulative
impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
options proposed in the National REDD + Strategy
and the state REDD+ strategies take into account the
conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous
environmental services and products that natural
habitats provide to human society.
Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the
country puts in place an effective strategy to reduce
loss of natural forests. The SESA will address issues
related to natural habitats and potential impacts of
the National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
included in the national ESMF; issues specific to the
CRS will also be covered in the CRS ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes         Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
and forest degradation, while contributing to the
well-being of forest dependent communities.
Potential impact of the National REDD+ Strategy on
natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
and included in the national ESMF. Potential impacts
of the CRS REDD+ Strategy will be included in the
CRS ESMF.
The SESA and associated ESMFs will reflect the
requirements of the Bank's Operational Policy


﻿regarding forest management, in particular as these
relate to the establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD          This policy could be triggered depending on the final
scope of the National REDD+ Strategy and state
level REDD+ Strategies. Agricultural intensification
and reforestation activities, among others, are REDD
+ activities which could require pest management in
the course of project implementation. The SESA will
address critical issues related to pest management, as
necessary; these will be, as needed, also included in
the key elements of the ESMFs, as well as in a
specific plan related to pests and pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          REDD+ activities are likely to be implemented in
OP/BP 4.11                                areas containing sites deemed physical cultural
resources by rural communities living there (e.g.
holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
forests, etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
project will have negative impacts on any such sites,
the SESA will address issues related to physical
cultural resources and potential impacts of the
National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
included in the national ESMF. Similarly, the CRS
ESMF will address issues related to the CRS REDD+
Strategy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10                                      The SESA will, however, take into account the
interests of all relevant stakeholders, in particular,
vulnerable populations, consult with them
adequately, ensure that they participate in, and
benefit from REDD+ activities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         REDD+ activities will trigger the Involuntary
BP 4.12                                   Resettlement OP given that, in the future, restrictions
of access to legally designated parks, protected areas,
or forest management / reforestation areas may be
introduced. The policy aims to avoid resettlement to
the extent feasible, or to minimize and mitigate its
adverse social and economic impacts in cases where
resettlement or other involuntary restrictions cannot
be avoided. Through the SESA process, any issues
related to land acquisition or involuntary resettlement
will be identified, and a national-level Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared. With
regard to restrictions of access to protected areas,
parks, forest concessions, etc., a Process Framework
will be prepared as well.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           N/A


﻿Projects on International     No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2018
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The main safeguard instrument to be launched is the Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA). The SESA exercise will be launched once the consultancy team is hired, and
will be completed under the close supervision of a SESA Working Group. As one of the outcomes
of the SESA process, the national Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Process Framework will be prepared. A state-level
ESMF specifically for Cross River State will also be prepared.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amos Abu
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)               Date: 11-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                     Date: 12-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


