                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA7691

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tunisia                         Project ID:    P146799
                                                     Parent         P124341
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:     TN-MSME Development Project Additional Financing (P146799)
   Parent Project    MNA Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise Financing Facility (P124341)
   Name:
   Task Team         Laurent Gonnet
   Leader:
   Estimated         25-Feb-2014                     Estimated   17-Apr-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    MNSF1                           Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):        SME Finance (100%)
   Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       100.00              Total Bank Financing: 100.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                  Amount
     Borrower                                                                             0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                              100.00
     Total                                                                              100.00
   Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                           Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objective is to improve access to finance for micro, small and medium
   enterprises in Tunisia, including through enabling creditworthy MSMEs to maintain access to
   credit.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
This MSME Facility is an Additional Financing -AF- in the amount of US$m 100 to continue to
support access to finance for MSMEs.

Development Policy Loans (DPLs) and the associated Policy Matrix measures agreed with
Governments since the revolution will complement this AF. The resulting policy and legal reforms
will strengthen the impact of the financing provided by the AF by enabling financial institutions to
offer financial services to smaller and under-served MSMEs, including women-headed MSMEs. As
of November 2013, two Development Policy Loans were granted to Tunisia that included measures
that improve the policy, legal and sector context for MSME Finance. A third DPL is under
preparation.

While maintaining the vital flow of financing to credit-worthy MSME, this AF will also support the
liquidity to the banking system. The loan will finance new lending to MSMEs, and also, with strict
criteria, rescheduling of loans to otherwise creditworthy MSMEs that are currently affected by the
economic impacts of the political instability in Tunisia since the Revolution (January 2011).
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Additional Financing will be managed by the Central bank of Tunisia, as it was the case for the
initial project. The beneficiary MSMEs will be located throughout Tunisia (including in underserved
regions) and will utilize the funds towards MSME sub-projects.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Taoufiq Bennouna (MNSEE)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             This Additional Financing –AF- will aim to
 BP 4.01                                            increase resources available for MSME lending.
                                                    As such, the project is classified as Category
                                                    #FI#, according to both World Bank Safeguard
                                                    procedures. Sponsors of sub-projects will
                                                    approach this AF via financial institutions for
                                                    financing, and these financial institutions will
                                                    make the decision on whether to support a
                                                    subproject based on its commercial viability, and
                                                    according to the procedures set out in the



                                            Page 2 of 6
                                                       Operations Manual that will be agreed prior to
                                                       Project effectiveness. The AF will consider the
                                                       potential environmental and social impacts and
                                                       risks of any subproject that it finances. The
                                                       project would support an Environmental and
                                                       Social Management System (ESMS) to identify,
                                                       mitigate and monitor potential social and
                                                       environmental impacts in compliance with Bank
                                                       Policies and Tunisia's applicable laws and
                                                       regulations.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

   Pest Management OP 4.09            No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     This Additional Financing will provide loans up to US$m 100 to eligible financial institutions in
     order to finance micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs) through sub-loans. The type of
     project or sector would not be restricted. However the size of the sub-loans would be the major
     factor restricting the potential impact. Similarly, loans to existing MSMEs would be expected to
     have limited impacts if they are used to replace, or modernize, existing equipment. Improvements
     in equipment may even result in reduced environmental impacts through reduced air or water
     pollution.

    The first line of credit was accompanied by an Environmental and Social Management System
    (ESMS) responsible for managing the environmental and social framework of funded activities.
    This ESMS will be published in the ANPE web site and infoshop. During the evaluation of this
    first line of credit (October 2013), the Bank found out that a significant number of firms that have


                                               Page 3 of 6
 applied to the parent project, in economic sector such as food processing, pharmaceutical,
 mechanical and electrical industries were put aside from the eligibility process as they proved not
 meet the criteria developed in the first ESMS, while these activities can be eligible provided that
 they are categorized in the World Bank B category according to OP 4.01. The ESMS has been
 updated in order to take into account all the concerns listed above, including the extension of
 eligibility for certain activities.

 Potential negative impacts may however include loans to MSMEs in the following sectors:
 construction; food processing (including olive oil); textiles; pharmaceutical and others.

 Loans to small businesses for the acquisition of vehicles (mostly through leasing), which
 represents a significant portion of MSMEs, are not expected to have significant impacts other than
 normal vehicular emissions.

  To streamline the project, numerous sub-projects would be excluded: any Category A subprojects;
  any sub projects causing involuntary resettlement, involved with large dams, in international
  waterways, in disputed territories, affecting natural habitats, forestry, pest management, physical
  and cultural resources. As a fail-safe, the screening of sub-projects referred to in paragraph 4
  (below) could identify any negative social impacts and mitigating action to be taken as a result.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Indirect impacts are expected to include cumulative impacts of multiple small activities that
  individually would be negligible.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  No “alternatives” to the proposed project exist as future activities (loans to MSMEs) are not yet
  known, however restrictions exist on project scale.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  National capacity to plan and implement environmental measures is relatively high in Tunisia; the
  National Environmental Protection Agency (Agence Nationale de Protection de l’Environnement
  –ANPE-) is effective and procedures are in place and understood by the financial industry and by
  small businesses. FIs are used to obtaining non-objection from the ANPE before financing any
  activities with significant impacts.

 The borrower (Tunisia) has updated the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)
 in order to take into consideration additional activities. This new ESMS will serve as a screening
 and mitigation mechanism for significant impacts. The ESMS would be used by Participating
 Financial Institutions (PFIs) working with MSMEs to classify activities financed under the Facility
 as having high, low or negligible impacts. Depending on the category (B or C), MSMEs would
 implement the appropriate socio-environmental mitigation instrument (partial EIA, simple
 Environmental Management Plan, or “no action”). This is in keeping with current procedures in
 Tunisia, and would be implemented by law. For each additional country accessing the Facility in
 future, an annex would be added to the ESMS to specify additional requirements. The new ESMS
 have been validated (national workshop held November 27 at the headquarter of the Bank in
 Tunisia with the Central Bank of Tunisia, the National Environmental Protection Agency, the
 Ministry of Cooperation and the Tunisian Employers’ Association).


                                            Page 4 of 6
  Given the relatively high capacity of the ANPE, the ESMS requires (i) ANPE approval before
  funding from the Facility can proceed, as well as (ii) screening for impacts on international
  waterways, safety of dams, disputed territories, deforestation, natural habitats, and endangered
  species, which would rule the investment as ineligible.

  Since PFIs and MSMEs may not have the required capacity to identify environmental and social
  impacts, some training session will be provided to the PFIs on environmental safeguards and
  screening techniques. Additional technical assistance (TA) could be provided to further strengthen
  these aspects if needed.

  Additionally, the project, at PIU level, would track the number of activities having received non-
  objection from ANPE at startup; annually; and would ensure an independent annual evaluation
  focusing specifically on cumulative impacts and labor issues.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders are MSMEs and PFIs, and the main consultation mechanism during
  implementation would be between businesses applying for loans and their financial institution (e.
  g. banks, leasing agencies, factoring agencies).

  A focal point based at the National Agency of Environmental Protection will help stakeholders to
  decide on the eligibility of projects, fill out the screening forms, support the project leaders from
  the Environment Agency, follow the publication on the website of the Environmental Agency and
  ensure the monitoring of environmental indicators

  The project has carried out extensive consultation with PFIs during preparation missions in
  Tunisia.

  In Tunisia, the official channel for announcing the availability of loans under the Facility is in the
  form of a circular letter from the Central bank to PFIs, who would then publicize the availability
  of loans to their potential (and existing) clients.

  Disclosure mechanisms for environmental documents in Tunisia are weak, and this could therefore
  be strengthened through the planned technical assistance. The disclosure of environmental
  documents in a format and language accessible to the population (for example on the project’s or
  the relevant ministry's website) will be carried out.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                 27-Nov-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              25-Feb-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Tunisia                                                     25-Feb-2014
  Comments: http://www.anpe.nat.tn/index.php?
                option=com_content&view=article&id=294&Itemid=211&lang=fr


                                              Page 5 of 6
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Laurent Gonnet
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                Date: 28-Feb-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Simon C. Bell (SM)                             Date: 03-Mar-2014




                                             Page 6 of 6
