                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC9071

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bangladesh                      Project ID:      P149605
                            Project Name:     Nuton Jibon Livelihood Improvement Project (P149605)
                            Task Team         Frauke Jungbluth
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Oct-2014                     Estimated        26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSURR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Other social services
                                              (30%), Public administration- Other social services (2 0%), Agro-industry,
                                              marketing, and trade (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Participation and civic engagement
                                              (25%), Rural non-farm income generation (15%), Nutrition and food security
                                              (10%), Other rural development (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    225.00                   Total Bank Financing:        200.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          25.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                200.00
                              Total                                                                      225.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to empower the poor and extreme poor, and improve
                           their livelihoods and living conditions in the project areas.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would seek to build on the successful implementation aspects of the Social
                         Investment Program Project–II (Nuton Jibon Project-SIPP-II), while aiming to simplify the project
                         design, strengthen the support for sustainable institutions, and expand its reach into other upazilas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and districts, based on recent poverty data and other selection criteria. The proposed project would
                         consist of three components over six years with a currently proposed funding envelop of US$ 200
                         million: (a) Community and Livelihood Development; (b) Business Partnerships and Market
                         Linkages; and (c) Capacity Building, Monitoring and Learning, and Project Management.

                         An initial review of poverty data indicate that the above selection criteria would result into (i)
                         deepening of intervention in districts in which the project is already active, by adding additional
                         upazilas (new upazilas), that are among those with the highest percentage of poor according to the
                         2010 HIES but have not yet been covered; and (ii) expanding into upazilas in districts where the
                         project is not yet active - about an additional 5 -6 districts would likely be included

                         Component A – Community and Livelihood Development
                         Objective. The objective of this component would be to: (i) mobilize and empower the poor and
                         hard-core poor in rural communities, as well as build and strengthen pro-poor institutions; and (ii)
                         fund village development and livelihood-related investments for project beneficiaries. The project
                         would continue to work with SIPP-II beneficiaries to help them implement an exit strategy from
                         project dependence and, at the same time, provide support to new villages and community
                         institutions. The component would also seek to integrate nutrition related messages and actions as
                         well as increase knowledge on good agricultural practices.
                         Community Planning and Empowerment. The project would largely keep the procedures of
                         organization, empowerment, planning and implementation of sub-projects under this component
                         intact as per the procedures under SIPP-II. It is suggested that the initial community planning
                         process would be broadened such as to include disaster risk and climate change concerns at that level
                         to feed into the overall investment planning, particularly for infrastructure investments. It is
                         expected that the current funding windows for institutional development, community infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and village development funds would remain. However, further review and discussions will be held
                         as to the share of these funds within a village allocation.
                         Village Development Fund. Among current SIPP-II villages, the component would primarily focus
                         on strengthening sustainability mechanisms for the infrastructure and village-level institutions built
                         so far under the program. With respect to the community infrastructure, the project would
                         particularly aim at strengthening mechanisms for ensuring its adequate maintenance, including
                         effective collection, management, and use of infrastructure maintenance funds. Regarding
                         community financing, the project would particularly aim at improving the operational efficiency and
                         sustainability of the Village Credit Organizations (VCOs).
                         VCOs continue to be an important resource in promoting economic opportunities among the poor in
                         SIPP villages. As of December 31, 2014, some US$ 54 million of revolving funds had been
                         cumulatively disbursed to about 430,000 borrowers. Activities financed have ranged from
                         production (livestock, vegetables, etc.) to services (tailoring, rickshaw transportation, etc.). As SDF
                         starts to progressively scale down its presence in “maturing” communities, it will be important to
                         leave these community financing institutions in a financially sustainable position. This will entail,
                         among other things: (i) strengthening their loan portfolio quality; (ii) professionalizing their
                         operations; (iii) simplifying their processes; (iv) facilitating their legal registration; and (v)
                         strengthening their second-tier institutions.
                         Among the new villages, the component would: (i) help mobilize, develop, and strengthen self-
                         reliant and self-managed community organizations; and (ii) establish a Village Development Fund to
                         finance activities for income generation, small-scale local infrastructure development, and other
                         activities at the village level which are prioritized, managed and maintained by the communities.
                         The component would: (i) institute mechanisms to ensure more equitable allocation of funds and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         their efficient utilization and (ii) strengthen collaborative arrangements with other initiatives and
                         entities, including government line ministries in order to maximize synergy.
                         Nutrition. The project would use information from the national nutrition mapping exercise to work in
                         synergy with concerned stakeholders for mainstreaming nutrition sensitive activities in its geographic
                         areas. In areas where other stakeholders are already actively pursuing nutrition related programs, the
                         project would seek cooperative arrangements. In areas where no other stakeholder is active, the
                         project would seek to contract support. The project would aim to address nutrition by (i) raising
                         awareness; (ii) mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive actions across project interventions; (c) improving
                         hygiene/hand-washing practices; and (d) enhancing access to safe and nutritious food.
                         The project would seek to provide longer term training to targeted beneficiaries for (i) development
                         of privately operated community-level nurseries to provide quality seeds and saplings tolerant to
                         climate variability; (ii) improved technologies for poultry rearing to increase egg production and
                         local production of poultry feed; (iii) vegetable homestead gardening practices; (iv) small fish ponds;
                         and (v) improved agricultural practices and technologies. For agricultural related activities,
                         arrangements would be made with support from the Local Government and extension services for the
                         provision of adequate technical assistance to the beneficiary households. Given the shortfall of
                         extension workers in livestock and fisheries, skilled community professionals would be selected and
                         additional training provided for quality day-to-day support to the concerned households, under the
                         overall supervision of the Upazila extension officer. A farmer field school approach could be
                         adopted based on models already introduced by other organizations that integrate basic nutrition and
                         agricultural messages.

                         Component B – Business Partnership Development and Market Linkages
                         Objective. This component would aim to increase livelihood opportunities of poor and hardcore
                         poor by organizing them in producer groups, cooperatives or federations and improving their market
                         and business orientation and forward and backward linkages in the market systems. Various
Public Disclosure Copy




                         empowerment models of joint actions of small-scale individual producers working as organized
                         producer groups would aim to raise the attractiveness of poor and hardcore poor as market partners,
                         reduce market transaction costs and align their production decisions with business and market
                         opportunities. Such empowered producer organizations would also facilitate services provisions to
                         their members and act as economic entities and business partners in the down- and up-stream value
                         chains and create additional opportunities for added value to their products. Specific objectives
                         would be to (i) build and strengthen producer organizations as market partners and commercially
                         oriented entities; (ii) organize and align skill development and training in response to the specific
                         labor market requirements; (iii) facilitate interaction between producers and traders/processors of
                         products in the down- and up-stream value chains; and (iv) support market/business oriented
                         investment to solve bottlenecks in the market chains and/or adding value to the products (e.g. poor
                         and hardcore poor capturing a higher share in the value chain). The design of the component would
                         built on and further develop the approaches started under the on-going SIPP-II project.
                         The component would aim to address several issues: (i) limited marketing and commercial
                         experiences of most project beneficiaries; many of them only used to sell small surplus production
                         above subsistence needs, others with no experience as in the case of many landless or newly trained
                         youth, who never promoted their skills on the labor market; (ii) production decisions are not market
                         driven; traditionally agricultural production decisions are based on subsistence food production,
                         where the surplus is sold on the market. This surplus, which is pushed on the markets rather than
                         demanded by the market, generally yields sub-optimal returns. Low seasonal prices, difficulties to
                         sell, weak negotiation power are generally associated with such surplus selling; (c) small-scale,
                         scattered and non-standardized production units and products; individual producers offer small
                         amounts of products, that are not attractive for traders, wholesalers or processors; and (d) limited
Public Disclosure Copy




                         added value; small producers offer mainly raw material, which is not graded, packaged or further
                         processed and, thus, capture only a limited share of the value in the existing value chains.
                         Possible activities to be supported under the component would include: (i) capacity building for
                         producer organizations created under the project including registration, management facilities and
                         management training; (ii) regular stakeholder workshops, which would bring producer groups,
                         traders, processors and other value chain actors together for forward and backward information
                         exchange and facilitating business relationship building; (iii) youth employment support (e.g.
                         employment promotion facilities such as web-sites, job centers, job fairs, etc.); and (iv) a fund for
                         market facilitation and value addition available for registered producer groups/ federations/
                         cooperatives for investments in joint facilities supporting their market access and adding value to
                         their produce (e.g. product storage facilities, product collection points, pre-processing, packaging,
                         transport facilities, quality assurance and food safety improvement investments, etc.).
                         The formation of producer organizations and development of economic entities envisaged under
                         Component B would follow a successful grassroots level empowerment and livelihood development,
                         which has been already been achieved in many of the project villages supported under SIPP-II and is
                         envisaged to be achieved under the proposed project (Component A) after year two. It is therefore
                         suggested that the implementation of this component would start in the villages of SIPP-II and would
                         gradually cover all project villages under the proposed new project starting after year two. The
                         component would provide support for a range of mutually supportive activities addressing the above
                         described issues such as:

                         Component C – Capacity Building, Monitoring, Learning and Project Management
                         This component would aim to continue building SDF’s capacity to provide comprehensive support to
                         the poor. The component would enable the provision specialized technical advice on a needs basis
                         and would aim to develop SDF’s strategic and institutional vision further. The component would
                         also continue supporting third party monitoring and impact evaluation activities as well as built and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expand on communication/presentation aspects that SIPP-II started working on. Information and
                         communication technology supported feed-back mechanisms may be piloted under the proposed
                         project to simplify and feed into existing feedback and monitoring tools. SIPP-II has established a
                         well-functioning Monitoring and Information System that would be built on and expanded.
                         Impact Evaluation. The project would continue building on the impact evaluation process that has
                         been started in SIPP-II and would include a second follow-up survey for communities that the
                         program had been active for some time and a baseline and follow-up survey for the new areas to be
                         intervened in.
                         Third Party Monitoring. SIPP-II has established a third party monitoring process that looks at
                         processes and activities on a monthly basis and feeds into quarterly monitoring meetings held per
                         region. The project would continue to use the successful process monitoring mechanisms that have
                         been built under SIPP-II. The same methodology would be continued, though SDF suggests to lower
                         the number of communities visited per month.
                         Innovation. SDF would like to maintain funds for innovation activities as under SIPP-II. This would
                         be used to establish a platform to generate new ideas/ proven experiences and encourage innovative
                         proposals from individuals/organizations/societies etc. which would create opportunities to piloting
                         ideas. This activity was not very successful in SIPP-II and just one contract has been started now.
                         The preparation process will further explore how one could improve on the experience of SIPP-II in
                         this area and thus, whether an inclusion of funds for separate innovative activities is warranted.
                         Program Management. The component would also cover part of the operating costs of SDF. Within
                           the new project period, the endowment fund established by the Government for SDF would likely
                           become accessible and would be used to cover SDF’s operating costs. During SIPP-II the GoB
                           committed to provide a total of US$ 21.5 million as endowment fund to SDF for its sustainability to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           meet its operating cost partially or fully. As to date, SDF received a total of US$ 15 million with the
                           reminder to be provided in two equal installments in FY 2014-15 and FY 2015-16. Guidelines for its
                           use are currently being prepared by SDF. Estimates prepared last year indicate that the current
                           endowment fund would be sufficient to cover SDF’s operating costs within the currently served
                           districts and structures. It is therefore proposed that only about US$ 5 million are earmarked for
                           operating costs from IDA funds.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The ongoing project is working in a total of 16 districts (Kurigram, Rangpur, Nilphamari, Dinajpur,
                           Gaibandha, Naogaon, Sirajganj, Sherpur, Mymensing, Sylhet, Barisal, Patuakhali, Borguna,
                           Bagerhat, Pirojpur) and within these districts in 51 Upazilas, 252 unions,3262 villages. The
                           proposed project will continue to work in these 16 districts and is likely to expand to additional 5-6
                           districts (to be selected). An additional 2,000 villages would be covered by expanding into other
                           unions of districts in which the project is already active and entering into other unions in newly
                           selected districts. The new districts and upazilas to be covered under the project will be determined
                           based on poverty indicators as derived from the recent Bangladesh household income survey and
                           potentially on food security and risk data.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Project management would continue to be the responsibility of the existing implementation agency,
                           the Social Development Foundation (SDF). Because of prior experience of working with Bank
                           financed project, SDF is familiar with the Bank's safeguard policies. However, SDF still needs
                           capacity improvement with regard to environmental management and to comply with Bank's
                           safeguards requirements since the new project would incorporate new activities that are concentrated
                           more on nutrition, market facilitation and value addition for sustainability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Sabah Moyeen (GURDR)
                           Farhat Jahan Chowdhury (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              While the project designed to improve
                           BP 4.01                                               livelihood and living conditions of rural poor
                                                                                 and extreme poor, it may have some minor
                                                                                 impacts from small-scale local infrastructures,
                                                                                 agriculture based livelihoods, and market
                                                                                 facilitation. Therefore, the project is classified
                                                                                 as a “Category B” under OP/BP 4.01 with a
                                                                                 partial assessment as the impacts are likely to be
                                                                                 very minor, site specific with no irreversible
                                                                                 impacts and mitigation measures can be
                                                                                 designed more readily.
                                                                 The implementing agency will update the
                                                                 Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                 prepared for the SIPP-II. The updated EMF will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 ensure environmental management of newly
                                                                 incorporated interventions as well as
                                                                 compliance with Bank's Safeguard policies. It
                                                                 will provide checklist as well as guidelines to
                                                                 carry-out sub-project specific environmental
                                                                 assessment and EMPs, consultations, costing,
                                                                 implementation, and guidelines for construction
                                                                 and post-construction monitoring. In addition,
                                                                 the EMF will provide a negative list of
                                                                 attributes and interventions so that no natural
                                                                 habitats or physical cultural resources will be
                                                                 affected during the implementation of sub-
                                                                 projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   The project will not implement any activities
                                                                 inside Protected Areas (wildlife sanctuaries,
                                                                 national parks, etc.). It is also highly unlikely
                                                                 that any natural habitats formed largely by
                                                                 native plant and animal species would undergo
                                                                 transformation of use or would be affected or
                                                                 modified by project activities. However, as a
                                                                 precautionary measure, the Natural Habitat OP
                                                                 has been triggered. The presence of natural
                                                                 habitats will be assessed during the
                                                                 environmental screening of sub-projects. The
                                                                 EMF will also include an environmental code of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 practices to follow if unforeseen issues arise.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No activities will be implemented inside forest
                                                                 areas nor will be forest planting undertaken.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   TAlthough, the project will work on soil health
                                                                 improvement and promote IPM technologies in
                                                                 the small-scale home gardening program,
                                                                 project beneficiaries may use pesticides on a
                                                                 small scale. Therefore, the pest management
                                                                 OP has been triggered. The EMF will
                                                                 incorporate pest management guidelines and
                                                                 provide a negative list of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    It is not expected that any sub-projects to be
                         BP 4.11                                 designed and implemented by the project will
                                                                 affect, modify, or reverse any designated
                                                                 physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project will likely work in areas where
                                                                 indigenous people live and will engage with
                                                                 them for the improvement of their livelihoods.
                                                               SIPP-II did not trigger OP 4.10, therefore the
                                                               existing Social Management Framework (SMF)
                                                               will be updated to include and Indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               People’s Development Framework (IPDF)
                                                               based on which specific sites will be screened
                                                               and where relevant site specific Indigenous
                                                               Peoples Development Plans (IPDP) will be
                                                               prepared and implemented. The SMF will also
                                                               update the Communication and Inclusion
                                                               components and address gender issues and those
                                                               of very vulnerable people in a more focused
                                                               manner. The SMF will also include a Grievance
                                                               Redress Mechanism that is easily
                                                               understandable and accessible at local levels.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No   No land acquisition or displacement of people
                         4.12                                  from public or private lands is permissible under
                                                               the project. This will be explicitly mentioned in
                                                               the updated SMF, as it was done for SIPP-II.
                                                               The project undertakes small scale infrastructure
                                                               development on vacant public lands or existing
                                                               office sites; small earthen roads, culverts, tube-
                                                               wells, latrines, repairs to school buildings etc.
                                                               have been undertaken previously. The nature
                                                               and scale of infrastructure development will
                                                               largely remain the same for the proposed
                                                               project. However, the updated SMF will
                                                               include additional documentation requirements
                                                               for infrastructure development sub-components
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               to demonstrate that the works are on vacant
                                                               public lands and no displacement or negative
                                                               impacts on livelihoods are caused due to the
                                                               interventions. If lands are contributed by
                                                               private parties or purchased on a willing buyer/
                                                               willing seller basis, adequate documentation and
                                                               consultation will have to be demonstrated via
                                                               required reporting guidelines which will be
                                                               included in the updated SMF.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No   The project will not construct or rehabilitate
                                                               dams larger than 10 meters in height.
                         Projects on International        No   The OP on International Waterways has not
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  been triggered. Being implemented in the lowest
                                                               riparian country in the Ganges-Brahmaputra
                                                               watershed, the project will not carry out any
                                                               interventions that affect the use or pollute
                                                               international waterways, particularly river or
                                                               body of surface water that flows through two or
                                                               more states.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No activities will be implemented in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be updated to adequately
                                      address potential safeguards issues in the Nuton Jibon interventions. The target date for finalizing
                                      the update EMF and the SMF would be September 30, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Frauke Jungbluth

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 24-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Shobha Shetty (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 23-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
