INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12615
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Africa                     Project ID:  P153665
Parent       P111556
Project ID:
Project Name: 3A EA PH Laboratory Networking Project Additional Financing (P153665)
Parent Project East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project (P111556)
Name:
Task Team       Miriam Schneidman
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-Jan-2015                Estimated    30-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (90%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s):       Other communicable diseases (34%), Health system performance (33%),
Tuberculosis (33%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     99.00             Total Bank Financing:   99.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                99.00
Total                                                                      99.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 10


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To establish a network of efficient, high quality, accessible public health laboratories for the
diagnosis and surveillance of tuberculosis and other communicable diseases.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The project includes three mutually reinforcing components, which assist Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda,
Tanzania, Uganda, and now Ethiopia, to diagnose diseases of public health importance and to share
information about those diseases to mount an effective regional response. The project components
will remain unchanged but will be expanded to include Ethiopia and to support additional activities
for four of the participating countries (Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda). The activities to be
funded and the estimated budgets are summarized below.
Ethiopia. In light of the government's strategic priorities, as articulated in the Ebola Emergency
Preparedness and Response Plan, and the support of other development partners the following
activities will be included under each component:
COMPONENT 1--Regional Diagnostic and Surveillance Capacity (US$41.9 million) is providing
support to enhance access to diagnostic services for vulnerable groups in cross border areas of
Ethiopia; improve capacity to provide specialized diagnostic services and conduct selective drug
resistance monitoring at the national level; and strengthen disease surveillance and preparedness to
provide early warning of public health events. As requested by the Government of Ethiopia, this
component will support construction of two regional laboratories in Benishangul and Dire Dawa,
(employing a CDC laboratory model used for similar facilities to ensure uniformity and promote high
standards) and quality related improvements at an additional eleven regional laboratories which
would become part of the laboratory network. In addition, support will be provided to the Ethiopian
Public Health Institute (EPHI) to make it a premiere center of excellence in the region for public
health, research, and training.
The thirteen regional laboratories are in strategic cross border areas and/or in densely populated peri-
urban areas where poverty is rampant and slum conditions serve as a breeding ground for the spread
of diseases. Given Ethiopia's size and diversity the project support, combined with assistance from
other development partners, will provide good coverage. The satellite sites were selected based on
the following criteria: (i) facilities which are located in high transmission areas with large numbers of
migrants or refugees; (ii) regional teaching hospitals which can serve as centers of excellence for
conducting training and research; (iii) commitment to collaborate and coordinate efforts within and
across countries; and (iv) support from other development partners to leverage other financing. The
satellite facilities are essential to optimize surveillance efforts and contain the spread of
communicable diseases. Component 1 includes three sub-components:
(i) Diagnostic Services for Vulnerable Populations in Cross Border Areas (US$5.4 million): In
addition to the 32 laboratories already receiving support, the first component will incorporate the 14
laboratories in Ethiopia in the laboratory network. IDA financing will continue promoting a systems
approach to laboratory development and include: (i) support for rehabilitation, expansion, and/or
Page 2 of 10


﻿construction of laboratories and/or isolation units at select facilities, filling in gaps not funded by
other partners; (ii) provision of laboratory equipment (including new TB diagnostics), materials, and
supplies, including waste management and infection control equipment, and personal protective
equipment to ensure the safety of laboratory personnel; (iii) acquisition of computer equipment,
software, and technical support for integrated laboratory information systems to improve the quality
of data generated and videoconferencing capacity to facilitate communications; and (iv) provision of
operating funds to render the laboratories functional, including strengthening human resources,
supporting assisted supervision and conducting outreach activities at the community level.
(ii/a) Reference and Specialized Services and Drug Resistance Monitoring (US$32 million): The
project will bolster the capacity of the EPHI to conduct specialized testing, with a particular focus on
the diagnosis of emerging and re-emerging pathogens, such as Ebola. The EPHI will strengthen
collaboration with the national referral laboratories in the other participating countries by sharing
information, conducting joint training and research, and harmonizing policies and strategies. The
project will fund the rehabilitation/construction and equipment of the EPHI, including appropriate
biosafety capacity. The project will allow the Government to fund procurement of expertise in key
aspects of designing, costing, and environmental safeguards needed for the state-of-the art
laboratories for EPHI including BSL 3 and BSL 4. Subsequently, the project will allow for the
Government to fund construction of BSL 3 and BSL 4 laboratories in line with WHO biosafety
standards and guidelines and in collaboration with other technical partners (agreeable to both IDA
and the Government), subject to completion of acceptable risk, economic and financial, and
environmental assessments.
(ii/b) EQA Systems and Laboratory Accreditation (US$2.8 million): The project will introduce and/
or strengthen laboratory quality systems at the 14 participating laboratories. All facilities will be
supported to participate in the WHO/AFRO five-step quality improvement process (SLIPTA)
towards accreditation and the accompanying training program (Strengthening Laboratory
Management Towards Accreditation (SLMTA), with the goal of reaching at least three stars by
project completion. The project will finance: (i) provision of equipment to support the EPHI to
systematically conduct External Quality Assurance (EQA) by producing and distributing proficiency
testing panels to regional facilities; (ii) technical assistance for laboratory accreditation; (iii) capacity
building activities for satellite laboratories to participate in the EQA system; and (iv) provision of
operating funds to support inter-laboratory external quality assessments among the six participating
countries.
(iii) Disease Surveillance and Preparedness (US$1.7 million): The proposed activities complement
ongoing national, regional and global initiatives to improve Integrated Disease Surveillance and
Response (IDSR) country systems by addressing glaring gaps highlighted by the recent Ebola
outbreak. The project supports the IDSR strategic goals to improve availability of quality
information by: (i) strengthening competence of lab and facility personnel to collect, analyze, and use
surveillance data; (ii) reinforcing lab networking and district capacity to report, investigate, and
adequately respond to disease outbreaks; and (iii) strengthening communications and data sharing to
respond rapidly to outbreaks. The additional financing will assist Ethiopia to comply with its
commitments under the IHR. The project will support Ethiopia to: (i) strengthen etiological
confirmation of pathogens and promote active participation of laboratory and other health personnel
in disease surveillance and disease outbreak investigations; (ii) scale up an electronic disease
surveillance reporting system supported by CDC/USAID; (iii) refurbish isolation centers within
existing hospitals/facilities at high traffic border points (Gambela, Benishangul); (iv) strengthen
capacity to diagnose and manage zoonotic diseases in collaboration with animal health experts
Page 3 of 10


﻿through joint training, and coordinated disease outbreak investigations and table top simulations; (v)
strengthen and operationalize cross border zonal surveillance committees with a focus on hot spot
areas; and (vi) bolster capacity to track and diagnose non-communicable diseases (NCDs) with
special emphasis on cancers which are rapidly emerging as an important public health problem.
These activities will be funded through the provision of technical assistance, ICT equipment, and
operating costs.
COMPONENT 2 --Joint Training and Capacity Building (US$3.4 million) aims to support training
and capacity building for health (i.e. laboratory, health workers, community workers) and non-hea Ith
(i.e. airport and other port of entry personnel; zoonotic surveillance experts) personnel in order to
increase the pool of experts, and improve the effectiveness of public health laboratories and the
efficiency of disease preparedness and outbreak responses. As part of this component, Ethiopia will
prepare a training plan, to be reviewed annually, which provides details of short and long-term
programs, including regional training, in laboratory sciences and field epidemiology. In total, over
2,000 personnel will benefit from training to improve quality of laboratory services and disease
prevention and preparedness capacity. An initial list of critical short term training programs have
been proposed and will include but not be limited to: laboratory management, infection control and
bio-safety, equipment maintenance, disease surveillance and outbreak investigations, laboratory
mentorship, TB diagnostic techniques, Good Clinical Laboratory Practice, SLMTA and research
methodologies. In addition, a three-month certificate program on Laboratory Management,
developed by Tanzania under the original project, will be made available to Ethiopian participants.
In order to address the growing need for diagnosis and management of NCDs, particularly cancers,
training will also be provided to strengthen cancer screening and pathology services. The project
will also support fellowships in field epidemiology through the country's ongoing flagship Field
Epidemiology and Training Program (FETP), complementing support from CDC and others. The
project will finance: (i) attendance at training courses at national and regional institutes; (ii)
laboratory attachments, and regional exchanges at recognized centers of laboratory excellence; and
(iii) technical assistance to review and develop standards and training curricula.
COMPONENT 3-- Joint Operational Research and Knowledge Sharing/Regional Coordination and
Program Management (US$3.7 million) will finance operational research and knowledge sharing
activities, which aim to inform public policy and programmatic action on various topics, such as use
of mobile phone disease surveillance technologies, feasibility of developing vaccines for zoonotic
diseases, and strategies for the control and management of disease outbreaks. The component will
also support activities aimed at generating lessons and sharing knowledge on the role of Health
Extension Workers in disease surveillance and early response systems. The AF will support: (i)
technical assistance to conduct operational research; (ii) procurement of essential supplies for
operational research; (iii) workshops to disseminate research findings; (iv) study tours to the other
participating countries to learn from ongoing successful programs and initiatives; and (v) operational
costs to manage the project at the national and regional levels.
Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. For the four original countries the AF will support the
consolidation of ongoing activities and funding of the following supplementary activities:
Component 1--Regional Diagnostic and Surveillance Capacity (US$36.2 million): Under Component
1,the following additional activities will be funded to enhance readiness to cope with disease
outbreaks: (i) establishment of selective BSL2/3 capacity to facilitate rapid and efficient diagnosis of
EVD and other pathogens and minimize the need for transporting infectious materials across borders,
drawing on thorough risk assessments to be conducted to determine the appropriate BSL required for
Page 4 of 10


﻿different contexts in accordance with WHO guidelines and policies; (ii) construction of isolation
units to manage cases of EVD and other infectious diseases such as cholera and TB; (iii) construction
and equipment of additional laboratories to expand geographic coverage and increase national
capacity; (iv) provision of personal PPEs, materials and supplies; (v) operational support for EOCs
and RRTs, cross border disease surveillance committees, and table top simulations; (vi) equipment
and supplies for veterinary laboratories; and (vii) equipment for roll out of mobile phone disease
surveillance reporting, based on system developed under the original project; and (viii) specialized
pathology equipment to support a small scale cancer screening program.
Component 2--Joint Training and Capacity Building (US$5.5 million): The AF will assist the four
participating countries to conduct training and mentoring of both health and non-health personnel in
key aspects of epidemic preparedness and response using a training of trainers (TOT) approach,
cascading training down from regional to national level and from national to peripheral level. To this
end, the project will fund training of: (i) health workers (i.e. medical, laboratory, community, disease
surveillance) at all levels of the health system to enhance knowledge and capacity to monitor, track
and manage cases of EVD and other infectious diseases; (ii) non-health workers (i.e. airport and port
authorities) to strengthen screening and reporting of cases during epidemics; (iii) community and
civil society groups to raise awareness of risks, and strengthen case notification during outbreaks;
(iv) animal health specialists to encourage a move towards a One Health approach; and (v)
establishment of the FETP Program (Burundi). In order to address the growing need for diagnosis
and management of NCDs, particularly cancers, training will also be provided to strengthen cancer
screening and pathology services.
Component 3--Joint Operational Research and Knowledge Sharing/Regional Coordination and
Program Management (US$8.3 million): In addition to consolidating and disseminating findings
from ongoing operational research, the AF will support the participating countries to conduct
research to determine factors contributing to outbreaks of VHF and to identify the most effective
strategies for managing epidemics.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The initial project countries are Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda. The additional
financing will add Ethiopia to the project and provide additional financing for four of the countries
(Burundi, Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda). The project-supported facilities are located primarily in
cross border areas of these five countries and/or in densely populated peri-urban areas where poverty
is rampant and slum conditions serve as a breeding ground for the spread of communicable diseases.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Page 5 of 10


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          For Burundi and Kenya.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project Additional Financing is categorized
as "B", similar to the original project (P111556) and triggers the safeguard policies on: (a)
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) due mainly to the planned construction/rehabilitation of
2 regional laboratories (employing a CDC laboratory model used for similar facilities to ensure
uniformity and promote high standards) in addition to the proposed construction at the Ethiopian
Public Health Institute (EPHI), as well as the generation of health care waste at all laboratories;
and (b) Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) for the project in Kenya and Burundi.
The appraisal mission confirmed that OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered, as all
construction works will take place within the fenced premises of the selected hospitals or within
the premises of the EPHI. There are no settlements on these sites, which have been reserved for
potential future expansion. Moreover, even within the fenced premises there are no activities that
could be viewed as supporting livelihoods.
With regard to OP4.01: during the preparation of the original project, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) that includes an Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) was prepared to ensure proper assessment and mitigation of potential adverse
environmental and social impacts. Medical Waste Management Plans have also been prepared for
each country.
Recent assessment of safeguards performance of the original project revealed that compliance with
safeguard instruments has been generally satisfactory. In Rwanda, facilities are completed and no
major environmental related issues emerged. In Kenya, environmental impact assessments were
conducted for each site. In Uganda, authorities developed Environmental and Social Management
Plans (ESMPs) to mitigate potential negative effects of the project-supported civil works. Civil
works activities in Burundi and Tanzania are still at an early stage, with ESMPs to be prepared.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The ESMF will be updated to include Ethiopia, with guidance on managing the environmental and
social impacts of the civil works planned for the laboratories in Ethiopia. The ESMF outlines the
steps to be followed by the borrower in the Environmental and Social Screening Form (ESSF), and
includes Social and Environmental Clauses/Guidelines (SEC/G) for contractors, a summary of the
Bank's safeguard policies, and an Environmental and Social Checklist. The ESMF includes a
generic Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) terms of reference to be applied in
the event that the screening process results indicate the need for a separate site specific ESIA and/
or Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). As the specific works have not yet been
finalized, the project will use the ESMF to guide the management of environmental and social
impacts. The ESIA and/or ESMP will be prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before the civil
works begin.
In addition, the existing Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP) for the health sector in
Ethiopia will be customized to encompass wastes likely to be generated through activities
supported under the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project. These two
safeguards instruments will be used for the Ethiopia related activities under the project. The
Waste Management Plans for the other four countries will also be updated to take into account
Ebola related requirements.
With regard to OP 4.10, in the case of Kenya, under the original project, initial screening
suggested that indigenous vulnerable/marginalized peoples might be present in the five focus areas
that would benefit from the project, and hence a Vulnerable and Marginalized Peoples Planning
Framework was prepared in January 2010, to enable screening of sub-projects and preparation of
plans as and when needed. In the case of Burundi, which received support to join the regional
project in 2012 an "Indigenous Peoples Plan" was prepared aiming to ensure that vulnerable
groups, including more specifically the Batwa, would be able to receive culturally appropriate
services and benefits from the project. These instruments are currently under implementation and
capacity of implementing agencies in Kenya and Burundi has been strengthened to improve
implementation and monitor safeguard due diligence in relation to Indigenous and Vulnerable
Peoples. With regard to the proposed activities in Ethiopia OP 4.10 has not been triggered, as
planned activities consist mainly of refurbishing existing facilities and/or are planned in densely
populated peri-urban areas which are outside of indigenous community areas.
The Project Paper includes an Environmental and Social Action Plan that sets out the updating of
the safeguards instruments to address the new activities under the Additional Financing.
Finally, in light of the Bank's new policy on climate change screening, the task team is currently
proceeding with the Climate Change screening requirements as part of the IDA 17 commitments.
Screening will be completed before Board presentation. Findings will be taken into consideration
during implementation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Future activities at these laboratory facilities to be supported under the project are not expected to
have long term detrimental or cumulative effects, especially as waste management and social and
environmental concerns are being addressed through the ESMF, MWMP, the VMGP (Kenya) and
IPP (Burundi).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Page 7 of 10


﻿The "no project" alternative would actually cause serious harm since it would prevent the health
facilities from tackling efficiently debilitating and often lethal infectious diseases, as well as the
appropriate ways of dealing with medical waste, especially in communities where poor and
vulnerable groups live.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As has been the practice in the other participating countries (Burundi, Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda
and Tanzania), Ethiopia will also be included in the ESMF. The ESMF and MWMP to be revised
will be consulted upon, and disclosed.
There is already a dedicated team ofstaff in the Ethiopia's Federal Ministry of Health (FMoH)
working specifically on both social and environmental safeguards issues. The same team will be
entrusted to satisfactorily implement the safeguards for this laboratory project. The Social &
Environmental Team (SET) will be guided by and work closely with the World Bank safeguards
team during supervision and throughout the project life cycle. The SET will also benefit from
additional technical capacity building provided by the Bank team through a series of workshops
and/or in-field training.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary beneficiaries are medical practitioners and local communities benefiting from and
using medical facilities, including poor and vulnerable groups living in cross border communities.
More specifically, discussions were held with a number of key stakeholders starting with the
management of the Federal Ministry of Health and with members of the Ethiopia Public Health
Institute (EPHI), and other key ministry personnel. These meetings provided detailed information
on the proposed project design, implementation arrangements, and the safeguard documents,
including the Environmental and Social Management Framework of the East Africa Laboratory
Project (that will be used for Ethiopia) plus other important project related information.
On the basis of these discussions it was decided to update the two safeguards instruments, namely
the ESMF/ESMP, and the MWMP. During the implementation phase a series of participatory
public consultations will be held to raise awareness, gain familiarization with the project, and with
the proposed laboratory facilities to be supported under the project, and build ownership to foster
more social accountability throughout the life of the project.
As consultation and participation needs to be sustained, there will be regular consultations with
implementing agencies during the implementation phase of the project.
Finally, under the Additional Financing, the safeguards mechanisms to be used for consultation
and disclosure of safeguard policies will be those already existing in Ethiopia which will be
updated as needed to ensure new activities and populations are covered.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Jan-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Feb-2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 8 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                03-Feb-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Feb-2010
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [ X ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Miriam Schneidman
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                       Date:
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


