                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA8259
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lebanon                         Project ID:    P122540
                            Project Name:     LB: PCB Management in the Power Sector Project (P122540)
                            Task Team         Maria Sarraf
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Aug-2014                     Estimated   20-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GENDR                           Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:           2.54              Total Bank Financing:  0.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                            0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                   2.54
                              Total                                                                               2.54
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The proposed GEO/PDO is to dispose of high risk PCBs and improve the inventory management of
                           transformers in the power sector in an environmentally sound manner.



                                                                    Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         PCBs in Lebanon are mainly encountered in the electric power sector. Prior to the mid-1990s, they
                         were widely used in power transformers and capacitors at various levels – power stations, sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stations and distribution transformers. Most of this equipment is owned by Electricité du Liban
                         (EDL), the state-owned power utility, but some are owned by some smaller private distribution
                         utilities.

                         Subsequent to ratifying the Stockholm Convention for the management of Persistent Organic
                         Pollutants (POPs), the Government of Lebanon requested the Bank to execute a GEF-financed
                         project that would deal with priorities in POPs management. Risks of environmental contamination
                         from PCBs come from three major sources: a) equipment manufactured with PCBs as dialectics; b)
                         equipment containing oil that is contaminated with PCBs; and c) sites contaminated from leaking oil
                         containing PCBs. The Proposed Project addresses two of these priorities and comprises the following
                         three components:

                         Component 1. Inventory of PCB contaminated transformers (US$0.79 million)

                         This component will support a countrywide inventory of PCB contaminated transformers in the
                         power sector in Lebanon. The inventory will focus on the entire stock of transformers in Bauchrieh
                         (about 2,000) and in the EDL’s distribution network (about 19,000). The purpose of the inventory is
                         twofold. At the country level, it will identify the contaminated transformers and their level of
                         contamination in each site, thus providing a clear picture of the extent of PCB contamination in the
                         power sector. At the local level (Bauchrieh), the inventory will result in good engineering practices,
                         particularly in terms of health and safety protocols, sampling, testing and labeling of PCB oil. These
                         practices will be reflected in on-site training of local staff during the period of inventory, as well as
                         in written guidelines to be used for the management of incoming transformers in Bauchrieh after the
                         end of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Conducting the inventory of PCB contaminated transformers is based on four steps: (i) desk review
                         of EDL database to identify the number of transformers potentially contaminated; (ii) sampling,
                         which involves taking a 50 ml sample of oil from each transformer; (iii) on-site testing of PCB,
                         which identifies the PCB-free transformers by testing the samples through a rapid method (Clor-N-
                         Oil technique); and (iv) lab testing of PCB, which identifies the PCB contaminated transformers and
                         their contamination level by testing the samples through an accurate laboratory method (Gas
                         Chromatography analysis, GC).

                         Component 2. Disposal of high-content PCB equipment and contaminated oil (US$1.10 million)

                         This component will support the disposal of high content PCB equipment owned by the EDL and
                         potentially by the private sector, and of the PCB contaminated oil from Bauchrieh.

                         (i) Disposal of out-of-service high content PCB equipment (US$0.21 million): EDL’s out-of-service
                         equipment includes 12 Askarel transformers and 489 capacitors, with a total weight of 44 tons .
                         Removing this equipment will also require to dispose of 10 tons of contaminated soil and concrete
                         from PCB leakages, particularly from Zouk. Thus, this component will finance the disposal of about
                         44 tons of high-content PCB equipment and 10 tons of contaminated soil and concrete. The limited
                         number of high-content PCB equipment in Lebanon does not justify the establishment of a
                         permanent local disposal facility; the most cost-effective solution is exporting them to licensed


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         facilities abroad (such as in Germany, Denmark, Sweden, or other countries) in accordance with the
                         requirements of the Basel Convention. This operation will be the responsibility of a contractor
                         selected based on international tendering procedure. The contractor will provide all required
Public Disclosure Copy




                         packaging materials and will perform drainage of transformers, collection of empty transformers,
                         liquid, and capacitors, packaging , transport and destruction abroad.

                         (ii) Disposal of in-service high content PCB equipment and contaminated oil (US$0.89 million):
                         - In-service high content PCB equipment in Jieh includes 17 Askarel transformers and 6 capacitors,
                         with a total weight of 147 tons. All in-service Askarel transformers are located in Jieh power plant.
                         The Jieh plant includes 5 old units (with 5 in-service transformers) and 2 new units (with 12 in-
                         service transformers). This component will finance the disposal of all in service Askarel transformers
                         and capacitors in Jieh. As part of the project co financing, EDL will be responsible for purchasing
                         and replacing these transformers to allow continuity of electricity generation.
                         -Capacitors in the private sector. The rapid inventory (COWI, 2011) also identified three private
                         companies that held PCB containing capacitors with a total weight of about 5 tons. MOE will contact
                         these companies and check their willingness to dispose of these capacitors through the proposed
                         project.
                         -Contaminated oil in Bauchrieh. As mentioned previously EDL’s repair and storage site in Bauchrieh
                         contains about 2,000 transformers; a large percentage of them being contaminated. The inventory
                         undertaken under Component 1 will identify all contaminated transformers. The proposed project
                         will finance the drainage, packaging and disposal aboard of the contaminated oil. It is estimated that
                         about 100 tons of contaminated oil will be disposed of from Bauchrieh.

                         The most cost-effective way of disposing in-service equipment and contaminated oil is export to
                         licensed facilities abroad in accordance with the requirements of the Basel Convention. The
                         responsibility of this work will be with a contractor selected based on international tendering
                         procedure. The contractor will provide all required packaging materials and will perform drainage,
                         dismantling and removal of all in-service Askarel transformers, collection of transformer carcasses,
                         liquid, and capacitors, package, transport and destruction abroad
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Capacity building and project management (US$0.65 million): This component will
                         support: (i) establishment of a Project Management Unit (PMU) within MOE; (ii) monitoring of
                         indicators and reporting on project performance; (iii) training and capacity building of MOE, EDL
                         and other stakeholders (e.g. customs administration, on site workers technicians etc.) on sustainable
                         management of PCB equipment and storage sites.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project has a localized reach as it targets 3 specific sites (Zouk and Jieh power plants
                         and Bauchrieh repair shop) which contain high content PCB transformers and capacitors and 7 EDL
                         substations which have PCB capacitors. In addition, the project will target the PCB capacitors owned
                         by the private companies which express their willingness to dispose of them.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (GURDR)
                         Suiko Yoshijima (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           The nature of the project is to safely manage
                         BP 4.01                                         polluting PCB-containing equipment and thus
                                                                         project investments will yield significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         environmental improvements and long term
                                                                         public health benefits. However there are risks
                                                                         associated with the handling of PCBs, both to
                                                                         humans and the environment, if appropriate and
                                                                         stringent safeguards measures are not
                                                                         implemented. Risks to the environment include
                                                                         long-term and far-reaching contamination of soil,
                                                                         surface and ground water with PCBs (oils,
                                                                         leaking equipment etc). The persistent and toxic
                                                                         nature of PCBs has high risks to human health,
                                                                         including being a potential carcinogen and having
                                                                         possible developmental impacts. Poor
                                                                         management of PCB clean-up can involve a high
                                                                         risk to the neighborhood community and to the
                                                                         project site employees. Instituting sound
                                                                         occupational health and safety measures for the
                                                                         workers is critical who will be handling toxic
                                                                         PCB wastes. Due to the diverse nature of the risks
                                                                         associated with the project activities, the project
                                                                         is classified as Category A, for the purposes of
                                                                         OP 4.01, requiring a full environmental and social
                                                                         impact assessment, and extended disclosure,
                                                                         including multiple rounds of consultations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            There are no registered or known natural habitats
                                                                         in the project area and no adverse impacts are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         anticipated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            There are no registered or known forests near the
                                                                         project sites and no adverse impacts are
                                                                         anticipated.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            It is not envisaged to procure or use any
                                                                         pesticides under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project is not expected to impact on physical
                         BP 4.11                                         cultural resources, as there is no excavation
                                                                         planned in the existing project sites.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            No indigenous people will be impacted by project
                                                                         activities
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                         rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                         policy.
                         Projects on International         No            None of the project sites are near or impact



                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  None of the project sites are near or impact
                            7.60                                                 disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The nature of the project is to safely manage polluting PCB-containing equipment and thus the
                              project, by its very nature, is a public good and will result in significant environmental
                              improvements and long-term public health benefits.

                              However there are risks associated with the handling of PCBs, both to humans and the
                              environment, if appropriate safeguards measures are not implemented. The potential risks
                              associated with the inadequate management of PCBs with a concentration of more than 50 ppm by
                              weight include contamination of soils, groundwater and surface water resulting in long-term local
                              and global impacts. The persistent and toxic nature of PCBs has high risks to human health,
                              including being a potential carcinogen and having possible developmental impacts. Poor
                              management of PCBs can involve a high risk to the neighborhood community and to the project
                              site employees.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              PCB oils if not properly treated and eliminated may affect the surface and groundwater basis
                              downstream of the sites of the PCBs equipment.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Effective PCB management in accordance with Stockholm convention guidelines involves
                              treatment and disposal using technologies that meet best available techniques and best
                              environmental practices. A certain technology could be cost-efficient in large countries (China),
                              but very expensive in remote locations (due to added cost of transport, for example). The proposed
                              project has made a comprehensive assessment of technology options in order to choose the cost-
                              effective ones that best meet the site-specific requirements (e.g. export and destruction of the high-
                              content PCB equipment and contaminated oil by licensed facilities).
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Project triggers one safeguard policy OP 4.01 on EAs because it has the potential to
                              significantly impact the environment adversely due to disposal of high-content PCB equipment
                              and contaminated oil. Accordingly, a comprehensive Environment and Social Impact Assessment
                              (ESIA) was undertaken by MOE and EDL and completed in January 2013, which details status of
                              baseline environment and describes the potential impacts of project activities. The report also
                              includes an Environment and Social management Plan (ESMP) which defines safeguard measures
                              needed to be taken with respect to project activities and identifies capacity building and
                              institutional strengthening activities. Although the current ESMP is comprehensive, it will be
                              updated as more information on three proposed sites becomes available to ensure its steady
                              implementation in each site. The entire operation of disposal of high-content PCB equipment and
                              contaminated oil including packaging, transport, dismantling and cleaning of transformers and the

                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           final disposal will be the responsibility of an international contractor. The Contractor is required to
                           have in place an Environmental Management System (EMS) to implement the necessary
                           mitigating measures and includes training of local staff and occupational health and safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                           measures. A qualified expert (from MOE or PMU) will monitor the work of the contractor.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Multiple rounds of consultations have been held, including individual discussions with key
                           stakeholders and two workshops (November 2012 and May 2013). The Executive Summary has
                           been translated into Arabic and the draft ESIA was disclosed in-country and in the Bank Infoshop
                           on March 21, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lebanon                                                          21-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The EA was published on the Ministry of Enviornment website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated      Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Maria Sarraf
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                              Date: 28-Jul-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager:   Name: Benoit Paul Blarel (PMGR)                    Date: 28-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
