                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1043
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                             Project ID:    P146515
                            Project Name:      Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project (P146515)
                            Task Team          Marcus J. Wishart
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Oct-2014                        Estimated   11-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Hydropower (60%), Flood protection (20%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                               protection sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (60%), Natural disaster management (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       294.20           Total Bank Financing:  75.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          19.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 75.00
                              African Development Bank                                                                    75.00
                              EC European Development Fund (EDF)                                                         100.00
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                     25.00
                              Total                                                                                      294.20
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to assist in improving the safety and reliability of the Kariba


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         Dam.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project will assist ZRA in financing implementation and oversight of
                         those components required for the rehabilitation of the Kariba Dam.

                         Component 1: Institutional Project Support ( estimated cost US$ 70.0 million )
                         The objective of this component is to provide the necessary support to assist in securing the long-
                         term safety and reliability of the Kariba Dam Hydro-Electric Scheme.

                         This component would be co-financed by IDA, Sweden, the African Development Bank and the
                         European Development Fund through a combination of joint co-financing and parallel co-financing
                         of individual activities. Activities to be financed include: (i) Technical Services and Supervision
                         Consultant; (ii) Dam Break Analysis; (iii) Panel of Experts; (iv) Dispute Adjudication Board; (v)
                         Environmental and Social Assessment; and, (vi) Audits, Evaluations and other Studies. Financing
                         under this component would be used for: (i) consultants services; (ii) goods, equipment and non-
                         consulting services; and, (iii) operating costs associated with enhanced project implementation,
                         management and monitoring.

                         Component 2: Plunge Pool Reshaping (estimated cost US$ 100.0 million )
                         The objective of this component is to stabilize the plunge pool and prevent further scouring,
                         particularly along the weak fault / shear zone towards the dam foundations. While the plunge pool
                         was originally intended to be formed from the natural scour, the hole has progressively widened and
                         deepened vertically to create an 80m deep scour hole in the bedrock immediately downstream of the
                         dam foundations. A 3D FEM model has been established to assess how the plunge pool scouring
                         progress and excavation works would affect the stress field of the dam foundation. In the absence of
                         measures to prevent the current trend, the scouring would only be controlled if the spillway is
                         operated with no more than three, non-adjacent gates open, which would however limit the spillway
                         discharge capacity during large floods. The limit on the number of useable gates requires lowering of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the maximum safe reservoir level, which in turn reduces power generation capacity from the dam.

                         This component would be financed by the European Development Fund (EDF11) in parallel to the
                         other components of the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project. Activities to be financed include: (i)
                         Plunge Pool Reshaping Civil Works; (ii) carrying out of additional engineering studies,
                         investigations and surveys, and supply of equipment as might be needed during implementation; (iii)
                         provision of technical services for the monitoring of the plunge pool reshaping; and, (iv) carrying out
                         of visibility and communications activities. The measures required to reshape the plunge pool include
                         construction of a downstream coffer dam to enable the blasting and excavation of an estimated
                         volume of 300,000 m3 of rock from the downstream face and north and south bank sides of the pool.
                         This will create a stepped profile to increase the energy dissipation and guide the spilling water in the
                         downstream direction, away from the dam foundations. The Technical Audit Consultant to the EU is
                         responsible for undertaking regular missions to provide factual reporting and technical advices
                         during implementation. This will be achieved through the audit of the organizational, technical,
                         contractual and financial aspects of the plunge pool, along with the result achieved during the
                         implementation. Financing under this component would be used for: (i) goods, works and non-
                         consulting services; and (ii) consultants services.

                         Component 3: Spillway Refurbishment ( estimated cost US$ 124.6 million )
                         The objective of this component is to improve the operation and prevent potential failure of the


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         spillway control facility. Advanced deterioration of the built-in structures and secondary concrete
                         due to cavitation and Alkali-Aggregate Reaction has the potential to limit the function of the spillway
                         gates. Without installing a new emergency gate, the current stop beam cannot be closed in the event
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of a downstream flood gate failure. In the event that the downstream flood gate jams and cannot be
                         closed there would be no way to stop water flow. The water level in such case may go down to the
                         sill of the spillway, well below the minimum operating level, during which period no power
                         production would be possible. If the flood gate were to jam under its closed or middle position during
                         a large flood it could limit the ability to ensure safe passage of the flood waters and result in
                         overtopping of the dam.

                         This component would be jointly co-financed by IDA, Sweden, and the African Development Bank.
                         The activities to be financed include: (i) Spillway Refurbishment Contract; and (ii) Additional
                         Engineering Studies, Investigations, Surveys and Equipment as may be required. The Spillway
                         Refurbishment would include the fabrication and installation of emergency gates and a new gantry,
                         with refurbishment of associated built-in structure and replacement of secondary concrete. This
                         would include installing a new fixed roller gate that would have an independent opening/closing
                         function for the upstream sluice opening irrespective of downstream gate position/flow condition.
                         The current stop beams cannot be closed under flowing condition. The existing gantry crane will also
                         be replaced with a higher capacity gantry in order to operate the new emergency gate under water
                         flowing condition. Financing under this component would be used for goods (supply and installation
                         of hydro-mechanical equipment), civil works and non-consulting services associated with the
                         refurbishment of the spillway.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Kariba Dam is located roughly in the middle of the Zambezi River basin, at the border of
                         Zambia and Zimbabwe. The drainage basin area is approximately 663,848 km2 of savannah-dry
                         forest and lies in the territories of five of the eight riparian states: Angola, Botswana, Namibia,
                         Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project includes two rehabilitation components both of which require works in situ on existing
                         infrastructure to secure operations in accordance with international dam safety standards and avoid a
                         potential catastrophic failure of the dam.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kristine Schwebach (GSURR)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The rehabilitation measures are not expected to
                          BP 4.01                                             have any significant adverse environmental
                                                                              impacts. The plunge pool reshaping involves
                                                                              excavation of an estimated 300,000m3 of material
                                                                              within 200m immediately downstream from the
                                                                              toe of the dam wall. The works area for the
                                                                              plunge pool is located immediately under the
                                                                              spillway gates, limiting the reshaping works to
                                                                              the “non-spillage period”. Any potential impacts



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                                         are likely to be associated with site specific
                                                                         rehabilitation works and temporary in nature,
                                                                         limited to the construction phase. All potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         environment and social impacts related to
                                                                         proposed project activities, including construction
                                                                         impacts associated with noise and dust, soil
                                                                         erosion, access roads, health and safety of
                                                                         workers, etc. are being assessed through an ESIA
                                                                         scheduled to be completed in March, 2015. The
                                                                         ESIA will include an Environment and Social
                                                                         management Plan (ESMP) to ensure necessary
                                                                         measures required to prevent, minimize, mitigate,
                                                                         or compensate for any potential adverse
                                                                         environment and social impacts during
                                                                         implementation. Specific provisions are to be
                                                                         included in the tender documents to guide the
                                                                         contractors. During the period of construction,
                                                                         instream flows will be maintained through the
                                                                         continued release of water through the power
                                                                         station outlets. The cofferdam to enable
                                                                         excavation of the plunge pool works (<12m) will
                                                                         be constructed below the plunge pool but above
                                                                         the outlets.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The policy is not triggered. The rehabilitation
                                                                         works will take place in situ and will not lead to
                                                                         the significant loss or degradation of any critical
                                                                         natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The policy is not triggered. The project is limited
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         to rehabilitation of the existing dam and will not
                                                                         impact on the health and quality of any forests;
                                                                         affect the rights and welfare of people and their
                                                                         level of dependence upon or interaction with
                                                                         forests; nor will it bring about changes in the
                                                                         management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                                         forests or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not involve the use of pesticides
                                                                         and agro-chemicals. Thus the policy is not
                                                                         triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The rehabilitation includes civil works and so
                         BP 4.11                                         provisions governing chance find procedures are
                                                                         being incorporated in the Environmental and
                                                                         Social Management Plan.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The policy is not triggered. There are no
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project includes two rehabilitation
                         4.12                                            components both of which require works in situ



                                                                 Page 4 of 10
                                                                   on existing infrastructure to secure operations in
                                                                   accordance with international dam safety
                                                                   standards and avoid a potential catastrophic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   failure of the dam. As a result, the rehabilitation
                                                                   measures are not expected to have any significant
                                                                   adverse social impacts. There is not expected to
                                                                   be any physical relocation and only limited, if
                                                                   any, land acquisition leading to involuntary
                                                                   resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                                                                   resources or livelihoods. However, the World
                                                                   Bank involuntary resettlement policy has been
                                                                   triggered and the ESIA Consultants are preparing
                                                                   a Resettlement Policy Framework to ensure prior
                                                                   agreement on a transparent mechanism in the
                                                                   event that any land acquisition is required for
                                                                   waste dumps, access routes or construction sites,
                                                                   etc..
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes           The project is aimed at ensuring appropriate
                                                                   measures are implemented and sufficient
                                                                   resources provided for the continued safety of the
                                                                   Kariba Dam. The ZRA carries out five yearly
                                                                   inspections of the dam by internationally
                                                                   reputable consultants and the rehabilitation works
                                                                   will be carried out in compliance with the OP/BP.
                                                                   The regular inspection reports have been
                                                                   reviewed and ZRA has conducted or is
                                                                   conducting required actions as per the policy in a
                                                                   satisfactory manner.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   The ZRA has Standing Operations Procedures of
                                                                   the Kariba Dam and Reservoir that are sufficient
                                                                   in terms of the provisions of the policy and cover
                                                                   the reservoir operation procedure, instrumentation
                                                                   plan, operation and maintenance procedure of
                                                                   equipment, etc. The EPP framework is also
                                                                   included in the procedures. The Standing
                                                                   Operations Procedures will be reviewed, and
                                                                   revised, as needed, as part of the tendering
                                                                   process to align the procedures with the necessary
                                                                   actions during implementation of the works, and
                                                                   revised further to finalize not later than six
                                                                   months before commissioning of all
                                                                   refurbishment works in the case of the Operation
                                                                   and Maintenance Plan, and 12 months before
                                                                   commissioning of all refurbishment works in the
                                                                   case of the Emergency Preparedness Procedures.
                         Projects on International   Yes           Notification has been made by the ZRA in


                                                           Page 5 of 10
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                accordance with provisions of the ZAMCOM
                                                                                Agreement along with the Revised SADC
                                                                                Protocol on Shared Watercourses in compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                with OP/BP 4.37. No new works will be
                                                                                undertaken and the rehabilitation is not
                                                                                anticipated to adversely change the quality or
                                                                                quantity of water flows to other riparians in the
                                                                                Zambezi River basin, nor will it adversely affect
                                                                                water use by the other riparians. The
                                                                                rehabilitation works will not exceed the original
                                                                                scheme, change its nature, or so alter or expand
                                                                                its scope and extent as to make it appear a new or
                                                                                different scheme.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The policy is not triggered. The dam has been
                            7.60                                                under joint operation under the current
                                                                                arrangements since 1987 and there are no disputes
                                                                                over the project area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project includes two rehabilitation components both of which require works in situ on existing
                              infrastructure to secure operations in accordance with international dam safety standards and avoid
                              a potential catastrophic failure of the dam. The rehabilitation measures will be confined/restricted
                              to existing dam facilities and its immediate surroundings and are not expected to have any
                              significant large scale adverse or irreversible environmental or social impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The Plunge Pool Reshaping works consist in the enlargement of the plunge pool scoured in the
                             riverbed, mainly downstream but also on both banks. Therefore, it consists mainly of rock
                             excavation performed in the riverbed. These impacts are limited to the construction phase and not
                             expected to have any long-term impacts. An ESIA is under preparation and will include an ESMP
                             to govern handling and management of construction waste, air and noise pollution, increased
                             sediments causing turbidity, health and safely of workers, etc..

                              The World Bank was involved in supporting the initial financing and development of the Kariba
                              Dam between 1954 and 1959 through an IBRD loan to the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland
                              (Malwai, Zambia and Zimbabwe). This predates the current operational safeguard policies and the
                              project involved the resettlement of 57,000Gwembe-Tonga peoples; 34,000 people were resettled
                              in Zambia. While the rehabilitation project is not directly addressing the historical issues
                              associated with the original dam construction, and these do not meet the criteria outlined in the
                              World Bank’s “Guidelines for Addressing Legacy issues in World Bank Projects”, the ZRA is
                              undertaking an assessment of the impact and efficacy of the ZVDF. This is being carried out as
                              part of the Batoka Gorge HES ESIA and will be used to inform any Government responses to
                              associated historical issues.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                           The project activities are not expected to have any indirect or irreversible long-term environmental
                           or social impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           The most recent dam safety assessment has identified the proposed measures as Category I
                           interventions requiring immediate attention and the alternative to the project would be to continue
                           to operate the dam below internationally accepted safety standards.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower has limited experience with World Bank safeguard policies. There is a dedicated
                           water resources and environmental management department that carries out routine monitoring
                           and community relations. The ZRA also manages the Zambezi Valley Development Fund which
                           was established in 1997 to enhance the socio-economic status of people displaced during
                           construction of the Kariba Dam.

                          The ZRA has contracted an Environmental and Social Service Provider to carry out an ESIA for
                          the Kariba dam rehabilitation works, along with Environmental and Social Management Plans
                          (ESMPs) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The ESIA is expected to be completed by
                          March 2015, prior to commencement of any of the associated works and in time to incorporate the
                          necessary provision in the tender documents for the contractors.

                           The ZRA will be supported in implementation of the project by a Technical Services and
                           Supervision Consultant, who will be responsible for oversight of the works, including compliance
                           with the provisions of the ESMP and RPF. An independent Panel of Experts is also being recruited
                           to provide international experience and oversight during implementation. This includes both
                           environment and social expertise.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The rehabilitation measures will be confined/restricted to existing dam facilities and its immediate
                           surroundings. However, media speculation around the safety of the Kariba Dam has generated
                           significant interest in a wide range of stakeholders. The ZRA has been working on stakeholder
                           engagement with government officials through the Zambezi Watercourse Commission, SADC
                           structures, and bilateral relationships. A communications strategy is being developed with support
                           from the financing partners to ensure clear, consistent and transparent messages during the
                           preparation and implementation of the project. This is being coupled with a series of targeted site
                           visits to explain the project.

                          The environmental and social impact assessment also includes a strong consultative and
                          participatory emphasis. The same firm is currently undertaking the ESIA for the Batoka Gorge
                          Hydro-Electric Scheme under a parallel process with ZRA. Located immediately upstream of the
                          Kariba Dam, the synergies between the two projects allows for a comprehensive consultative
                          process with clear and consistent messages.

                          In preparation for the ESIA the ZRA undertook a series of public consultations on the scope of the
                          ToRs with a range of with stakeholders in the project area. Given the nature of the rehabilitation
                          works and the concerns raised through the media reports to date, the process of undertaking the
                          consultations and the ESIAS is committed to public participation, with specific provisions to


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           ensure that the procedure of data acquisition, analysis and interpretation is conducted in a
                           transparent manner according to accepted international standards and practice.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ToRs for the ESIA have been subject to a series of public consultations in locations around
                           the dam, reservoir and downstream areas, and disclosed through the InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Mar-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         31-Mar-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zambia and Zimbabwe                                                 26-Jun-2014
                           Comments: The ToRs forthe ESIA were subjected to a consultative process with stakeholders in
                                         the project area in June 2014, with an emphasis on public participation and specific
                                         provisions to ensure that the procedure of data acquisition, analysis and interpretation
                                         is conducted in a transparent manner according to accepted international standards
                                         and practice. The ToRs were subsequently disclosed through the InfoShop on
                                         September 24, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Mar-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Zambia and Zimbabwe                                                 26-Jun-2014
                           Comments: The ToRs forthe ESIA were subjected to a consultative process with stakeholders in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         the project area in June 2014, with an emphasis on public participation and specific
                                         provisions to ensure that the procedure of data acquisition, analysis and interpretation
                                         is conducted in a transparent manner according to accepted international standards
                                         and practice. The ToRs were subsequently disclosed through the InfoShop on
                                         September 24, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The project is being processed in accordance with OP 10.00 Investment Project Financing Paragraph
                         12 for Projects in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance. This provides for the environmental and
                         social requirements set out in the following safeguard policies triggered by the Kariba Dam
                         Rehabilitation Project that are normally applicable to the preparation phase to be deferred to the
                         Project implementation phase: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical
                         Cultural Resources), OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                         An Environmental and Social Prospectus has been prepared by ZRA with support from the
                         Technical Advisors. This outlines the broad context and provides the framework within which the
                         ESIA must be undertaken. An ESIA Consultant has been appointed to evaluate the design of the


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         Kariba Dam rehabilitation works, undertake the required Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment and prepare an integrated Environmental and Social Management Plan, along with
                         associated instruments to ensure the sustainability of project through appropriate preventive,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mitigation and monitoring interventions. The ToRs were subjected to a consultative process with
                         stakeholders in the project area in June 2014, with an emphasis on public participation and specific
                         provisions to ensure that the procedure of data acquisition, analysis and interpretation is conducted
                         in a transparent manner according to accepted international standards and practice. The ToRs were
                         subsequently disclosed through the InfoShop on September 24, 2014.

                         The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment is expected to be completed by March 2015, prior
                         to commencement of any of the associated works. A framework ESMF has already been received
                         and specific provisions have been included in the financing agreement to ensure that no works will
                         commence before the necessary safeguard instruments have been subject to review and approval by
                         the World Bank, disclosed in country and through the World Bank’s Infoshop and that the project is
                         implemented in accordance with the Safeguard Instruments.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Marcus J. Wishart
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 08-Nov-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)                    Date: 14-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
