                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA7480

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Armenia                           Project ID:      P148102
                                                        Parent           P116748
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      Electricity Supply Reliability Project: Additional Financing (P148102)
   Parent Project     Electricity Supply Reliability Project (P116748)
   Name:
   Task Team          Artur Kochnakyan
   Leader:
   Estimated          17-Apr-2014                       Estimated   30-May-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     ECSEG                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
   Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%), Rural services and
                     infrastructure (40%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                  40.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                          Amount
     Borrower                                                                                    10.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       40.00
     Borrowing Agency                                                                             0.00
     Total                                                                                       50.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          Yes
   Repeater
   project?


                                              Page 1 of 7
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objective is to increase the reliability and capacity of the transmission
   network.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
Additional Financing (AF) to the Electricity Supply Reliability Project (ESRP) will have two
components: strengthening of power transmission network and technical assistance.

Component 1: Strengthening of Power Transmission Network. This component will finance: (a) full
rehabilitation and extension (within existing perimeter/footprint) of Haghtanak SS, (b) full
rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3 SS, and (c) replacement of some critical equipment at Vanadzor-1
SS.

Component 2: Technical assistance. This component is designed to support project implementation
and to provide technical assistance for strengthening capacity of the transmission company - High
Voltage Electric Networks (HVEN) Closed Joint Stock Company (CJSC).
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Haghtanak SS is located in the capital city of Yerevan, in a sparsely populated area. The SS territory
is fenced. It is accessible by a road, which passes nearby the facility. Most of the land around the SS
is not in use. It carries next to no vegetation. Some ofthe land to the North of the SS is being
cultivated. There is an industrial facility to the East of the SS.

Charentsavan-3 SS is located in the Kotayk marz (region), near the city of Charentsavan. The SS
territory is fenced. It is accessible by a local road, which passes nearby the facility. Some of the land
around the SS is used by the local farmers primarily for cattle grazing and crop growing.

Vanadzor-1 SS is located in the Lori marz (region), in the city of Vanadzor. The SS territory is
fenced. It neighbors with the premises of a chemical plant, which is currently out of service.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)

 6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              ESRP AF is not expected to have significant
 BP 4.01                                               impact on the environment. All planned physical
                                                       works are limited to rehabilitation of the existing
                                                       electric substations (SSs) and extension of
                                                       Haghtanak SS (within existing perimeter/


                                               Page 2 of 7
                                                footprint). The only higher risk activity is the
                                                replacement of some operation buildings and
                                                transformers (MTRs) within two of the target
                                                SSs. These activities will generate debris from
                                                demolition of the existing small buildings, and,
                                                more importantly, small amount of hazardous
                                                waste in the form of used transformer oils. Waste
                                                disposal is a generally challenging task in
                                                Armenia, due to lack of adequate infrastructure
                                                and effective control mechanisms. Site-specific
                                                EMPs are developed to describe these risks and
                                                recommend mitigation measures most suitable in
                                                the country context. Works at the third SS carry
                                                lesser environmental risks and a simplified
                                                Checklist EMP for Small Construction and
                                                Rehabilitation Activities was used for its purpose.
                                                ESRP AF is classified as environmental category
                                                B, alike the original ESRP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Rehabilitation and extension of Haghtanak SS
                                                and rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3 and
                                                Vanadzor-1 SSs are not expected to have any
                                                impact on the natural habitats however this policy
                                                was triggered for the original project and remains
                                                applicable to the AF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Rehabilitation and extension of Haghtanak SS
BP 4.11                                         and rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3 and
                                                Vanadzor-1 SSs are not expected to have any
                                                impact on the physical cultural resources however
                                                this policy was triggered for the original project
                                                and remains applicable to the AF. Also, the AF
                                                will finance works that include some earth
                                                excavation which carries likelihood of chance
                                                finds. Site-specific EMPs will carry provisions for
                                                handling chance finds and, through incorporation
                                                into works contacts, adherence to these EMPs
                                                will become mandatory for contractors.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Rehabilitation and extension of Haghtanak SS
4.12                                            and rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3 and
                                                Vanadzor-1 substations are not expected to cause
                                                any type of involuntary resettlement, however this



                                        Page 3 of 7
                                                       policy was triggered for the original project and
                                                       remains applicable to the AF. The beneficiary SSs
                                                       are not located in densely populated areas, and
                                                       neither are there many active businesses in their
                                                       vicinity. Nonetheless, works supervision at SSs
                                                       will imply regular inspection of surrounding area,
                                                       so that any occurrence of access/use restriction to
                                                       roads and/or land plots as a result of SS's
                                                       refurbishment are timely revealed and promptly
                                                       addressed.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     ESRP AF is classified as environmental category B, alike the original ESRP, as concordant with
     the upgrading of the existing SSs. Rationale for classifying the project as Category B is justified
     by its expected impacts being locally defined, well understood, and readily manageable with
     known mitigation measures. The possible long term environmental impacts have already occurred
     by the time these SSs had been constructed (e.g. landscape aesthetics, necessity for access roads,
     etc.) and will not be tangibly influenced by upgrading of these existing SSs. The physical
     environment in and around the project sites is not particularly sensitive or vulnerable to impacts
     from construction and operation of SSs, if good practice and good housekeeping as well as
     environmental due diligence measures are included into their construction and operation.

    Out of all types of works to be undertaken on the Haghtanak and Charentsavan-3 SSs, relatively
    higher risks are associated with the replacement of small buildings within the land plots allocated
    for these two SSs, and the replacement 110 kW and 220 kW main transformers (MTRs).
    Replacement of the existing small operational buildings will generate some demolition waste,
    which will have to be disposed in as environmentally decent manner; while the replacement of
    MTRs will generate some hazardous waste as well. The latter is the most important environmental
    issue related to the ESRP AF implementation, especially because there is adequate infrastructure
    and strong regulations for the disposal of hazardous waste in Armenia. So the main challenges
    will be to ensure that the used transformer oils are not recycled in an informal manner, but are
    rather handed over to specialized entities for deactivation and safe recycling, in agreement with the
    national legislation and in the way least detrimental for the environment and human health.
    Upgrading of the Vanadzor-1 SS has lesser potential impacts, because about half of this SS was
    rehabilitated in 2008-2010 under a KfW-financed project, including rehabilitation of one
    transmission line bay, two main autotransformer bays, and the associated main bus bars.
    Rehabilitation works to be financed from the ESRP AF will cover: (a) maining 110 kV bays and


                                               Page 4 of 7
  main bus bars; (b) two voltage transformer bays; and (c) 6 kV and 10 kV sections with associated
  SCADA and protection relays.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Operation of the rehabilitated SSs will imply periodic replacement of MTR oil and unless
  undertaken in an environmentally sound manner, that may cause pollution of the environment and
  impact on human health.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  "No project" scenario was one alternative when taking decision on the implementation of the
  ESRP AF. This alternative was discarded, as rehabilitation and extension of the Haghtanak SS as
  well as rehabilitation of Charentsavan-3 and Vanadzor-1 SSs is required to avoid increased
  incidence of power supply outages in the areas served by these SSs. Haghtanak SS is critical for
  ensuring reliable power supply to distribution substations and consumers in the Western parts of
  Yerevan. Charentsavan-3 serves residential consumers and also functions as a switching station
  linking to other six substations in the North-Eastern Armenia. Vanadzor-1 serves residential and
  large industrial consumers in the Northern parts of Armenia. Rehabilitation of these SSs needs to
  start the soonest, given that several key pieces of plant and equipment are well beyond their
  economic life and increased incidence of their failure (if not replaced) will have significant
  negative implications. In particular, some equipment used at these SSs was commissioned back in
  1930s and has never been substantially rehabilitated since then.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The borrower developed site-specific environmental management Plans (EMPs) for the three
  substations covered by the ESRP AF. These documents describe bio-physical environment in and
  around the project sites, explain risks expected at the construction and operation phases, and
  prescribe measures for their mitigation. EMPs also carry arrangements for monitoring
  environmental performance of works contracts at the construction phase, and of the substation
  operator at the operation phase.

 No land acquisition or resettlement is expected under ESRP AF and the Resettlement Policy
 Framework (RPF) already in effect for the ESRP will also govern any such impacts under the
 Additional Financing. The RPF was updated to include a list of the known new sites being
 incorporated into the Project under the Additional Financing.

  HVEN is the implementing agency for ESRP AF, as for the original ESRP. The implementation of
  the original project is progressing well and is rated as Satisfactory on the progress towards DPO as
  well as on the safeguards performance. Physical works have not commenced under the original
  ESRP yet. Safeguards documents due at the ESRP preparation phase were delivered to the
  satisfaction of the Bank. HVEN will use consultant services for supervising works under ESRP,
  however the project will finance in-house capacity building of HVEN as well, including capacity
  for managing environmental and social aspects of its activities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders for the project are HVEN, as the project proponent; the Armenian
  environmental authorities, both in Central Government (Ministry of Nature Protection) and on
  local level (environmental protection agencies - EPAs - on Marz level); and all households and


                                            Page 5 of 7
  businesses that are served by the power supply schemes that the target three SSs are part of.
  Consultations and outreach will also include relevant civil society stakeholders and representatives
  of beneficiary groups.

  The borrower published the updated RPF and the site-specific EMPs prepared for the upgrading of
  the three substations on the web pages of the HVEN, and the Ministry of Energy and Natural
  Resources. Several hard copies of draft EMPs in Armenian language were delivered to the local
  municipalities of Yerevan, Kotyak Marz and Lori. Project-affected people were notified on the
  availability of these documents in soft and hard versions and were given opportunity to provide
  comments and questions. RPF and EMPs were finalized and re-disclosed afterwards.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Apr-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Armenia                                                          07-Apr-2014
  Comments: Disclosed on the web-sites of HVEN and Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Apr-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Armenia                                                          07-Apr-2014
  Comments: Disclosed on the web-sites of HVEN and Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?



                                            Page 6 of 7
    If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
    project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Name: Artur Kochnakyan
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:         Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                         Date: 07-Apr-2014




                                               Page 7 of 7
