                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                         Report No.: ISDSA9493


    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Nov-2014
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2014
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
       1. Basic Project Data

       Country:          China                             Project ID:    P132775
       Project Name:     China: Gansu Rural-Urban Integration Infrastructure Project (P 132775)
       Task Team         Holly Krambeck
       Leader:
       Estimated       20-Oct-2014                         Estimated   31-Mar-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GTIDR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                           Instrument:
       Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
       Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Regional integration (50%)
       Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
       8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:        227.49                 Total Bank Financing:       150.00
       Financing Gap:                0.00
          Financing Source                                                                        Amount
0
          Borrower                                                                                  77.49
          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    150.00
          Total                                                                                    227.49
       Environmental A - Full Assessment
       Category:
       Is this a         No
       Repeater
       project?

       2. Project Development Objective(s)
      The project development objective is to provide residents in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia County
      with improved connectivity between rural and urban areas.
       3. Project Description
      A. Concept



                                                Page 1 of 14
    The proposed project components include the construction and improvement of urban and rural roads
    and bridges prioritized through Wuwei and Linxia's rural-urban integration plans.

    1. Description
0


    Component A: Wuwei Road Network Improvement (Cost: USD 138.563 million; IBRD Loan: USD
    90.981 million) will provide all-season roads to Wuwei rural people and increase transport capacity
    in key corridors. Physical outputs include newly constructed roads and bridges, as well as
    rehabilitated roads with improved safety and drainage features.

    Component B: Linxia Road Network Improvement (Cost: USD 73.304 million; IBRD Loan: USD
    44.331 million) will provide all-season roads to Linxia rural people and increase transport capacity in
    key corridors. .Physical outputs include newly constructed roads and bridges, as well as rehabilitated
    roads with improved safety and drainage features.

    Component C: Technical Assistance (Cost: USD 4.067 million; IBRD Loan USD 3.133 million).
    This component supports training and technical assistance activities related to road safety,
    maintenance, and rural beneficiaries support.
     4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    The project sites are located in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia County, Gansu Province. Wuwei
    Municipality, located at the eastern end of the Gansu Hexi Corridor, is a prefecture-level city in
    northwest central Gansu Province. It borders Yingchuan and Inner Mongolia in the north; Lanzhou
    Municipality, provincial capital of Gansu Province in the east; and Qinghai Province in the south. Its
    position makes it an important business and transportation hub for the area. Wuwei has one district,
    and three counties with a land area of 33,000 square-km and a population of 1.9 million. The project
    area in Wuwei Municipality is located in the alluvial and fluvial plain in the front of Qilian
    Mountain. The area belongs to arid zone of cold temperate zone, with precipitation of 60-610 mm
    and evaporation up to 3,000 mm.

    Linxia County is located in the middle of Gansu Province, the transition zone of the Qinghai-Tibet
    Plateau and Loess Plateau. Linxia is a county of the Linxia Hui Autonomous Prefecture. It borders
    Yongjing County in the north; Dongxiang County and Hezheng County in the east; Gannan
    Prefecture in the south; and Qinghai Provinces in the west. Linxia consists of 19 townships with a
    population of 389,000 and a land area of 1,212 square-km. Linxia has a mountainous climate with
    continental and monsoon features. Annual average temperature is -12.7oC - 26.OoC. Annual
    precipitation is 628.5 mm, and evaporation is 541.9mm. The rural roads to be upgraded in Linxia are
    all existing roads along the flood plain and terrace of small valleys.
     5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    Feng Ji (GENDR)
    Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)

     6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
     Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Environmental Impacts (OP4.01): The proposed
     BP 4.01                                              project will improve local transport infrastructure,
                                                          rural-urban connectivity and rural accessibility to



                                                 Page 2 of 14
             urban public services in project area. In Wuwei,
             part of the existing road (#A9 road; width:7.5
             meters) to be rehabilitated is within the boundary
o            of a Class II Zone (buffer zone) drinking water
             source protected area of the Dajingxia Reservoir
             and Liujiatan in Dajing Town. In Linxia County,
             partial alignment of a rural road (road width: 7.5
             meters) to be rehabilitated runs along the bank of
             the Liujiaxia Reservoir. These existing roads
             currently pose risks to the drinking water sources
             due to the deteriorated road conditions and
             inadequate safety facilities. Rehabilitation of
             these roads would significantly reduce risks to
             these water sources because of the improved road
             conditions and the provision of safety facilities.
             The EA proposes both engineering measures and
             specific mitigation measures, such as provision of
             surface runoff and accident spill collection and
             storage tanks along the sections close to water
             source protection areas; drainage system; anti-
             crash barriers; and warning signs, and speed
             control measures, etc..

             Most of the adverse environmental impacts of the
             project are related to construction activities, such
             as nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater, borrow
             and disposal sites, soil erosion, disturbance to
             local traffic, communities and irrigation system.
             During operations, adverse impacts include
             vehicle noise and emission, road safety, and the
             potential leakage of fuel and chemicals from
             vehicles, etc. The EA concludes that these
             potential adverse impacts and risks can be
             mitigated with the engineering design, good
             construction management practice, and the
             proposed mitigation measures.

             With respect to the cumulative impacts, key
             Valued Ecosystem Components (VECs) under
             consideration include soil, acoustic environment,
             water quality and air quality. The EA shows that
             the project will have very limited contribution to
             the cumulative impacts given that (i) the project
             only accounts for 0.06% (in terms of new road
             length) of the total roads in Linxia; and 1.5% of
             the total roads in Wuwei; and (ii) 57% of the road
             investments (in terms of road length) of the



    Page 3 of 14
                                            project are for the rehabilitation of existing roads.
                                            To minimize the potential impacts such as soil
                                            erosion and traffic noise, a specific water and
                                            social conservation plan has been developed for
                                            Wuwei and Linxia respectively. Noise monitoring
                                            and noise abatement measures have been
                                            proposed in the ESMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Natural Habitats (OP4.04): The project is located
                                            in areas that have been disturbed by intensive
                                            human activities. In Linxia, approximately 89%
                                            of total land affected (158ha) are farmland,
                                            existing roads, land for economic trees (e.g.,
                                            planted fruit or timber trees) and residential land.
                                            The remaining 10.9% are grassland and green belt
                                            along the existing roads. In Wuwei,
                                            approximately 56.6% of the total land affected
                                            (235ha) are farmland, residential land, and
                                            existing roads; while the remaining 43% is
                                            wasteland in desert area. Wuwei is facing
                                            desertification problems, with 39% of its land
                                            being desert. The EA confirms that there are no
                                            endangered species in the project area that could
                                            be affected by project interventions.

                                            Road investments include 40 bridges (25 in
                                            Linxia and 15 in Wuwei) with bridge length
                                            varying from 15-155m and width varying from
                                            8-28m. Construction activities for 25 bridges in
                                            Linxia are expected to affect river systems-
                                            seasonal streams or perennial streams; i.e., Daxia
                                            River and its branches. Soil erosion caused by the
                                            construction activities may increase the sediment
                                            concentration in Daxia River and cause deposits
                                            in the lower stream of the river. If no mitigation
                                            measures taken, project construction may increase
                                            soil erosion by 78,427 tons in Linxia and by
                                            92,172 tons in Wuwei during five year
                                            construction phase and three years after the
                                            construction.

                                            Daixa River and its small branches have been
                                            influenced by human activities. But by taking a
                                            precautionary approach, Natural Habitats policy
                                            (OP4.04) is deemed triggered. Mitigation
                                            measures for construction have been proposed in
                                            the ESMP.




                                    Page 4 of 14
                                                     The project will affect 29,969 trees in Wuwei and
                                                     18,087 trees in Linxia. The affected trees are
                                                     timber/fruit trees planted by farmers in the land
o                                                    close to their villages or houses, or green belt
                                                     along the existing roads. Compensation for the
                                                     trees has been specified in the RAP. The project
                                                     will not have any impacts on the health and
                                                     quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare
                                                     of people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                     interaction with forests. Forests policy (OP4.36)
                                                     is not deemed triggered.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project will not have impacts on the health
                                                     and quality of forests, nor affect the rights and
                                                     welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                     upon or interaction with forests, nor aim to bring
                                                     about changes in the management, protection, or
                                                     utilization of natural forest or plantations. This
                                                     policy is not triggered.
    Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project will not include any procurement of
                                                     pesticides or pesticide application equipment; nor
                                                     introduce any new pest management practices, or
                                                     expand/alter existing pest management practices;
                                                     nor lead to substantially increased pesticide use
                                                     and subsequent environmental and health risks.
                                                     Road maintenance in the project area will not
                                                     involve the use of pesticides due to the elevation
                                                     and climate conditions in Wuwei and Linxia. This
                                                     policy is not triggered.
O
    Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            Physical Cultural Resources (OP4. 11): Ten
    BP 4.11                                          mosques and one Taosim temple are identified in
                                                     the vicinity of the alignments of four existing
                                                     rural roads in Linxia County. These mosques are
                                                     recent buildings built between 1982-2010 and
                                                     serve religious services for about 5,000 Muslim
                                                     people. The Taoism temple (Guodongshan
                                                     Temple) was built over 200 years ago and serves
                                                     the Taoism community of about 2,000 people in
                                                     the area. Neither the mosques nor temple are
                                                     registered as cultural relics. However, they are
                                                     considered as PCRs due to their religious and
                                                     cultural significance to local communities.

                                                     The completion of the road renovation will
                                                     provide better road condition and safety for the
                                                     local communities to access these religious
                                                     services. All the mosques and temple are outside
                                                     the right-of-way of the projects roads, with



                                            Page 5 of 14
                                               distance between 10-1 80m. The road construction
                                               will not directly acquire the land nor encroach the
                                               property of these mosques and the temple.
                                               However, construction will likely cause short
                                               adverse impacts, including noise impact on
                                               religious events, and disturbance to accessibility
                                               to these places. Mitigation measures have been
                                               specified in the ESMP. In addition, total 345
                                               household graves will be relocated due to the
                                               project. Based on field survey and public
                                               consultation, it is concluded that these graves are
                                               with insignificant archaeological and historical
                                               value.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           Linxia is a Hui autonomous county. In the project
                                               sites, there are 23 project villages with
                                               concentrations of Hui people and 6 villages with
                                               concentrations of Dongxiang. They account for
                                               49.6% and 56.3% of the total villagers in the
                                               project sites, respectively. These ethnic people
                                               meet the definition of the Bank IP term. On the
                                               other hand, in Wuwei Municipality, there are only
                                               196 ethnic minority people (0.17 % of local total
                                               villagers) living scattered throughout 41 villages,
                                               and in the project areas, they are well integrated
                                               with the majority-Han People. They are very
                                               similar to Han people in terms of social welfare,
                                               rights, social security, language, cultural and
                                               living customs. Thus OP4. 10 is not applicable to
                                               these people in Wuwei. Overall, the task team
                                               concludes that the Bank's OP4.10 policy on
                                               Indigenous People is triggered. A Social
                                               Assessment as required by the policy has been
                                               conducted with a report, and an Ethnic Minority
                                               Development Plan has been prepared by the
                                               client.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           Land acquisition caused by project construction is
4.12                                           unavoidable in Wuwei Municipality and Linxia
                                               County. The main involuntary resettlement
                                               impacts will include ground structure demolition,
                                               temporary and permanent land acquisition. Two
                                               Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) have been
                                               prepared in both English and Chinese for Wuwei
                                               and Linxia. In the project preparation phase,
                                               locations of some subcomponents might not be
                                               determined or might change during project
                                               implementation; therefore both Wuwei and Linxia
                                               have prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework



                                       Page 6 of 14
                                                            (RPF) as an annex in their RAPs.
                                                            Linkage projects: The Golden Avenue (Jinse
                                                            Dadao Road) in Wuwei is identified as the only
                                                            linkage project as defined by the OP4.12. Given
                                                            that resettlement of the road has been completed,
                                                            a due diligence study on its resettlement was done
                                                            and included in the Wuwei RAP. There is no
                                                            legacy issue about this project land acquisition.
       Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                The project will not finance construction or
                                                            rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                            policy.
                                                            Not applicable
       Projects on International          No                Not applicable
       Waterways OP/BP 7.50
       Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable
       7.60

    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
      A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
       1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
         and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
        Environmental
        Environmental Impacts (OP4.01): The proposed project will improve local transport infrastructure,
        rural-urban connectivity and rural accessibility to urban public services in project area. In Wuwei,
        part of the existing road (#A9 road; width:7.5 meters) to be rehabilitated is within the boundary of
        a Class II Zone (buffer zone) drinking water source protected area of the Dajingxia Reservoir and
        Liujiatan in Dajing Town. In Linxia County, partial alignment of a rural road (road width: 7.5
        meters) to be rehabilitated runs along the bank of the Liujiaxia Reservoir. These existing roads
        currently pose risks to the drinking water sources due to the deteriorated road conditions and
a       inadequate safety facilities. Rehabilitation of these roads would significantly reduce risks to these
        water sources because of the improved road conditions and the provision of safety facilities. The
        EA proposes both engineering measures and specific mitigation measures, such as provision of
        surface runoff and accident spill collection and storage tanks along the sections close to water
        source protection areas; drainage system; anti-crash barriers; and warning signs, and speed control
        measures, etc..

        Most of the adverse environmental impacts of the project are related to construction activities,
        such as nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater, borrow and disposal sites, soil erosion, disturbance
        to local traffic, communities and irrigation system. During operations, adverse impacts include
        vehicle noise and emission, road safety, and the potential leakage of fuel and chemicals from
        vehicles, etc. The EA concludes that these potential adverse impacts and risks can be mitigated
        with the engineering design, good construction management practice, and the proposed mitigation
        measures.

        With respect to the cumulative impacts, key Valued Ecosystem Components (VECs) under
        consideration include soil, acoustic environment, water quality and air quality. The EA shows that



                                                   Page 7 of 14
    the project will have very limited contribution to the cumulative impacts given that (i) the project
    only accounts for 0.06% (in terms of new road length) of the total roads in Linxia; and 1.5% of the
    total roads in Wuwei; and (ii) 57% of the road investments (in terms of road length) of the project
    are for the rehabilitation of existing roads. To minimize the potential impacts such as soil erosion
C
    and traffic noise, a specific water and social conservation plan has been developed for Wuwei and
    Linxia respectively. Noise monitoring and noise abatement measures have been proposed in the
o   ESMP.

    Natural Habitats (OP4.04): The project is located in areas that have been disturbed by intensive
    human activities. In Linxia, approximately 89% of total land affected (158ha) are farmland,
    existing roads, land for economic trees (e.g., planted fruit or timber trees) and residential land. The
    remaining 10.9% are grassland and green belt along the existing roads. In Wuwei, approximately
    56.6% of the total land affected (235ha) are farmland, residential land, and existing roads; while
    the remaining 43% is wasteland in desert area. Wuwei is facing desertification problems, with
    39% of its land being desert. The EA confirms that there are no endangered species in the project
    area that could be affected by project interventions.

    Road investments include 40 bridges (25 in Linxia and 15 in Wuwei) with bridge length varying
    from 15-155m and width varying from 8-28m. Construction activities for 25 bridges in Linxia are
    expected to affect river systems-seasonal streams or perennial streams; i.e., Daxia River and its
    branches. Soil erosion caused by the construction activities may increase the sediment
    concentration in Daxia River and cause deposits in the lower stream of the river. If no mitigation
    measures taken, project construction may increase soil erosion by 78,427 tons in Linxia and by
    92,172 tons in Wuwei during five year construction phase and three years after the construction.

    Daixa River and its small branches have been influenced by human activities. But by taking a
    precautionary approach, Natural Habitats policy (OP4.04) is deemed triggered. Mitigation
    measures for construction have been proposed in the ESMP .

    The project will affect 29,969 trees in Wuwei and 18,087 trees in Linxia. The affected trees are
    timber/fruit trees planted by farmers in the land close to their villages or houses, or green belt
    along the existing roads. Compensation for the trees has been specified in the RAP. The project
    will not have any impacts on the health and quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare of
    people and their level of dependence upon or interaction with forests. Forests policy (OP4.36) is
    not deemed triggered.

    Physical Cultural Resources (OP4. 11): Ten mosques and one Taosim temple are identified in the
    vicinity of the alignments of four existing rural roads in Linxia County. These mosques are recent
    buildings built between 1982-20 10 and serve religious services for about 5,000 Muslim people.
    The Taoism temple (Guodongshan Temple) was built over 200 years ago and serves the Taoism
    community of about 2,000 people in the area. Neither the mosques nor temple are registered as
    cultural relics. However, they are considered as PCRs due to their religious and cultural
    significance to local communities.

    The completion of the road renovation will provide better road condition and safety for the local
    communities to access these religious services. All the mosques and temple are outside the right-
    of-way of the projects roads, with distance between 10-180m. The road construction will not
    directly acquire the land nor encroach the property of these mosques and the temple. However,
    construction will likely cause short adverse impacts, including noise impact on religious events,


                                               Page 8 of 14
     and disturbance to accessibility to these places. Mitigation measures have been specified in the
     ESMP. In addition, total 345 household graves will be relocated due to the project. Based on field
     survey and public consultation, it is concluded that these graves are with insignificant
     archaeological and historical value.
o

     Social
     The project will have social impacts related to the need for land acquisition and demolition of a
     number of structures. In Wuwei Municipality, about 4,846 people from 1,143 households will be
     affected by the acquisition of 120 ha of collective owned land and 903 people from 190
     households will be affected by demolition of some 76,662 square-meters of rural structures. Ten
     shops and 5 institutes will be affected. Some PAPs will be affected by both land acquisition and
     structure demolition; therefore the total number of PAPs in Wuwei is 5,432 people from 1,271
     households. In the County of Linxia, some 6,481 people from 1,519 households will be affected by
     the acquisition of 70 ha of collective land and 130 people from 25 households will be affected by
     demolition of 1,028 square-meters rural structure. Some PAPs will be affected by both land
     acquisition and structure demolition; therefore the total number of PAPs in Linxia is 6,481 people
     from 1,519 households.

     Linxia County is a Hui autonomous county. In the project sites, there are 23 project villages with
     concentrations of Hui people and 6 villages with concentrations of Dongxiang people. They
      account for 49.6% and 56.3% of the total villagers respectively. The task team concludes that the
      Bank's OP4. 10 policy on Indigenous People is triggered. A Social Assessment as required by the
      policy has been conducted, and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan has been developed by the
       counterparts. While in Wuwei city, there are only 196 Hui, Dongxiang, Salar and Mongolian
       ethnic people, they live scattered across 41 project villages. These ethnic people do not meet the
       definition of the Bank IP term; therefore, IP policy OP 4.10 is not triggered for Wuwei subproject.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
      in the project area:
      The drainage and sewer pipelines constructed as part the project roads will improve wastewater
       collection efficiency of the urban areas of the project cities, thus contribute to the improvement of
      water environment. With the improvement of transport infrastructure, future investment will be
       likely increase in the project area, providing local residents with employment opportunities.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
      impacts.
      The EA includes a review of the alternatives for the road alignments and a "with vs without
      project" analysis. Proposals that may cause significant adverse impacts on PCRs or natural
      habitats were dropped as a result of the EA and the feasibility study. Some engineering designs
      that do not have significant environmental and social impacts are not discussed in the EA, but
       covered in the detailed feasibility study. Efforts also were made to minimize resettlement impact
       and negative impact to Hui communities as much as possible.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
       assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
      Environmental (OP/BP4.01): A stand-alone Environmental and Social Management Plan has been
      prepared for Linxia and Wuwei, based on the above environmental assessment. The ESMP
       includes, but is not limited to:
       a)       Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for inclusion in the bidding
       documents and civil work contracts;


                                                 Page 9 of 14
    b)        Specific mitigation measures during design and construction phases, such as (i) road
    drainage system and road safety design, and provision of road safety facilities; (ii) balance of cut
    and fill for construction activities; (iii) management of borrow and disposal sites, camps, nuisance
C
    of dust, noise, waste, and wastewater; (iv) specific soil erosion management plan; (iv) mitigation
    measures to avoid or mitigate disturbance to local communities, traffic, religious activities, utilities
    and irrigation system;
    c)        Specific measures proposed for the operation phase including (i) road maintenance (e.g.
    road safety, drainage system); (ii) noise monitoring and noise mitigation measures; (iii) measures
    to protect water sources/streams; and (iv) emergency measures for the potential leakage of
    chemicals and fuel;
    d)       Water sources protection measures including: (i) provision of surface runoff and accident
    spill collection and storage tanks along the sections close to water source protection areas; (ii)
    drainage system; (iii) anti-crash barriers; and warning signs, and speed control measures etc.; and
    e)       A social management plan based on the major findings and recommendations from the
    Social Assessment.

    Natural Habitats (OP4.04): Mitigation measures for the bridge construction have been proposed in
    the ESMP. A Soil and Water Conservation Plan, as part of the ESMP, has been developed for
    Linxia and Wuwei respectively including mitigation measures, monitoring plan and the budget.
    With these mitigation measures, soil erosion caused by construction activities can be substantially
    reduced.

    Physical Cultural Resources (OP4. 11): To protect PCRs, consultation with local communities
    (especially Muslim communities) has been conducted and necessary mitigation measures
    incorporated into the ESMPs, which include (but not limited to): training of construction workers
    to respect local culture; provision of temporary access to ensure accessibility; prior notice of
    construction activities and schedule; use of low noise equipment in the vicinity of the mosques and
    temple; and optimizing construction time and activities to avoid disturbance to religious events.
    For the relocation of household graves, compensation measures have been included in the RAPs.
    Chance Find Procedures for PCRs are included in the ESMP.

    The ESMP specifies environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangement, capacity building
    activities, and the budget for the ESMP implementation.

    Gansu Province has worked with the Bank since 1980s. At present, it has four ongoing projects
    financed by the Bank. The province is familiar with the Bank's procedures and requirements.
    Under
    the provincial level, project implementation and coordination will be carried out by Wuwei
    Municipality and Linxia County. Wuwei and Linxia have established their Project Leading Group
    (PLG) with a vice mayor or a country governor as the head of the PMOs, assisted by a number of
    government agencies. PMOs have been established under the guidance of the PLGs. The PMOs
    consist of departments responsible for financial, engineering, procurement, social and
    environmental management. ESMP implementation will be managed by Wuwei PMO and Linxia
    PMO. An environmental management unit will be established in the PMOs respectively with
    designated environmental staff. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to
    assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the
    ESMPs. As per the ESMP, PMO will receive more training during project implementation.

    Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12) In accordance with local laws and Bank requirements,

                                               Page 10 of 14
     Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPF) for the two project
     sites of Wuwei and Linxia were prepared in Chinese and English by the Wuwei and Limxia
     PMOs, with assistance from house demolition offices, local land bureaus, affected villages and
     communities, potentially displaced persons, and a consultative team from Hohai University.
o

     RAPs were prepared in line with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and World Bank OP 4.12
     on Involuntary Resettlement. Key principles, compensation standards and salient activities in
     project design and RAP preparation included:
     *        Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized as much
     as possible.
     *        A socio-economic survey will be conducted to determine baseline conditions, especially of
     project affected persons.
     *        Compensation for houses or other properties will be determined at full replacement value.
     *        Compensation will be provided to all project affected persons, including those who lack
     house registration or other documents, such as legal documents.
     *        Basic infrastructure and service facilities will be provided in areas where project affected
     persons will be resettled.
     *        Affected persons will be consulted during planning for acquisition of land and other
     assets, and provision of rehabilitation.
     *        Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made available
     when required.
     *        Special consideration will be given to vulnerable groups.
     *        Institutional arrangements will be established to ensure effective and timely design,
     planning, consultation and implementation of the RAP.
     *        Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project implementation
     will be executed.

     A Resettlement Policy Framework for Wuwei and Linxia has been developed respectively
     according to relevant local laws and regulations as well as World Bank's OP/BP 4.12 on
     Involuntary Resettlement for components that might change their location during project
     implementation. The RPF describes the overall legal framework, planning principles, procedures,
     compensation and rehabilitation approach, consultation and participation requirements, grievance
.*   redress mechanisms, organization and monitoring arrangements.

     A Due Diligence Review had been conducted for involuntary resettlement practices for Linkage
     project identified. The Report showed that there is no legacy issue in terms of involuntary
     resettlement.

     Indigenous People (OP4. 10): A social assessment (SA) has been carried out during project
     preparation, with a focus on positive impacts, negative impacts, and actions for project design and
     construction. Hui ethnic minority groups were identified as IP group in 23 project villages and
     Dongxiang ethnic minority group as IP group in 6 villages of Linxia. The social assessment (SA)
     was conducted by a qualified team including economists and sociologists, who carried out
     intensive fieldwork in selected sample villages. The villages/communities fully understood the
     potential risks and opportunities associated with the project, and expressed their interest,
     enthusiasm and broad support to the project activities.

     Key findings of the SA include: ethnic minority people of Hui and Dongxiang live concentrated in
     29 project villages in Linxia and the Bank IP policy (OP 4.10) is triggered. The project faces some


                                               Page 11 of 14
      risks and negative impacts such as land acquisition, tomb relocation, house demolition, dust and
      noise pollution, temporary and partial road blocks, and traffic jams during project construction.
      The project has a range of positive benefits, such as improving roads accessibility, safety and
O
      transportation efficiency, bringing opportunities of employment and income for local people. Road
      supporting facilities, road maintenance and traffic management are essential. Public publicity and
      participation are critical to optimize project design and smoothen project implementation. The SA
      report suggests a social management plan with measures to address social risks and benefits with
      roles of relevant project stakeholders. The SA report was shared with the FS, EA and design teams
      to ensure the SA findings and action plan are reflected in the project feasibili ty study report, and
      separate social safeguards instruments of RAP and EMDP.

      Based on the findings of the Social Assessment, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP)
      was developed to ensure that project activities on roads development in Linxia are offered to these
       communities in the same way as other project beneficiaries and that their participation in the
      Project would be encouraged.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
       on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
      The main stakeholders are project affected people in local communities. In accordance with the
      Bank's OP4.01, public consultations were conducted during the EA process, including
       questionnaire surveys and public meetings with project affected people and relevant stakeholders
       (e.g., mosques/temple management committees). Information about the project, potential
       environmental and social impacts, and planned mitigation measures were provided to the public
       during consultation. Their concerns have been addressed in the project design and in the EAs and
      the ESMPs.

      The EA document for Wuwei was disclosed at local villages and the government's website on
      January 4, 2014; while EA document for Linxia was disclosed at local villages and the
      government's website on December 26, 2013. Updated EA documents were re-disclosed locally
      on August 15, 2014. The EA safeguards documents in Chinese and English were disclosed in the
      Bank Infoshop on August 19, 2014, and re-disclosed in September 2014.

      The social safeguards documents for Linxia were locally disclosed on August 11, 2014 and for
      Wuwei on August 15, 2014. The social safeguards documents in Chinese and English were
      disclosed in the Bank Infoshop on August 18, 2014.
    B. Disclosure Requirements
    Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
      Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Jul-2014
      Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Aug-2014
      For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
      Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
    "In country" Disclosure
      China                                                               04-Jan-2014
      Comments: Linxia: Dec 26,2013; Wuwei: Jan 4, 2014
     Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
      Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Jul-2014


                                                Page 12 of 14
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                       18-Aug-2014
    "In country" Disclosure
     China                                                                15-Aug-2014
O
     Comments:     Linxia: Aug 11, 2014; Wuwei: Aug 15, 2014
     Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
O
     Date of receipt by the Bank                                          22-Jul-2014
     Date of submission to InfoShop                                       18-Aug-2014
    "In country" Disclosure
     China                                                                1 1-Aug-2014
     Comments:     Linxia
    If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
    respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
    Audit/or EMP.
    If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


    C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
    OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
     Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes   [ X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     report?
     If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
     Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     in the credit/loan?
    OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
     Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [    ]   No [ X ]   NA [
     degradation of critical natural habitats?
     If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [
     degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
     project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
    OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
     Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [ X ]   NA [   ]
     property?
     Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
    OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
     Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes   [ X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
     Indigenous Peoples?
     If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
     Practice Manager review the plan?




                                                Page 13 of 14
        If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA
        been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
        Development Unit or Practice Manager?
       OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
o       Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA
        process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
        If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [ X ]      No [   ]   NA
        Practice Manager review the plan?
       The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
        Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA
        World Bank's Infoshop?
        Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ]           No [   ]   NA
        place in a form and language that are understandable and
        accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
       All Safeguard Policies
        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
        responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
        measures related to safeguard policies?
        Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [ x]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
        in the project cost?
        Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes   [   X]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
        include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
        related to safeguard policies?
        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [ X]       No [   ]   NA [   ]
        with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
        the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS
       Task Team Leader:        Name: Holly Krambeck
       Approved By
       Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                 Date: 05-Dec-2014
       Advisor:
       Practice Manager/        Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                             Date: 06-Dec-2014
       Manager:




                                                   Page 14 of 14
