                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8373

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Haiti                            Project ID:       P148259
                            Project Name:      HT Strengthening Hydro-Met Services (P148259)
                            Task Team          Gaetano Vivo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Feb-2015                      Estimated         28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Flood protection (60%), Irrigation and drainage (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (60%), Other rural development (20%), Urban
                                               planning and housing policy (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5.50                      Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                  5.50
                              Total                                                                         5.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to strengthen the Government of Haiti’s institutional capacity to provide
                           weather, water and climate services customized to the needs of civil protection and agriculture
                           sectors.

                           The PDO will be achieved through: (i) integrating existing hydro-met networks into a national data
                         platform; and (ii) understanding weather, water, and climate services’ requirements for select end
                         users (including agriculture and civil protection).
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support the Government of Haiti's capacity to increase its resilience today and build
                         its future adaptive capacity by providing access to water, weather, and climate information to end
                         users. By strengthening the collaboration between relevant institutions and end-users, the focus will
                         be on enhancing accessibility and customization of hydro-met information that is critical for decision
                         making in emergency management and agriculture. In these two sectors, the project will leverage
                         synergies with existing World Bank-IDA operations (e.g. the Re-launching Agriculture 2 and the
                         Disaster Risk Management and Reconstruction projects) which aim to increase resilience to
                         exogenous shocks, including hydro-meteorological hazards.

                         The project will comprise three components:

                         (i) Capacity building for sustainable weather, water and climate services; (ii) Understanding
                         requirements of select end users (agriculture and civil protection) and support to decision making;
                         and (iii) Support to project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and SPCR coordination.

                         Component 1. Strengthening capacity of the Government of Haiti to collect, validate, archive,
                         analyze data and provide adequate sustainable weather, water and climate services. (US$3 million)

                         Main focus areas for the component would be:

                         i)      Support to Institutional strengthening, capacity building, and partnership development;

                         ii)     Improving inter-institutional data sharing and coordination.

                         Component 2. Understanding weather, water and climate services’ requirements for select end users
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (including agriculture and civil protection); (US$1.8 million)

                         Component 3. Support to project implementation, monitoring and evaluation, and support to SPCR
                         coordination (US$ 0.7 million)
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will maintain and replace hydro-meteorological equipment and provide services and
                         capacity building around the country. It will focus on areas where there is already hydro-
                         meteorological equipment in place. No new areas will be covered. In the areas where new equipment
                         will be installed awareness raising and communication activities will be carried out to ensure
                         engagement and support of local communities.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Borrower capacity for managing environmental risk is generally weak, due to low capacity. Most
                         Bank projects in Haiti have therefore recruited environmental specialists to the Project
                         Implementation Unit (PIUs) to cover this function. In this project, the environmental and social risk
                         is low, given that there will be no construction, no acquisition of land, no resettlement and all
                         activities on the ground will focus on replacing equipment. There is some risk associated with the
                         safe disposal of old equipment, but this can be managed by the Government (Ministry of
                           Environment) or using an environmental specialist from another Bank project without the
                           recruitment of a new environmental specialist.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (GENDR)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Hydromet projects usually provide
                           BP 4.01                                            environmental benefits, given that they support
                                                                              lower risks associated with floods, drought and
                                                                              fire, winds, extreme weather events, and even
                                                                              industrial accidents. Project activities are
                                                                              usually implemented within available hydromet
                                                                              sites and involve a minor installation of
                                                                              observation equipment with no or minimal
                                                                              environmental disturbance. This project,
                                                                              likewise, has a very low environmental and
                                                                              social risk and is rated a low risk Category B
                                                                              project. The main environment impacts are
                                                                              focused on three aspects of the equipment repair
                                                                              (Component 1):

                                                                              (a) the safe disposal/storage of old equipment,
                                                                              in particular, of mercury containing parts such
                                                                              as thermometers, temperature gauges, etc;
                                                                              (b) the safety of workers involved in repair: it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              important to ensure that their exposure to
                                                                              mercury is minimized through the use of
                                                                              appropriate protective gear and handling
                                                                              protocols; and
                                                                              (c) possible exposure to electromagnetic fields
                                                                              (EMFs) if the system for collection of the data
                                                                              from the equipment is sent by cell tower or
                                                                              other emitting frequency. While there is no
                                                                              clear proved risk to low levels of EMF, higher
                                                                              levels may cause a disturbance, particularly to
                                                                              those who are sensitive to EMFs.

                                                                              The environmental risks mentioned above are
                                                                              only associated with Component 1. This
                                                                              component focuses on strengthening the
                                                                              capacity of the GoH to collect, store and
                                                                              provide hydro-meteorological and climate data
                                                                              to end users. Under this component, the project
                                                                              may also fund the repair of equipment necessary
                         to collect critical hydro-meteorological and
                         climate data and will finance community
                         awareness raising activities in places where
Public Disclosure Copy




                         repaired stations are located.

                         A full scale ESMF would not be particularly
                         useful given that, if the project will finance
                         repair of stations, the location of the equipment
                         is known and the environmental impacts will be
                         limited to one or two specific known issues
                         associated with hydro-met equipment. Therefore
                         the team will develop an environmental
                         management plan (EMP) that will cover all the
                         equipment repairs. The EMP will focus largely
                         on the type of equipment, waste disposal from
                         the repair process and options for disposal or
                         storage of mercury. The EMP will include
                         recommendations to minimize and mitigate
                         potentially adverse environmental, health and
                         safety (EHS) impacts for equipment repairs.
                         Consultations will occur as part of the EMP
                         process.

                         In Haiti, it is unlikely that mercury, like in the
                         US and Europe, is recycled. It is also unlikely
                         that there is any law related to the release of
                         mercury into the air or water or ground. The
                         EMP should therefore focus on assessing what
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is available in Haiti in terms of mercury storage
                         and should assess other options for safe disposal
                         such as shipping to Dominican Republic if they
                         have such a facility. The EMP should also focus
                         on safety issues for workers, including
                         directives on protective gear, and standard
                         operating procedures that need to be used when
                         removing and storing (temporarily) parts
                         containing mercury. Standard protocols are
                         available in the literature which elaborate the
                         steps necessary for the removal and storage of
                         these parts prior to transport to a designated
                         center or facility.

                         Component 2 focuses on understanding hydro-
                         met data requirements for end users and
                         includes collection of information from end-
                         users, workshops, etc. This component has no
                         safeguard requirement.
                                                                                                                                  Component 3, support to project
                                                                                                                                 implementation, monitoring and evaluation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 focuses on recruitment of the project
                                                                                                                                 coordinator and team and project management.
                                                                                                                                 This component has no safeguard requirement.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 project is not expected to have impacts on
                                                                                                                                 natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 project will not finance activities that affect
                                                                                                                                 forests.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 project will not finance the purchase or use of
                                                                                                                                 pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         project will not impact the quality or
                                                                                                                                 management of physical cultural resources as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered given that given that
                                                                                                                                 there are no indigenous peoples present in the
                                                                                                                                 project areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            No. There will be no resettlement since the
                                 4.12                                                                                            project will only work in areas where there are
                                                                                                                                 already hydromet equipments in place and no
                                                                                                                                 land acquisition will be required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            project will not affect international waterways
                                                                                                                                 as defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered given that the
                                 7.60                                                                                            project will not affect disputed areas as defined
                                                                                                                                 under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      If needed, the specific studies and their timing will be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Gaetano Vivo

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (RSA)   Date: 22-Sep-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Anna Wellenstein (PMGR)         Date: 29-Sep-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
