                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8010
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                           Project ID:    P147521
                            Project Name:      Second Regional and Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (P147521)
                            Task Team          Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Apr-2014                       Estimated   23-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSUW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (35%), Sanitation (25%), Urban Transport (30%), Sub-national
                                              government administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%), Urban services and
                                              housing for the poor (40%), Other Private Sector De velopment (20%),
                                              Municipal governance and institution building (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      59.04           Total Bank Financing:                 30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  11.04
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     30.00
                              Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                                 13.00
                              SWITZERLAND Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC)                                            5.00
                              Total                                                                                     59.04
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         To improve the efficiency and reliability of targeted municipal services and infrastructure. This will
                         be achieved by investing in high-priority local infrastructure improvements, and by supporting LSGs
                         in enhancing their capacity and systems for service delivery.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Infrastructure Investments, Project Management and Monitoring (IBRD: US$28
                         million; MDF: US$13 million; Borrower: US$9.29 million).
                         This component will finance infrastructure investments for the rehabilitation and expansion of
                         priority municipal services, and provision of public infrastructure to attract private sector investments
                         in secondary cities, towns and villages. It will also finance technical preparation for sub-project
                         investment, monitoring and evaluation and project management related activities.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Infrastructure Investments (IBRD: US$26 million; MDF: US$ 13 million;
                         Borrower: US$8.79 million):
                         This sub-component will finance infrastructure investments including provision of works, goods and
                         consultant services to rehabilitate and expand priority municipal services such as roads, water and
                         sanitation, wastewater treatment, street lighting, municipal markets, kindergartens and community
                         facilities. The sub-projects will aim at improving the reliability of municipal services, e.g., reliable
                         water supply pressure and secured hours of service; and reliable roads with improved physical
                         conditions that reduce trip time and vehicle operating costs. Special attention will be paid to scale up
                         energy efficiency in water supply, e.g., use of gravity-fed water supply or replacement of old pumps
                         with energy efficient ones; replacement of street lighting bulbs with energy efficient bulbs; and
                         improve heating efficiency in municipal buildings, especially kindergartens. This subcomponent will
                         also finance public infrastructure to attract private investment in secondary cities and towns, where
                         private sector entities are willing to invest but require complementary public infrastructure to make
                         their investment viable (e.g., public infrastructure within vicinity of the investments, road/sidewalk,
                         water/sanitation, etc.). Financial resources will be provided on a combined credit and grant basis to
                         large LSGs based on their borrowing capacity. Performance-based grants will be provided to small
                         Local Self Governments (LSGs) with limited financial capacity based on a list of criteria aiming to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide incentives to improve their investment planning, financial management, sustainability and
                         accountability.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Project Management and Monitoring & Evaluation (IBRD: US$2 million;
                         Borrower: US$0.5 million):
                         This sub-component will finance the preparation of feasibility studies, engineering designs,
                         construction supervision, operating cost, and monitoring and evaluation of Project outcomes, with a
                         special attention to the gender dimensions, shared prosperity and job creation of Project impacts.

                         Component 2: Institutional Development (IBRD: US$2 million; SDC: US$5 million; Borrower: US
                         $1.75 million).
                         This component will support LSGs and the Municipal Development Fund (MDF) in improving their
                         institutional capacity and performance. Goods and consultants services would be financed.

                         All LSGs will be supported in the following areas:

                         •      Improving asset planning and management to ensure efficiency and sustainability of
                         investments.

                         •       Managing the infrastructure project cycle, including identification, preparation,

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         implementation, and monitoring.

                         •       Improving fiscal discipline and accounting, including accounting and financial management;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of simple and effective accounting and reporting system; training courses and
                         supporting computer system.

                         The component will also aim at enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of the MDF.
                         The MDF will be supported in strengthening its technical appraisal capacity, credit risk management
                         ability and fiduciary functions. The Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) will
                         make available a non-reimbursable grant, based on a Co-financing Trust Fund Agreement between
                         IBRD and SDC. The grant is exclusively to be used for financing activities under Component 2.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Second Regional and Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (RMIDP II) may be
                         implemented nationwide, with no geographic limitations.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes              RMIDP II will finance an infrastructure
                          BP 4.01                                            investment component and therefore triggers OP/
                                                                             BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered.
                                                                             Infrastructural improvements that are expected to
                                                                             be financed under the project include
                                                                             rehabilitation of existing roads, communications
                                                                             systems, water supply and wastewater collection
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             systems, waste water treatment plans, municipal
                                                                             markets and other infrastructure required for
                                                                             improved municipal services. No large-scale new
                                                                             construction will be financed. The project will
                                                                             finance investments that fall under environmental
                                                                             Category B. Category A activities will not be
                                                                             eligible for financing from the project proceeds.

                                                                             Environmental Management Frameworks (EMFs)
                                                                             used by the MDF for the implementation of the
                                                                             ongoing Regional Development Projects (RDPs)
                                                                             and the RMIDP were re-worked for the purposes
                                                                             of producing an Environmental and Social
                                                                             Management Framework (ESMF) for RMIDP II.
                                                                             The ESMF was disclosed and opened for
                                                                             comments from stakeholders. The ESMF
                                                                             provides an outline of procedures for
                                                                             environmental screening, approval, assessment,
                                                                             management planning, and monitoring of the



                                                                     Page 3 of 9
                                                                         individual interventions. It guides the MDF in the
                                                                         assessment of environmental risks related to the
                                                                         proposed investments and in defining the scope of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the required environmental work. Environmental
                                                                         and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and
                                                                         Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), may
                                                                         be required for high risk Category B activities,
                                                                         while the use of an EMP Checklist for Small
                                                                         Construction and Rehabilitation Activities may
                                                                         suffice for low-risk investments. Site-specific
                                                                         ESIA reports and EMPs will be disclosed and
                                                                         discussed with the project affected people and
                                                                         other stakeholders prior to commencement of
                                                                         works under individual sub-projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           RMIDP II will predominantly support the
                         BP 4.11                                         rehabilitation of existing infrastructure or small
                                                                         scale construction supplemental to existing
                                                                         systems. It is unlikely that activities will impact
                                                                         on any known monuments of culture and history.
                                                                         The bulk of the civil works will be undertaken
                                                                         within settlements or along existing rights of way
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         between them. Hence the likelihood of chance
                                                                         finds during earth works is low. Nonetheless,
                                                                         OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to provide guidance for
                                                                         managing such chance finds, should they emerge.
                                                                         A blueprint of action upon encountering of
                                                                         chance finds is provided in the ESMF and will be
                                                                         included in the Operations Manual (OM).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The OP/BP.4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is
                         4.12                                            triggered in response to the possibility of
                                                                         resettlement under civil works for sub-projects in
                                                                         Component 1. A Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF) has been prepared. It provides an outline
                                                                         of conditions under which potential land
                                                                         acquisition and/or livelihoods’ loss and/or other
                                                                         social impact may occur. It also provides general
                                                                         principles to be applied to mitigate impacts on
                                                                         affected persons. If, during the preparatory phase



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                               of sub-projects, potential impacts as defined by
                                                                               the OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement are
                                                                               identified, then site-specific Resettlement Action
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Plans (RAPs) shall be developed. The
                                                                               responsibilities for sub-project screening
                                                                               mechanisms and the RPF and RAPs will be
                                                                               clearly stated in the OM. The RPF has been
                                                                               disclosed and discussed with stakeholders and
                                                                               RAPs, if required, will be subject to similar
                                                                               procedures of disclosure and consultation with the
                                                                               affected people.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International          Yes             The project may finance rehabilitation of water
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               intakes, hydraulic structures, and municipal
                                                                               water supply networks, as well as waste water
                                                                               collection schemes and waste water treatment
                                                                               plants. In Georgia, most of the natural water
                                                                               bodies used for water abstraction and discharge
                                                                               are international waterways. Accordingly, the OP/
                                                                               BP 7.50 is triggered for RMIDP II. Nevertheless,
                                                                               rehabilitation of the selected elements of water
                                                                               supply infrastructure will not alter intake from the
                                                                               surface water bodies. Rather, it will decrease loss
                                                                               of the abstracted water during its transportation
                                                                               and discourage excessive water use due to
                                                                               introduction of metering systems to the
                                                                               beneficiary. Operationalization of waste water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               collection and treatment will contribute to the
                                                                               improvement of water quality in the recipient
                                                                               water bodies and will not alter cumulative water
                                                                               discharge. Based on the above, communication to
                                                                               the riparian states is not required. Exemption
                                                                               from the requirement for the communication to
                                                                               riparian was obtained from the Regional Vice
                                                                               President of the Bank.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              RMIDP II includes an investment component which will finance existing roads, communications
                              systems, water supply and wastewater collection systems, waste water treatment plans, municipal
                              markets and other infrastructure required for improved municipal services in the selected


                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                           settlements; and thus triggers the OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Because the Project
                           will not invest in new construction of buildings or in new systems of water supply, waste water
                           collection and treatment outside the present footprint of the existing infrastructure, there are no
Public Disclosure Copy




                           risks commonly related to the site selection and soil-breaking. However, rehabilitation of existing
                           structures, which have been out of operation for extended periods of time, may require
                           replacement and/or extension of certain elements of infrastructure. The management of sludge
                           from waste-water treatment facilities would be a key issue to monitor subsequent to the
                           construction/rehabilitation of such facilities as the country lacks a solid waste management system
                           and infrastructure that would provide straightforward arrangements for sludge acceptance and
                           disposal. Nevertheless, the environmental risks of the construction and operation phases of the
                           Project are fully manageable and none of them is expected to have significant, long term or
                           irreversible impacts on the natural environment. Thus, the Project is classified as environmental
                           Category B.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The expected long term environmental and social impacts of the RMIDP II implementation are
                           positive, because the rehabilitation of water supply and sanitation systems in the beneficiary
                           settlements will reduce water loss during transportation and will lead to thedecrease of human
                           health risks and environmental pollution from the discharge of raw sewage. Refurbishment of the
                           selected public buildings - mostly premises of children's institutions - will include thermal
                           insulation of these buildings leading to the decreased use of electricity and firewood during
                           operation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Analysis of alternatives will occur at the sub-project level and will affect selection of
                           infrastructure for rehabilitation, as well as the choice of technological solutions to be applied to
                           individual wastewater treatment plants. This process is already being applied in the process of
                           preparing the first set of investment sub-projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Environmental and Management Frameworks (EMFs) prepared for the ongoing Regional
                           Development Projects and the RMIDP, were used as a basis for developing an ESMF for the
                           RMIDP II. The ESMF guides the preparation of sub-project specific Environmental and
                           SocialImpact Assessments (ESIAs), including Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), and
                           self-standing EMPs for lower risk investments. Similarly, the Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPFs) prepared for the Regional Development Projects and RMIDP, were updated for the
                           RMIDP II implementation. The RPF provides an outline for the preparation of Resettlement
                           Action Plans (RAPs), which might be required during sub-project identification and preparation.
                           Site-specific safeguards documents will be developed, reviewed by the Bank, disclosed, and
                           discussed with all relevant stakeholders as the detailed designs of individual sub-projects become
                           available. The Strategic Environmental, Social and Cultural Heritage Assessments prepared under
                           the RDP and RDPII has been adapted and will also guide safeguards practice under the project.

                          The MDF will be an implementing agency for the Project. The MDF has a long history of
                          implementing World Bank supported projects, though its in-house institutional capacity for
                          safeguards application and monitoring has been relatively weak until recently. However, the MDF
                          has undergone a recent reorganization and has significantly improved its institutional capacity for


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           safeguards management. An Environmental and Social Unit is has been created within MDF and is
                           staffed with professionals of adequate background and skills. Environmental and social specialists
                           of the MDF will receive training from the World Bank's safeguard specialists, and will continue to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           be coached, as required. The MDF will also have an opportunity to supplements its in-house
                           safeguards team with hired consultants as required.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure of Georgia, the MDF, LSGs and
                           population of beneficiary communities are the key stakeholders of the Project.

                           The ESMF, which is an update of the already disclosed and publicly discussed EMFs for the
                           Regional Development Projects and the RMIDP, was disclosed in-country and through the Bank's
                           InfoShop. Site-specific ESIA reports including EMPs and self-standing EMPs will be prepared at
                           a level satisfactory to the Bank, they will be disclosed, and discussed with the sub-project-affected
                           communities prior to tendering works under any individual investment. Local stakeholders will be
                           provided with relevant information from the ESIA/EMP through proper communication channels.

                           The RPF, which is also an update of the already disclosed and publicly discussed RPFs for the
                           Regional Development Projects and the RMIDP, was disclosed in-country and through the Bank's
                           InfoShop. Site-specific RAPs, as required, will be prepared satisfactory to the Bank, and they will
                           be disclosed, discussed with project-affected people, and implemented prior to mobilization of
                           contractor to such site.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                            08-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Draft ESMF was disclosed in-country on March 8, 2014. Public consultation on the
                                         draft ESMF was held in the office of MDF in Tbilisi on March 21, 2014. Finalized
                                         ESMF was re-disclosed in-country and through InfoShop on March 24, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        24-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                            08-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Draft RPF was disclosed in-country on March 8, 2014. Public consultation on the
                                         draft RPF was held in the office of MDF in Tbilisi on March 21, 2014. The finalized
                                         RPF was re-disclosed in-country and through InfoShop on March 24, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Soraya Goga (SM)                          Date: 01-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
