INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR12400
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jan-2015, 18-Feb-2015, 24-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Papua New Guinea           Project ID:  P116521
Project Name: Flexible and Open Distance Education Project (P116521)
Task Team       Binh Thanh Vu
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Jun-2010                Estimated    1 1-Jan-201 1
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Adult literacy/non-formal education (55%), Public administration- Education
(19%), Secondary education (15%), Information technology (11%)
Theme:          Education for all (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       6.00            Total Bank Financing:    5.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               1.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      5.00
Total                                                            6.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The development objective of this project is to increase the number ofout-of-school youth who
complete recognized secondarydiploma/certificate equivalency programs.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Page 1 of4


﻿The objectives of the project are: (i) to align the distance educationcurriculum with the national
curriculum; and (ii) to strengthen FODE's information management system.
3. Project Description
O
Revised Component 1 "Curriculum Development" would support: (i) curriculum writing/module
development for all Grades 7 - 12 subjects, including acquisition of curriculum development
reference materials; (ii) the alignment of the revised curriculum with the national curriculum and the
establishment of revised assessment rubrics for scoring and marking; (iii) conducting a trial of new
Grade 7 - 10 curriculum, including printing of the new Grade 7-10 curriculum required for said trial;
and (iv) the development of a roll-out strategy. Funding would be provided for goods, consulting
services, consultation workshops for review by different levels and for final approval.
Revised Component 2 "Information Management Infrastructure" would support: (i) the establishment
of network connectivity between all 22 provincial FODE centers and headquarters, and aligning
FODE information and communication technology (ICT) with the wider, DOE ICT policy; and (ii)
the remodeling/upgrading of FODE's existing Student Information System and provision of related
training in using internet, data collection and entry. In order for FODE to improve its service delivery
to all students (including those in remote/isolated areas) and in a timely fashion, minimize
communication and freight costs for materials distribution, and strengthen its monitoring and
evaluation capacity, FODE needs to harness the appropriate Information Technology (IT) and train
its staff to effectively address its core business objectives. The component will support the
development of local and wide area communications networks that will connect all 22 provincial
FODE centers that are geographically scattered throughout the country to its Head Office in Port
Moresby. Training will be provided to FODE head quarter and provincial staff in using information
technology to perform their duties including, but not limited to, how to communicate electronically,
managing enrolment and materials distribution, carry out data collection, enter the data and generate
reports.
New Component 3 "Project management, monitoring and evaluation" would support: (i) project
management and day-to-day operations, including activity planning and budgeting, implementation
monitoring and progress reporting; (ii) financial management and procurement activities, including
reporting and audits; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation activities including gathering information
and updating the results framework.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented by FODE headquarters, located in Port Moresby, and by each of
FODE's 22 provincial training centers.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Page 2 of 4


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
O
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
o         Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The original project design envisaged minor civil works related to FODE's headquarter building
(i.e., renovation of existing office space and minor expansion), triggering OP/BP 4.01 and being
classified as a Category "C" project (i.e., no separate environmental instrument needing to be
developed). As part of its due diligence, the Bank will confirm overall compliance based on Bank
safeguards policy requirements, local regulations (such as the government's "Environment Act
2000") and safeguards criteria spelled out in the project appraisal document.
It should be noted that the restructured project design will not support any civil works, and it was
confirmed that the newly-introduced network connectivity activities will not have any safeguards
U           implications. As mentioned before, the project will continue to trigger OP/BP 4.01 even though no
more civil works are included in the restructured design, and remain a Category "C".
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               ///
Page 3 of 4


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [  No[  NA[X]
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  No       NA   X
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  No[     NA[X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Binh Thanh Vu
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Prateek Tandon (PMGR)              Date: 24-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


