                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6672

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                         Project ID:      P124293
                            Project Name:      CM -- FCPF REDD READINESS (P124293)
                            Task Team          Emeran Serge M. Menang Ev
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          30-Jun-2017
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTN1

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          0.20                 Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                      0.20
                              Total                                                                         0.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of this grant is to reinforce Cameroon’s capacities to design a socially
                           and environmentally sound national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest
                           degradation and to develop a national reference scenario of emissions from deforestation and
                           degradation that takes into account national circumstances
                           C. Project Description
                           This REDD+ Readiness Preparation grant will provide funding to support Cameroon in the amount
                         of US$ 3.6 million in carrying out a subset of activities outlined in its Readiness Preparation
                         Proposal (R-PP). The full R-PP includes all activities necessary for Cameroon to become ready for
                         REDD+. However, the FCPF grant will fund only a portion of the US$ 28.9 million needed to cover
Public Disclosure Copy




                         all R-PP planned activities.

                         FCPF will finance major components of the R-PP that have been prioritized by the REDD+
                         Technical Secretariat. This support is limited to technical assistance, analytical studies, capacity
                         building, goods, operating costs, and consultation processes and does not include the implementation
                         of site-specific REDD+ programs (carbon deals) on the ground. The activities have been prioritized
                         keeping in view the comparative advantages of the FCPF and the likelihood of follow up work by
                         others actors active in the REDD+ space in Cameroon.


                         COMPONENT 1: SUPPORT TO THE NATIONAL READINESS MANAGEMENT
                         ARRANGEMENTS (US$1.6 million)

                         COMPONENT 1.1 - COORDINATION OF THE REDD+ READINESS PROCESS:

                         This component will support the structures that will lead the coordination and implementation of the
                         REDD+ Readiness process in Cameroon, including the Steering committee, the Technical
                         Secretariat, and the decentralized structures at regional and departmental levels by providing them
                         with the adequate human, technical and operational resources. FCPF Grant funds will finance the
                         following:

                         Streamlining the utilization of REDD+ funds by setting up a fiduciary team
                         Recruitment of Technical Expert on REDD+ to support the National REDD+ Coordinator and help
                         strengthen the National REDD+ Technical Secretariat within the MINEPDED so as to ensure it can
                         deliver the activities planned as part of the REDD+ readiness process. In addition, a fiduciary team,
                         consisting of a financial management specialist, a procurement specialist, and an accountant will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recruited to support streamlining the utilization of all the funds, whatever their origin, allocated to the
                         REDD+ readiness process, with an interest in optimizing their impacts in terms of outputs, in
                         accordance with sound governance. There is a possibility that the Basket Fund, established within the
                         MINFOF, will support the fiduciary team, thereby freeing up FCPF resources. Operational budget
                         will be provided to procure office supplies, one vehicle, pay office rental, support annual financial
                         audits and purchase if needed financial management software.

                         Investments to make the REDD+ Technical Secretariat operational and effective
                         The REDD+ Technical Secretariat will ensure that REDD+ is integrated in the national and sectoral
                         policies and strategies, as well as other development and planned initiatives. To succeed, this will
                         require a close cooperation with countless governmental and non-governmental entities. Such
                         cooperation will entail numerous nationwide meetings and workshops, including field trips. This is
                         why the FCPF will support the acquisition of equipment, such as computers and vehicle(s).

                         Supporting operating costs to secure the functioning of REDD+ National and Sub-national structures
                         This sub-component will contribute to cover some operating costs of the REDD+ Technical
                         Secretariat, such as the annual financial audit, but the main target will remain the functioning of the
                         sub-national structures to promote a bottom up approach, making sure that regions and stakeholders
                         on the ground can voice their views.
                         COMPONENT 1.2 – SUPPORT FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT

                         Consultation and participation for activities to be implemented under the FCPF grant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This subcomponent will fund consultation and participation of key activities implemented using
                         FCPF funding. This includes the consultations on: i) the drivers and underlying causes of D&D, ii)
                         the draft strategy options, iii) SESA, preparation of the national implementation framework for
                         REDD+, iv) study on benefit sharing and, v) assessing and setting up effective feedback and
                         grievance redress mechanisms.

                         Specific and targeted consultations will be organized through a diversified set of events (meetings,
                         workshops, seminars, etc.). Various groups will be targeted: the media, civil society, opinion makers,
                         forest-dependent communities, indigenous peoples, the private sector, as well as state representatives
                         and relevant administrations. The CSO platform would be used as a conduit for dissemination of
                         information and consultation with CSOs, IPs and local communities throughout the decentralized
                         structures in the five agro-ecological zones. t. A consultation plan will be revised upstream to ensure
                         consistency and efficiency at the country level while avoiding overlaps with other initiatives.

                         Strengthening sub-national REDD+ structures

                         In Cameroon, the R-PP has identified serious capacity constraints and lack of adequate knowledge
                         and awareness on what is REDD+. Critical Sectors both at national and sub-national levels engaged
                         in land use do not have adequate knowledge or even basic understanding of REDD+, furthermore
                         other relevant stakeholders such as the private sector, forest dependent communities etc. face similar
                         situations. Therefore, this sub-component will fund institutional strengthening targeted at the sub-
                         national levels. Existing structures at regional and departmental levels (Environmental Department,
                         Forestry Department, Farmers Associations, Traditional Chiefs Associations, Women’s Associations/
                         Networks, IP groups, community forest committees, private sector associations, etc.) will benefit
                         from capacity building to enhance their engagement in the REDD+ process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Additional resources from the Basket Fund might be allocated to this sub-component with an interest
                         in expanding awareness and sensitization on REDD+.

                         COMPONENT 2: SUPPORT TO THE DESIGN OF A NATIONAL REDD+ STRATEGY (US
                         $1.350 million)

                         COMPONENT 2.1 - PREPARATION OF THE NATIONAL REDD+ STRATEGY

                         This component aims to support a series of analytic work that would contribute to the refinement of
                         the deforestation and forest degradation in order to help the country come up with the right strategy
                         options for Cameroon. This component has two sub-components as follows:

                         Sub-component 1: Based on existing data and consultations during the formulation of the R-PP, a
                         preliminary analysis of the direct and underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation in
                         Cameroon exists. During the readiness process, deepening the analytic work on the drivers and
                         underlying causes of deforestation and forest degradation will be conducted. The funds will also
                         support the recruitment of consultants to conduct the analytic work as well as support the
                         dissemination of these studies.

                         Subcomponent 2: Initial REDD+ strategy options have been identified during R-PP formulation.
                         Funds will be provided to assess and conduct analytic work on these options in order to align with
                         the more detailed assessment of drivers of deforestation and forest degradation. A REDD+ strategy
                         will be developed during Readiness. It is expected that the REDD+ Strategy in Cameroon will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         multi-sectoral, in nature with special emphasis on agriculture, logging and energy sectors given the
                         relevance of these sectors to deforestation and forest degradation. In addition, the REDD+ strategy
                         will need to address governance and law enforcement issues. The ongoing pilot REDD+ projects will
                         provide lessons for the development of the REDD+ strategy.

                         COMPONENT 2.2 – STRATEGIC ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL ASSESSMENT

                         This component aims to support Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) which will
                         be able to inform the national REDD+ strategy. The SESA will contribute to the REDD+ readiness
                         process in Cameroon by assessing how REDD+ strategy options address environmental and social
                         priorities associated with current patterns of land use and forest management. Gaps identified
                         through this assessment would lead to adjustments in the REDD+ strategy options to close the gaps.
                         Also, the SESA will provide an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that will
                         outline the procedures to be followed for managing potential environmental and social impacts of
                         specific policies, actions and projects during the implementation of the REDD+.

                         The grant will support the following activities:

                         •        Financing the payroll of the SESA Unit in the Technical Secretariat: A SESA Unit will be
                         established as part of the REDD+ Technical Secretariat and it will consist of at least 2 senior experts
                         (an environmentalist and a social development expert). In addition, the Technical Secretariat if
                         needed would hire additional expertise. This team will supervise the SESA process (see activities
                         below) that will allow Cameroon to reduce as much as possible the possible social and environmental
                         impacts of the REDD+ strategy options, in particular relative to at-risk groups. FCPF will support the
                         payroll of this team over the 3 year grant agreement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SESA and development of Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF): this sub-
                         component will support the following activities among others:
                         o       National validation workshop on the SESA Terms of Reference
                         o       Recruitment of a consultant(s)/firm to conduct SESA.
                         o       Analytical work on social and environmental considerations on D&D and strategy options
                         and the institution arrangement for SESA
                         o       Institutional legal and policy review
                         o       Consultations on SESA
                         o       Preparation of a draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)

                         COMPONENT 2.3 FEEDBACK AND GREVIANCE REDRESS MECHANISM

                         Given the broad range of stakeholders involved, and the potential complexity of REDD+ processes, a
                         functional and easily accessible national feedback and grievance redress mechanism is critical from
                         the earliest stages of R-PP implementation. In this regard, particular attention will be paid to
                         geographically, culturally or economically isolated or excluded groups. The grant will support the
                         design and early implementation of this mechanism. The FCPF Grant funds will be used to:
                         -        An assessment of existing national institutional capacity for feedback and grievance redress
                         mechanism;
                         -        Staffing to implement the identified redress mechanism during the REDD+ readiness
                           process.

                           COMPONENT 2.4 - PREPARATION OF THE REDD+ IMPLEMENTATION FRAMEWORK
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The FCPF grant will support an in-depth analysis of legal and institutional issues around REDD+,
                           including: i) analysis of the existing national legislation on forests and other sectors pertaining to the
                           REDD+ goals; ii) analysis of the governance for a national fund to manage REDD+; iii) fiscal and
                           economic incentives to promote REDD+ activities; iv) options for benefit sharing; v) analysis of the
                           opportunity to prepare specific legal text for the REDD+ dealing also with the legal nature of
                           emission reductions.

                           COMPONENT 3: INFORMING THE NATIONAL REFERENCE SCENARIO FOR REDD+ (US$
                           0.65 million)

                           The FCPF Grant will finance activities, which will inform the development of the National
                           Reference Scenario for REDD+, including sub-national reference levels as well, by highlighting its
                           (their) prospective (forward-looking) elements. These activities will be based on an analysis of future
                           pressure on forests. A consultant firm will be contracted to model potential future pressures on the
                           forests in Cameroon by assessing future development trends in various sectors, such as agriculture,
                           logging, energy, mining and infrastructure in each agro-ecological zone. The consultant firm will
                           adapt the IIASA partial-equilibrium model produced at the regional scale (Congo Basin) to the
                           national level, taking into account the most updated information available.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Activities to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness process in Cameroon do
                           not include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the ground. The FCPF support is limited to
                           analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the national and sub-national
                           levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project is implemented by the Technical Secretariat under the National REDD+ Coordination
                           Unit. The REDD+ Coordination is under the Ministry of Environment, Nature Protection and
                           Sustainable Development. An experienced team exists inside this ministry that deals with the
                           national environmental issues in their daily work. In addition to the existing staff, the Technical
                           Secretariat will be strengthened by a Senior Environmental Assessment Specialist, and Senior Social
                           Development Scientist familiar with the World Bank safeguards procedures. This staff will be
                           responsible for the SESA process. Furthermore, the World Bank team will also work closely with the
                           SESA Unit team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
                           Roger Muchuba Buhereko (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   The Strategic Environmental and Social
                         BP 4.01                              Assessment (SESA) to be carried out under the
                                                              project will serve to identify, avoid, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              mitigate the potential negative environmental
                                                              and social impacts associated with the final
                                                              REDD+ Strategy. It will also serve to identify
                                                              and promote potentially positive impacts and
                                                              benefit sharing opportunities in connection with
                                                              the Strategy. The SESA will influence the final
                                                              national REDD+ Strategy, by ensuring that the
                                                              consideration of social and environmental risks
                                                              and potential impacts is a factor in its
                                                              preparation. It will also provide guidance and
                                                              key elements for the preparation of an
                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                              Framework (ESMF).
                                                              The future investments and carbon finance
                                                              transactions will require specific environmental
                                                              and social assessments (ESAs) but these will
                                                              benefit from the strategy context created by the
                                                              SESA and ESMF. The ESMF will include
                                                              standing methods and procedures, along with
                                                              appropriate institutional arrangements for
                                                              screening, reviewing, implementing, and
                                                              monitoring specific ESAs to prevent adverse
                                                              impacts, as well as cumulative impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure
                                                              that all options proposed in the National REDD
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              + Strategy take into account the conservation of
                                                              biodiversity, as well as the numerous
                                                              environmental services and products that natural
                                                              habitats provide to human society. Overall,
                                                              REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                              significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
                                                              as the country puts in place an effective strategy
                                                              to reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will
                                                              address issues related to natural habitats and
                                                              potential impacts of the National REDD+
                                                              Strategy, which will later be included in the
                                                              ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                              significant positive impacts on forests, in that
                                                              the main goal of the program is to reduce
                                                              deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                                              contributing to the well-being of forest-
                                                              dependent communities. Potential impactof the
                                                              National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests
                                                                 will be assessed through the SESA and included
                                                                 in the ESMF. The SESA and associated ESMF
                                                                 will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Operational Policy regarding forest
                                                                 management in particular, as these relate to the
                                                                 establishment of plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This policy could be triggered depending on the
                                                                 final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy.
                                                                 Agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                                                 activities, for instance, could trigger the policy,
                                                                 depending on the methods employed by
                                                                 concrete activities on the ground to manage
                                                                 pests. The SESA will address critical issues
                                                                 related to pest management, as necessary, and
                                                                 these will also be included in the key elements
                                                                 for the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy could be triggered if REDD+
                         BP 4.11                                 activities promote actions in areas containing
                                                                 sites deemed physical cultural resources (e.g.
                                                                 holy sites such as sacred groves, sacred forests,
                                                                 etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                                                 project will have negative impacts on any such
                                                                 sites, the existence of any such sites and the
                                                                 corresponding need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                 determined once the National REDD+ Strategy
                                                                 is completed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   It is likely that some of the activities to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 implemented as part of the National REDD+
                                                                 Strategy would take place in areas inhabited by
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples (pygmies). This policy
                                                                 underscores the need for the government of the
                                                                 Republic of Cameroon to identify Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples in the project area, consult with them in
                                                                 a culturally appropriate manner at each stage of
                                                                 project preparation and implementation, and
                                                                 ensure that they participate in, and benefit from,
                                                                 REDD+ activities. Adverse impacts on
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples will be avoided. Drawing on
                                                                 the SESA, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                 Framework will be prepared, and integrated into
                                                                 the ESMF.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary
                         4.12                                    Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
                                                                 land acquisition and/or involuntary restriction of
                                                                 access to legally designated parks, protected
                                                                 areas, or forest management / reforestation
                                                                                                                                 areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement to the extent feasible, or to
                                                                                                                                 minimize and mitigate its adverse social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 economic impacts in cases where resettlement
                                                                                                                                 or other involuntary restrictions cannot be
                                                                                                                                 avoided. Through the SESA process, any issues
                                                                                                                                 related to land acquisition or restriction of
                                                                                                                                 access to resources will be identified, and a
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared as part of the ESMF. To help identify
                                                                                                                                 and mitigate restriction of access to natural
                                                                                                                                 resources in protected areas, a Process
                                                                                                                                 Framework will be prepared as part of the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The REDD+ activities do not involve the
                                                                                                                                 construction of new or use of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The REDD+ activities do not involve
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The REDD+ activities under this project do not
                                 7.60                                                                                            involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The SESA should be launched four months after Grant Signature.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The Project will not finance at this stage any concrete investment activities on the ground and is
                                      thus not expected to have any direct environmental and social impact on the ground. However, it is
                                      considered that the Project might have indirect impacts in the sense that the findings from
                                      analytical work carried out under the Project may influence the design of the national REDD+
                                      Strategy. Draft Terms of Reference of the SESA have been prepared by the National Coordination.
                                      The SESA will address the key environmental and social issues associated with the analysis and
                                      preparation of REDD+ strategy options as well as REDD+ projects, activities (including
                                      investments), policies and regulations. In this manner SESA can ensure compliance with World
                                      Bank’s environmental and social safeguards.

                                      The main safeguard instrument to be applied is an ESMF, to be prepared as part of the SESA. The
                                      ESMF may evolve and be updated over time when new REDD + strategy options and projects or
                                      activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during implementation of
                                      REDD+.

                                      The SESA process requires that the selection of REDD+ strategy options should take into account
                                      the country’s institutional and capacity constraints for managing environmental and social risks
                                      and the potential environmental and social impacts associated with these strategy options. Any
                                      identified gaps to manage these risks and potential impacts in relation to relevant World Bank’s



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             safeguard policies should be identified along with the strategy options to feed into the preparation
                             of the ESMF. The ESMF should provide a framework to manage and mitigate the potential
                             environmental and social impacts related to specific projects and activities (including investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and carbon finance transactions), in the context of the future implementation of REDD+.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Emeran Serge M. Menang Ev

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                         Date: 26-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                                 Date: 27-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
