                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA5972
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                               Project ID:    P113629
                            Project Name:      Centre for Coordination of Agricultural Research and Development for Southern
                                               Africa (CCARDESA) (P113629)
                            Task Team          Melissa Brown
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                               Estimated   14-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTA2                                    Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (90%), Tertiary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (67%), Rural policies and institutions (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         26.04                 Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                        0.00
                              CAADP Pillar 4 institutions                                                                    26.04
                              Total                                                                                          26.04
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To facilitate integrated agricultural research for development within the SADC region with the aim
                           of contributing to increased productivity of small holder crop, forestry, fish and livestock enterprises
                           in the region.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                         Page 1 of 12
                         The MDTF will support two main areas of the CCARDESA MTOP: (i) CCARDESA thematic
                         programs, and (ii) CCARDESA management and governance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: CCARDESA Thematic Programs (MDTF Financing: US$ 13.4 million). CCARDESA
                         activities will be organized around a set of priority thematic areas developed out of regional priority
                         setting and consultation process. In the implementation of its thematic programs CCARDESA will
                         focus on challenges of regional nature and instituting measures to address these challenges in
                         conjunction with stakeholders (NARS, CGIAR, and regional and international partners). In line with
                         the principle of subsidiarity CCARDESA will concentrate on:

                         •       Establishing and maintaining effective collaborations and partnerships with regional and
                         continental stakeholders, in order to collectively work on R&D issues in the region using the key
                         principles of FAAP
                         •       Mobilizing and deploying resources for implementation of regional activities in relation to
                         research and technology generation, farmer empowerment and market access, access to quality
                         information, capacity development of NARS and Farmer Organizations.
                         •       Carry out advocacy work with regard to Pillar 4 of CAADP and work with Southern African
                         countries to ensuring that research and development is adequately addressed in the national CAADP
                         compacts and investment plans.
                         •       Facilitate the development and application of practical ways of sharing information and out-
                         scaling of demand-driven innovations that contribute to food security, income generation, sustainable
                         production and reduce carbon footprints of agricultural products
                         •       Develop and implement regional programs that address cross cutting issues of environment,
                         youth participation, gender equity and nutrition security

                         Most thematic activities under CCARDESA will be financed by agricultural productivity and
                         capacity building sub-project grants within the context of sub-projects. A small number of activities
                         will be executed by CCARDESA Secretariat itself. Sub-project grants will be executed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         partnerships or consortia of sub-regional institutions and will address agreed sub-regional technology
                         generation and dissemination priorities and focus on solutions to problems that are common across
                         the sub-region. Financing would also be provided for the planning, priority setting, management and
                         monitoring of sub-project grants, including support to (a) overall thematic planning and
                         programming process; (b) sub-project grants management for the award, management and
                         coordination of the competitive and commissioned grants for thematic programs; (c) monitoring and
                         evaluation of sub-project grants including evaluation of the outcomes and impacts of sub-project
                         grants; and (d) capacity development for sub-project development and implementation (see section
                         on institutional arrangements below for greater detail).

                         Theme 1: Farmer empowerment and market access. CCARDESA will support regional efforts to
                         build the capacity of farmer groups and their national or regional associations to participate more
                         effectively in the formulation of the regional R&D agenda and generate knowledge and evidence
                         around on enhancing farmer access to markets and key technical/business management services.
                         Youth will also be given special priority and will be provided with special programs to empower
                         them in their participation in agricultural R&D agenda. In particular, CCARDESA will support
                         regional activities that focus on:

                         •       Generating new evidence and disseminating good practices at the regional level on: (i)
                         farmer and producer organization development; and (ii) models for agribusiness linkages;


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         •        Supporting regional exchange visits to promote good practice (involving farmers together
                         with service providers and advisory services);
                         •        Developing a regional internship program that will provide work experience to the youths
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through which they will be motivated to take up careers in agricultural research and development;
                         •        Disseminating good practices and experiences through workshops, publications and
                         newsletters;
                         •        Supporting capacity building activities to enable regional farmer organizations to actively
                         engage with their members;
                         •        Conducting targeted training to promote good practice for agribusiness linkages and private
                         sector development; and
                         •        Supporting innovative pilot activities such as IAR4D and Intellectual Property that are likely
                         to contribute to improved agribusiness linkages. Such pilot activities may include measures to
                         improve and integrate R&D into the value chain beyond primary production and into processing or
                         agribusiness activities.

                         Theme 2: Research, technology generation and farmer demand driven advisory services. The second
                         theme represents the largest thematic program in CCARDESA and will support to regional sub-
                         project grants which will contribute to the generation of technologies that respond to the identified
                         priority needs of farmers. A key principle will be collaboration among the NARS and partnerships
                         with the relevant universities and IARCs in the region. The partnerships and collaboration will
                         promote the principle of subsidiarity in R&D and the need to strengthen and to build the capacity of
                         weaker research institutions. Financing will be provided to establish networks and partnerships
                         whose main functions will be to carry out the agreed priority research and advisory services activities
                         of common interest between countries, to share knowledge and to disseminate research outputs
                         generated for the benefit of the entire region. In particular CCARDESA will support:

                         •        Capacity-building activities in: (i) developing research and extension networks and
                         partnerships and (ii) training NARS staff in proposal writing;
                         •        Financing networks and partnerships to carry out research and extension sub-project grants;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Supporting regional piloting and scaling up/out of good practices and technologies, including
                         demonstration and dissemination activities instead of research. Activities would include seed
                         multiplication, demonstration plots, and producing written and media materials to be used in training
                         farmers or others;
                         •        Supporting annual regional conferences where scientists and networks present their research
                         findings. Funds would be made available for the publication and distribution of the conference
                         proceedings;
                         •        Supporting the dissemination of research and extension information/findings through
                         conferences, publications, existing journals in the region;
                         •        Supporting regional research on production, processing and use of traditional and under-
                         utilized crops of existing farming systems; and
                         •        Supporting exchange visits between research scientists and advisory service providers
                         sharing common interests.

                         The particular focus will be demand driven through a call for proposals and continuous updating of
                         the regional agenda of R&D priorities. Several “quick win” priority activity areas, however, were
                         identified for initial implementation as part of the MTOP development. They are agricultural
                         technologies for maize, sorghum, cassava, groundnut, soybean, forestry, livestock (cattle, sheep and
                         goats), and fisheries systems.



                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         Theme 3: Knowledge, Information and Communication. Empowering smallholders to improve their
                         production efficiency and to generate higher income through increased market engagement will
                         require better access to appropriate information and the use of local knowledge to shape existing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         new technologies to suit local situations. CCARDESA’s third thematic program will support
                         regional efforts to increase and improve knowledge and information-sharing through more effective
                         use of communication methods, media channels and processes. CCARDESA priority setting has
                         identified a range of opportunities to better utilize digital, internet-based and traditional forms of
                         information and communication technologies (ICTs) at the regional level. A detailed situation
                         analysis will be carried out in order to identify more detailed thematic activities but financing would
                         focus on:

                         •         Identifying ICT information needs and state of use of ICT in the region to dissemination of
                         information to farmers and other stakeholders
                         •         Studies or reviews to determine ICT tools and network linkages best suited for different
                         stakeholders including promoting packaging of information into appropriate knowledge sharing
                         products for farmers and other stakeholders and the use of ICTs and methods for education and
                         learning; promoting the use of; and
                         •         Regional sub-projects, networks and partnerships among ICT practitioners with linkage to
                         R&D stakeholders with a likely focus on:
                         -         Regional ICT interventions that benefit the research/extension, private sector and
                         smallholder farmers to make informed decisions and strengthen their negotiation position with
                         service providers and markets;
                         -         Possible new ICT applications to improve smallholder commercialization, and market access
                         •         Capacity building in the use of ICTs in the agricultural information systems
                         •         Develop and maintain regional ICT information systems relevant for different stakeholders
                         (institutions, frontline extension staff and farmers, etc); and build the capacity of CCARDESA to
                         serve as platform for sharing of information.
                         •         Promote knowledge sharing and provide regional training focusing on ICT tools and network
                         linkages best suited for specific national and regional needs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Theme 4: Institutional Development and Capacity Building. The fourth theme was developed in
                         recognition that the generation of appropriate technology and its dissemination requires effective
                         R&D institutions and programs. Analysis of the individual NARS institutions within the region
                         indicates the need for strengthening their capacity to undertake institutional reform and change
                         processes; to improve R&D planning and programming, particularly as part of CAADP; and capacity
                         building to enable NARS scientists and extension agents to effectively participate in regional
                         research and extension activities through the competitive grant and other schemes which will be the
                         vehicle for funding sub-projects under the CCARDESA MTOP. There is also scope for developing
                         new institutional models at the regional level – such as regional centers of excellence or leadership –
                         in order to create opportunities to achieve a critical mass of knowledge and skills, reduce duplication
                         and increase spillovers.

                         Under this theme CCARDESA financing would support :

                         •       Studies on capacity for research planning, management and funding in NARS and a survey
                         on agricultural education in the region to identify best practices, their impact and relevance on the
                         agriculture sector;
                         •       Linking weaker and stronger systems around shared problems and exchanges;
                         •       Regional workshops and dialogue to share experiences and promote best practices and FAAP

                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                         principles such as market-oriented and demand-driven R&D policies; promote partnerships
                         mainstreaming AET activities; and promote use of mass media and ICTs, etc.;
                         •       Train NARS in proposal writing and competitive grants’ procedures; and in design and use
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ICT-based communication strategies and campaigns;
                         •       Support sub-projects that contribute to institutional reform; and mainstreaming good
                         practices, including gender and HIV/AIDS;
                         •       Encourage exchange visits of NARS to share experiences; promote networks and
                         partnerships between educational systems, R&D and farmer organizations. Promote sabbatical visits;
                         •       Identify and support regional centers of excellence/leadership (primarily in terms of design,
                         technical assistance and regional facilitation);
                         •       Provide support to SADC countries in the implementation of CAADP Pillar IV, especially
                         the development of CAADP investment plans or programs in the R&D sub-sector.

                         Component 2. CCARDESA Management and Governance (MDTF Financing: US$ 11.5 million).
                         The second component will finance the operational costs of CCARDESA including management
                         through a small Secretariat and its governance mechanisms. Activities to be funded would include (a)
                         operational costs including CCARDESA staff salaries and CARDESA Headquarters costs, (b)
                         Program management costs including salaries, cost of steering committees, task force meetings,
                         coordination meetings, stakeholders meetings, consultant fees, and operational costs and activities of
                         the technical staff of CARDESA Secretariat and other variable costs such as indirect costs, travel
                         expenses and other cost related to the implementation of programs; (c) capacity building in
                         administration, financial management, procurement, and accounting, (d) establishment and
                         maintenance of an M&E system; (e) governance costs for CCARDESA including the General
                         Assembly, and the activities of the CCARDESA Board and its associated committees.

                         Management, Administration and Supervision of the MDTF (proposed MDTF Financing: US$ 1.09
                         million). The MDTF will also finance the costs incurred by the World Bank in its management,
                         administration, and supervision of the trust fund. This would include staff costs including salaries
                         and benefits, other variable costs such as travel expenses, indirect costs, consultant fees and meeting-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related expenses and other cost items as agreed between the World Bank and contributing MDTF
                         donors.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Activities will be implemented in all or subsets of the SADC region. Exact locations where
                         agricultural activities will take place will be determined only during implementation. In general, the
                         magnitude of R&D activities is expected to be small and involve primarily research plots, field
                         testing and dissemination activities, all under Component 1. Research plots would generally be less
                         than 10 ha and all on farm activities would be based on voluntary participation of farmers who wish
                         to participate in technology demonstration or testing activities. The potential negative impacts are
                         related to land or water degradation, loss of biodiversity, or use of fertilizers, herbicides and
                         pesticides that could arise from implementation of sub-projects that support generation and
                         dissemination of agricultural technologies.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Herbert Oule (AFTN3)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The CCARDESA MDTF is category B, since the
                         BP 4.01                                      potential environmental and social impacts are
                                                                      expected to be minor, noncumulative, and site-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      specific, and can be easily managed to an
                                                                      acceptable level. The potential risks or negative
                                                                      impacts are related to potentially increased land
                                                                      or water degradation, loss of biodiversity, or use
                                                                      of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides that could
                                                                      arise from implementation of sub-project grants
                                                                      that support generation and dissemination of
                                                                      agricultural technologies or CCARDESA
                                                                      Secretariat direct activities in training, capacity
                                                                      building, technical assistance, knowledge
                                                                      management and policy dialogue. The location
                                                                      and sites for the sub-project grants are not yet
                                                                      known and therefore an Environmental and Social
                                                                      Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                      prepared. The ESMF provides a clear process of
                                                                      undertaking environmental and social screening
                                                                      of sub-project grants and eventual development of
                                                                      Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                                      (ESMPs) where necessary. Once identified, sub-
                                                                      project grants will undergo a screening and when
                                                                      necessary, will prepare an ESIA/ESMP to
                                                                      describe the sub-project level environmental and
                                                                      social risks and outline any required mitigation
                                                                      measures. The sub-project grant ESIA/ESMPs
                                                                      will be consulted upon and publicly disclosed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No            The policy is not triggered. MDTF supported
                                                                      activities will not involve significant conversion
                                                                      of natural habitats, either directly or indirectly
                                                                      and the CCARDESA ESMF prohibits funding of
                                                                      R&D sub-project grants that involve natural
                                                                      habitats. MDTF supported activities will
                                                                      encourage the expansion of agricultural
                                                                      production through the adoption of improved
                                                                      technologies, but the emphasis will be on
                                                                      improving productivity in areas that are currently
                                                                      being cultivated and therefore MDTF-supported
                                                                      activities are not expected to result in widespread
                                                                      extensification.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            The policy is not triggered. Forestry sub-project
                                                                      grants may take place under the MDTF. However,
                                                                      MDTF-supported activities will not have any
                                                                      direct negative impacts on the health and quality
                                                                      of forests, or on the health and safety of people
                                                                      who depend on forests. There is no intention to


                                                              Page 6 of 12
                                                                         change the management, protection, or utilization
                                                                         of forests. CCARDESA’s current set of thematic
                                                                         program activities do not include significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         forestry activities. The ESMF incorporates
                                                                         screening for impacts on forests and provide
                                                                         provisions to prohibit activities that would have a
                                                                         negative impact on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The policy is triggered. MDTF-supported
                                                                         activities may involve the purchase of pesticides
                                                                         or agrochemicals at very low volumes as part of
                                                                         sub-project research activities. No pesticides or
                                                                         agrochemicals will be purchased and supplied to
                                                                         farmers outside of their participation in research
                                                                         trials. Adoption of improved agricultural
                                                                         technology generated through CCARDESA could
                                                                         indirectly result in increased use of pesticides and
                                                                         agrochemicals by farmers, but the scale of this
                                                                         indirect impact will be low. Guidance on use of
                                                                         pesticides and their management has been
                                                                         included in the Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                                                                         included in the ESMF. Integrated Pest
                                                                         Management (IPM) procedures will be prepared
                                                                         for sub-project grants as needed following the
                                                                         guidance provided in the PMP.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The policy is not triggered. MDTF supported
                         BP 4.11                                         activities will not expand technology generation
                                                                         and dissemination activities on research stations
                                                                         or on-farm demonstration plots that include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         physical cultural resources. Most research
                                                                         centers/stations were established in the colonial
                                                                         era and have long-established boundaries that are
                                                                         not known to include such resources. Technology
                                                                         dissemination activities will take place with
                                                                         participation and consent of farmers and will not
                                                                         target any physical cultural resources. In addition,
                                                                         the project will not involve major civil and
                                                                         earthworks that would potentially unearth un-
                                                                         known physical cultural resources. However, a
                                                                         sample chance find procedure has been
                                                                         incorporated into the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The policy is not triggered. There are no
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples who will be affected by
                                                                         MDTF-supported activities. MDTF activities will
                                                                         be restricted to research stations and to the fields
                                                                         of farmers or technology end users who willingly
                                                                         engage in technology development and
                                                                         demonstration activities.


                                                                 Page 7 of 12
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The policy is not triggered. Technology
                            4.12                                          generation and dissemination activities under sub-
                                                                          project grants will be undertaken on research
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          stations and will not involve land acquisition
                                                                          leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                          restrictions of access to livelihoods and resources.
                                                                          In general CCARDESA MDTF-supported
                                                                          activities will have a limited impact on the
                                                                          increase in research activity on the stations and
                                                                          will not significantly affect utilization of land
                                                                          resources within the station boundaries. The
                                                                          ESMF screening process will identify sub-project
                                                                          grant proposals where resettlement is a potential
                                                                          issue and will reject proposals that require land
                                                                          acquisition or adversely affect land users even if
                                                                          whose access to land and/or livelihoods is
                                                                          affected by sub-project grant activities.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No           The policy is not triggered. MDTF-supported
                                                                          activities will not invest in dam construction and
                                                                          will not fund small productive rural infrastructure.
                                                                          Although some research sub-project grants may
                                                                          provide operational funds to rehabilitate or
                                                                          purchase small-scale irrigation equipment on
                                                                          research stations this will not involve any new
                                                                          investments in water storage or water control
                                                                          structures. The scale of any such activities will be
                                                                          confined to research plots and cover areas
                                                                          generally less than 10 ha. The FAO guidelines for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          small dams has been made available to the
                                                                          implementation teams to guide the screening of
                                                                          subprojects, and if needed, implementation of any
                                                                          mitigation measures.
                            Projects on International        No           The policy is not triggered. MDTF activities will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          not invest in any large-scale irrigation works that
                                                                          would adversely affect the quality or quantity of
                                                                          water flow within shared waterways. Small-scale
                                                                          irrigation within the context of technology
                                                                          demonstration or research could be financed by
                                                                          the MDTF but this would be within the context of
                                                                          research facilities and would not exceed more
                                                                          than few (less than 10) irrigated hectares per
                                                                          station/center.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           The policy is not triggered. The area in which the
                            7.60                                          MDTF will be implemented is not known to
                                                                          include any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                  Page 8 of 12
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Implementation of the CCARDESA MTOP is expected to have a positive impact on the
                           environment by supporting the development and dissemination of agricultural technologies that
                           promote sustainable use of land and water. The MTOP will also contribute towards reducing the
                           vulnerability of poor rural households to climate shocks by promoting the adoption of climate
                           smart agricultural practices.

                          The proposed MDTF is rated category B (partial assessment) as there are no foreseen large-scale,
                          significant or irreversible environmental impacts anticipated with any of CCARDESA’s proposed
                          activities. There are, however, potential indirect risks or negative impacts including potentially
                          increased use of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides that could arise from implementation of sub-
                          project grants that support generation and dissemination of agricultural technologies. In particular,
                          these could include:

                          •        Increased vulnerability to pests due to poor pest management or introduction of new
                          cultivars
                          •        Localized agro-chemical soil and water pollution and reduction of water quality from
                          agro-chemical use, waste generation, or poor handling of pesticides and disposal of empty
                          chemical containers;
                          •        Unintended movement or transmission of plant varieties within or between countries as a
                          result of field trials or other research activities, including transgenic research
                          •        Land or water degradation due to infrastructure development
                          •        Loss of biodiversity through clearance of land not previously used for agriculture

                           The ESMF contains the list of investments that are eligible for CCARDESA financing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long term risks or impacts are anticipated. The MTOP has the potential to make a positive
                           impact by contributing towards reducing the vulnerability of poor rural households to climate
                           shocks by promoting the adoption of climate smart agricultural practices.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No alternatives were considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. Existing agricultural
                           research stations would anyway be used for research activities, and land owned by farmers and
                           volunteered for demonstration purposes would anyway be farmed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Recipient has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Pest
                           Management Plan which provides clear guidance on (i) environmental and social screening of all
                           sub-projects and eventual development of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs)
                           and Integrated Pest Management Plans (IPMPs) where necessary, including implementation
                           procedures, relevant institutional roles, institutional arrangements and collaboration. The ESMPs
                           and IPMPs will be used to document any likely impacts and provide appropriate mitigation
                           measures that will be implemented in order to avoid or minimize the potential impacts associated


                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           with the respective sub-project grants; and (ii) provides guidance on use of pesticides and their
                           management. Integrated Pest Management procedures will be prepared for sub-project grants as
                           needed following the guidance provided in the PMP. In the unlikely event of displacement of land-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           use in institutional land, ample notice time will be given to the workers who may be utilizing such
                           land to harvest their crops. CCARDESA has limited experience in using and applying World Bank
                           safeguard policies. However, some training is anticipated as part of their participation in the Bank
                           financed regional IDA program APPSA (P094183). The task team will continue to work with the
                           recipient throughout implementation of the MDTF to ensure capacity to apply safeguards policies
                           is strengthened. In the short term CCARDESA will build capacity amongst staff and contract
                           expert services. In the medium term, a permanent safeguards specialist may be hired.

                           The responsibility for environmental and social safeguards including impact monitoring and
                           reporting for the respective country implementation agencies is elaborated in the ESMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholders for the CCARDESA MTOP include research scientists, extension agents/
                           advisory service providers, seed producers/suppliers, and farmers/producers/end users. These
                           beneficiaries from public and private sector, NGOs and communities will benefit directly by
                           participating in research projects, dissemination activities, and training, or by using technology
                           and knowledge outputs made available through MDTF financing.

                           As a regional institution CCARDESA has held detailed stakeholder consultations in all 15
                           CCARDESA Member States to develop its regional R&D priorities. Development of the ESMF
                           and PMP has not undergone the same level of consultation but will be incorporated as part of the
                           consultation process related to MTOP implementation going forward.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Africa                                                           14-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Disclosure will take place at the regional level (southern Africa region) through the
                                         CCARDESA website.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Africa                                                           12-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Disclosure will take place at the regional level (southern Africa region) through the
                                         CCARDESA website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Disclosure will take place at the regional level through the CCARDESA website.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Melissa Brown
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 21-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:

                                                                      Page 11 of 12
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)   Date: 27-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 12 of 12
