                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8203
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lebanon                           Project ID:    P149724
                            Project Name:      Lebanon Municipal Services Emergency Project (P149724)
                            Task Team          Chantal Reliquet
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Apr-2014                       Estimated   25-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSU                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Solid waste management (40%), Sanitation (20%), Water supply (10%), Rural
                                              and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (20%), Other social ser vices (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (85%), Other social development
                                              (10%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstru ction (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      10.00           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Special Financing                                                                          10.00
                              Total                                                                                      10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to address urgent community priorities in select municipal
                           services, targeting areas most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees. Municipal services include
                           solid waste management, water, wastewater and sanitation, roads (and related services), recreational
                           facilities and community activities.

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                          3. Project Description
                         The Project will promote a decentralized and consultative approach to emergency response, whereby
                         local governments through their unions and in collaboration with their constituencies will identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and prioritize the most urgent needs and appropriate interventions. In light of the limited financing
                         envelope, the Project will initially target eleven unions of municipalities identified based on a list
                         established by UNHCR, UNICEF and the GoL.

                         The Project consists of three components: (i) Emergency Response; (ii) Rehabilitation of Critical
                         Infrastructure; and (iii) Project Implementation Support.

                         Component 1, Emergency Response. This component will finance the provision of high priority
                         municipal services and initiatives that promote social interaction and collaboration in all the eleven
                         participating unions of municipalities. These initiatives will provide non-exclusionary benefits
                         addressing some of the most immediate service needs in the unions most affected by the influx of
                         Syrian refugees, and will be aimed at improving safety and mobility, mitigating the increasing health
                         and environmental risks associated with the deterioration of water, waste, sanitation, and contributing
                         to reducing social tension. For the first six months, to gain credibility, component 1 will address
                         immediate service delivery requiring simple preparation, prioritizing interventions with the input of
                         elected officials at union and municipal levels, with the objective of delivering quick impacts in the
                         areas of water supply and wastewater, solid waste management, and local roads including lighting.
                         Beyond the first six months of project implementation, activities may also include interventions that
                         require longer preparation or implementation, as well as community activities, which will be selected
                         through extensive consultations with elected officials and community representatives.

                         Component 2, Rehabilitation of Critical Infrastructure. This component will finance more complex
                         works to rehabilitate and/or provide critical infrastructure in the areas of solid waste management,
                         roads improvement, water and sanitation, and community infrastructure. Anticipated types of
                         infrastructure include waste sorting and composting plants, small scale waste water treatments plant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and rehabilitation road works exceeding the union allocations under component 1. Due to their larger
                         scale and costs, and given the existing financing envelope, the initial number of unions benefiting
                         from this component may be limited and priority will be given to those demand-driven projects that
                         can generate benefits to the highest number of beneficiaries in several unions.

                         Component 3, Project Implementation Support. This component will finance the management of the
                         Project and any support needed for the implementation of the decentralized, consultative approach.
                         The component will cover the costs of the project management unit (PMU) housed in CDR, which
                         will be responsible for implementing the project. The unit will hire the required staff to carry out the
                         responsibilities of the PMU, including coordination, reporting, financial management, procurement,
                         social and environmental safeguards.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project would support relevant Lebanese central and local authorities in improving
                         basic municipal services in cities and town and to the communities most affected by the influx of
                         Syrian refugees. Interventions would focus on priority areas such as solid waste management,
                         drainage, road maintenance and rehabilitation, water, wastewater and sanitation, street lighting, etc.,
                         with the objective of improving sanitary conditions, preventing the propagation of diseases,
                         improving mobility and safety, and strengthening social cohesion in the context of the crisis. The


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         project would also support provision and/or rehabilitation of essential community and social
                         infrastructure, among them parks and similar recreational facilities, community centers, women's
                         centers, etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         According to initial assessments, refugee-impacted municipalities in Lebanon are likely to undertake/
                         request: (i) procurement of power generators for wastewater pumping stations, street lights, sewage
                         tankers and sewage networks flushing equipment, water tankers and water filters for schools, street
                         cleaning equipment, solid waste compactors, matching garbage bins, and earth moving equipment;
                         (ii) rehabilitation and construction civil works, including roads and sidewalks rehabilitation,
                         construction of additional classrooms in schools, playgrounds and public gardens, and community
                         centers; (iii) joint projects of refugee-impacted municipalities and/or unions of municipalities such as
                         small scale wastewater treatment plants and solid waste sorting, recycling, and composting facilities
                         (design capacity are estimated around 10,000 cubic meters per day and 100 tons per day,
                         respectively); and (iv) communal activities that promote social interaction and collaboration, such as
                         sports teams, events, information or outreach campaigns etc.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (MNSWA)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Component 1 and 2 involve infrastructure
                         BP 4.01                                               rehabilitation and expansion projects which
                                                                               require environmental assessment and preparation
                                                                               of project specific management plans. Since the
                                                                               sub-projects are not fully known, the Project will
                                                                               use an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                               Framework (ESMF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               No natural habitats are expected to be affected

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               No forests are affected by project activities

                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No               No pest management materials/equipment are
                                                                               expected to be procured under the project
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               No physical cultural resources are expected to be
                         BP 4.11                                               impacted by project activities. Chance finds
                                                                               procedure is included in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              Land requirements are expected to be small and
                         4.12                                                  subproject investments will be carried out
                                                                               primarily on municipally owned lands or other
                                                                               land owned by the government. However, the
                                                                               project implementation may have impacts on
                                                                               squatters or encroachers on government owned
                                                                               lands or result in involuntary taking of land,



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                                 therefore the proposed project will trigger the
                                                                                 Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement OP
                                                                                 4.12. Since the location of sub-projects cannot be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 determined prior to project appraisal, a
                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                                 prepared based on the requirements of the World
                                                                                 Bank Policy and relevant Lebanese laws and
                                                                                 regulations as a guideline for resettlement
                                                                                 preparation and implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                  N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is expected to produce substantial positive environmental impacts through improved
                              community service delivery. The project is expected to improve capacity in solid waste
                              management in the targeted unions, including in the areas of collection, recycling, composting,
                              thus reducing landfill disposal. The interventions are expected to improve water supply to schools,
                              improved quality and continuity of wastewater networks collection and treatment. The
                              interventions for road rehabilitation and street lighting are expected to improve access and road
Public Disclosure Copy




                              safety and reduce dust. The community centers, playgrounds, and gardens will improve the overall
                              environmental and social conditions in targeted communities. The negative impacts anticipated
                              for the project activities are minor and of temporary nature during the construction phase,
                              including dust, noise, waste generation, disruption to traffic and movement, damages to existing
                              utilities, and easily mitigated by the environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) that
                              will be included in the bidding documents. Environmental Health and Safety procedures (EH&S)
                              during construction and operational phases will be also prepared for sub-projects as necessary.

                             The project is classified as environmental category "B", in accordance with Operational Policy OP
                             4.01. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be used as the
                             appropriate instrument of OP 4.01 as exact sub-projects are not determined at the onset of project,
                             but will be decided during project implementation based on demand and consultations with the
                             concerned municipalities.

                             Category "A" sub-projects will not be eligible for funding. For infrastructure sub-projects, the
                             Recipient will be prepare Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) that will define
                             and quantify all risks, including site sensitivities which might entail a higher environmental
                             category. Eligibility will be contingent on alternatives (including site selection) that exclude any of
                             the environmental, social, or cultural sensitivities. For procurement of goods, in lieu of a
                             subproject ESMF, guidelines for their use and handling will be developed and applied within the


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                          provisions of the bidding documents and technical specifications.

                          No impacts on physical and cultural resources or natural habitats are anticipated under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          A chance find procedure is included in the ESMF in case chance finds are encountered during
                          project implementation.

                           Land requirements are expected to be small and subproject investments will be carried out
                           primarily on municipally owned lands or other government owned lands. However, the project
                           implementation may have impacts on squatters or encroachers on government owned lands or
                           result in the involuntary taking of land.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF has been prepared in consultation with the targeted municipalities. The ESMF
                           identifies the policy triggers for the project, the screening criteria of sub-projects, the
                           environmental and social impacts for the likely sub-projects and the measures to mitigate the
                           identified risks, an assessment of the institutional capacity of the implementing agency and
                           measures for capacity-filling gaps, and an estimate of the budget needed for the implementation of
                           the ESMF and related instruments. The ESMF has been reviewed and cleared by the Bank, and
                           disclosed both in-country (CDR web site and at premises of concerned municipalities) and on the
                           Bank infoshop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          For the anticipated infrastructure sub-projects, the Recipient will prepare ESIAs that will define
                          and quantify all risks, including site sensitivities which might entail a higher environmental
                          category. Eligibility will be contingent on alternatives (including site selection) that exclude any of
                          the environmental, social, or cultural sensitivities. For procurement of goods, in lieu of a sub-
                          project ESMF, guidelines for their use and handling will be developed and applied within the
                          provisions of the bidding

                          No impacts on physical and cultural resources or natural habitats are anticipated under the project.
                          The ESMF specifies the procedures in case chance finds are encountered during project
                          implementation. For all sub-projects which may include civil works, a social and environmental
                          safeguards screening tool will be applied, along with the specific sub-project level instruments that
                          will be necessary to cover both social and environmental aspects, including sub-projects ESIA if
                          determined necessary, as well as ESMPs. Additional measures will support the implementation,
                          monitoring, and compliance to the ESMF, including; (a) annual fiduciary audits/ post-review of a
                          subset of sub-projects with respect to design and implementation of ESMPs, and (b) project
                          supervision missions by the Bank which will include social and environmental implementation
                          expertise to support the client during the entire project cycle.

                          To mitigate the potential resettlement impacts during project implementation, a Resettlement
                          Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared based on the requirements of the World Bank Policy


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           and relevant Lebanese laws and regulations and consultations with relevant municipalities.
                           Resettlement action plans will be prepared by following the process and procedures set forth in the
                           RPF during project implementation if needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The implementing agency, the Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR) is familiar
                           with the provisions of the Bank's safeguards policies relevant to this operation, in particular those
                           related to the implantation and monitoring of the ESMF and related instruments. This experience
                           stems from the implementation of another Bank-financed project, the Cultural Heritage and Urban
                           Development Project (CHUD). Should any capacity gap becomes evident during implementation,
                           it will be addressed via provision of appropriate skills and/or further training. The safeguards
                           management of this operation will benefit from the safeguards modalities established under
                           CHUD, including the use of the existing PMU and their environmental staff, and will utilize and
                           build on the existing safeguards documentation including baseline reports, the ESMF, subproject
                           screening checklist, a safeguards monitoring and evaluation framework, municipality toolkits, and
                           social and environmental audits. The costs for the implementation of the ESMF, ESMPs, and other
                           instruments (e.g., additional sub-project ESIAs) are estimated and included in the project budget.

                           In the course of preparation of the ESMF and the RPF, CDR consulted with the targeted
                           municipalities and unions (Mayors). As part of project implementation, targeted communities and
                           affected people will be consulted on all aspects of projects from identification to execution,
                           including during the project environmental and social impacts assessments and preparation of
                           EMPs and any other instruments.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lebanon                                                          11-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lebanon                                                          11-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Chantal Reliquet
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                   Date: 10-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)                              Date: 10-Apr-2014




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
