                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR1126
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Turkey                                       Project ID:           P078359
                            Project Name:       Seismic Risk Mitigation Project (P078359)
                            Task Team           Elif Ayhan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Mar-2005                                  Estimated   26-May-2005
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSURR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Sub-national government administration (40%), Other social services (20%),
                                                Health (20%), General education sector (20%)
                            Theme:              Natural disaster management (50%), Urban planning and housing policy (25%),
                                                Participation and civic engagement (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       400.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       400.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                400.00
                              Local Communities                                                                                      0.00
                              Total                                                                                                400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The overall objective of the ISRMEP project is to assist the Government of Turkey in mitigating the


                                                                                  Page 1 of 6
                         seismic risks facing the municipality of                                               Istanbul and to
                         further strengthen the capacity for emergency
                         preparedness in order to save lives and reduce social, economic and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial impacts in the event of future earthquakes. This is expected
                         to be achieved through: (i) strengthening the institutional and
                         technical capacity for disaster management and emergency response; (ii)
                         implementing a comprehensive program aimed at reducing the existing vulnerabilities in Istanbul's
                         residential buildings; and (iii) strengthening lifelines and critical public facilities structures for
                         better earthquake-resistance.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The overall objective of the ISRMEP project is to assist the Government of Turkey in mitigating the
                         seismic risks facing the municipality of                                               Istanbul and to
                         further strengthen the capacity for emergency
                         preparedness in order to save lives and reduce social, economic and
                         financial impacts in the event of future earthquakes. This is expected
                         to be achieved through: (i) strengthening the institutional and
                         technical capacity for disaster management and emergency response; (ii)
                         implementing a comprehensive program aimed at reducing the existing vulnerabilities in Istanbul's
                         residential buildings; and (iii) strengthening lifelines and critical public facilities structures for
                         better earthquake-resistance.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project is being implemented by Istanbul project Coordination Unit (IPCU). The progress
                         towards achievement of the PDO and Project Implementation progress have been rated Satisfactory
                         since the Project launch. The project comprises the following components:

                         Component A: Enhancing Emergency Preparedness
                         The component will enhance the effectiveness and capacity of the provincial and municipal public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safety organizations in Istanbul to prepare for, respond to and recover from significant emergencies,
                         especially those arising from earthquakes by (i) Improvement of emergency communications systems
                         (ii) Establishment of an emergency management information system (iii) Upgrading of emergency
                         response capacity (iv) Public awareness and training

                         Component B: Seismic Risk Mitigation for Public Facilities
                          The component supports the reduction the risk of future earthquake damage to critical facilities in
                         order to save lives and ensure their continued functioning in the event of an earthquake by (i)
                         Retrofitting/reconstruction of priority public facilities such as hospitals, clinics, schools,
                         administrative buildings, etc. (Residential buildings are not in the scope of this project) (ii) Risk
                         assessment of cultural heritage buildings

                         Component C: Enforcement of Building Code
                         The component supports innovative measures on a pilot basis for monitoring and improvement of
                         building codes and lan use plans enforcement through data collection on land use and building
                         inventory; data digitization and computer equipment to help district municipalities make the process
                         of issuing building permits more efficient and transparent and training/awareness raising for
                         municipal authorities and local communities on seismic risks and the need to take this into account in
                         land use planning and construction; training of engineers in new retro-fitting regulations, etc.



                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                           Component D: Project Management
                           This component supports the Istanbul Special Provincial Administration to implement the project in
                           an efficient and transparent manner, and build institutional capacity to sustain the seismic risk
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mitigation program beyond the life of the project.

                           This Restructuring is suggesting the following changes to the Project: (i) twelve months extension of
                           the loan closing date until August 31, 2015, and (ii) change of the Project Implementing Agency
                           from recently abolished Istanbul Special Provincial Administration (ISPA) to the Istanbul
                           Governor’s Office. Neither of these changes have impact on environmental and/or social safeguards
                           of the project.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project would be implemented within the Istanbul region. Since the exact locations of the
                           buildings to be retrofitted/reconstructed are not known by the appraisal of the project, an
                           environmental management plan (EMP) framework document has been prepared and disclosed
                           before Appraisal. Sub-project specific EMPs have been prepared for the sub-projects.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (GSURR)
                           Esra Arikan (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                             The project supports seismic retrofitting and few reconstruction works.Those interventions have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental impacts which are minor to moderate in scale, and which are very localized in their
                           extent. Impacts can be readily defined, mitigated and monitored. Potential physical impacts are:
                           emissions of particulate matter/dust to the air, sediment to sewerage systems, noise pollution,
                           proper disposal of demolition debris or wastes present in the buildings, etc. These are assessed in
                           details in the environmental management plan framework document which has been prepared and
                           disclosed in 2005. The framework document has been revised in 2010 to reflect the revised
                           national legislation on environment, and since then the framework document is implemented by
                           the PIU successfully. For each sub-project the PIU asks the consultant of the retrofitting/
                           reconstruction company to prepare project specific EMPs (by using the EMP checklists in the
                           framework document). These sub-project EMPs are made a part of the contractor contracts and the
                           implementation is monitored by the PIU and by Bank's supervision missions.

                           The project will not entail land acquisition or resettlement, as the retrofitting or reconstruction will
                           take place on existing sites and residential buildings are not in the scope of the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             None are anticipated.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower has prepared an EMF for the proposed construction works that provides
                           environmental guidelines and outlines appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           proposed activities. The IPCU is responsible for the implementation and monitoring of the Banks
                           safeguards policies and resulting environmental management and mitigation measures. IPCU
                           fulfills its responsibility related to environmental management of the project activities. IPCU also
                           has a dedicated staff for monitoring environmental compliance of the sub-projects. IPCU's staff
                           has participated in Bank's safeguard policies trainings. training events organized by the Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Consultations with key stakeholders government officials, municipality representatives, etc.,
                           were carried out during EMF preparation. Throughout the project, an independent consultancy
                           firm is hired for holding regular consultations with the affected public (parents of the kids going to
                           the schools which will be retrofitted, etc.). In order to minimize the possible disturbance for the
                           beneficiaries (facility users), the Borrower carefully prepares the work program and retrofits
                           schools during holidays to the extent possible, or identify temporary schools and hospitals to be
                           used during retrofitting works. The Borrower also informs all relevant parties beforehand on the
                           works to be carried out. This includes awareness raising activities for seismic mitigation.
                           Innovative actions have been taken to convey the message to the school children such as theatre
                           plays and cartoons; and the information campaign for teachers, parents and health administrators.
                           This approach will be continued during retrofitting and reconstruction activities after the
                           restructuring till the end of the project closure date.


                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       01-Feb-2005
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    24-Feb-2005
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Elif Ayhan
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                          Date: 01-Dec-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                              Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
