                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6356

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Azerbaijan                       Project ID:      P122200
                            Project Name:      REGIONAL ROADS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (P122200)
                            Task Team          Elizabeth C. Wang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-May-2014                      Estimated        16-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSTR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (65%), Public administration-
                                               Transportation (35%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Trade facilitation
                                               and market access (25%), Administrative and civil s ervice reform (25%), Rural
                                               services and infrastructure (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    250.00                     Total Bank Financing:        200.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      50.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Total                                                                        250.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDOs are “to reduce road transport costs and to improve access to markets and
                           services for the communities in the project region" and "to increase sustainability of the main road
                           network by supporting reform of the existing maintenance system". The PDOs would support higher
                           level development objectives of regional development and poverty alleviation for the project region.
                         The project region is defined as the Sabirabad, Salyan, Neftchala, and Shirvan rayons of the Aran
                         region. The main road network consists of M roads (1,654 km) and the R roads (1,795 km)
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       Description
                         The Government has requested the Bank to rehabilitate two regional road sections and up to 100 km
                         of local roads connected to them:
                         •        41km long R45 Shirvan-Noxudlu-Salyan Road;
                         •        43km long R46 Salyan-Neftchala Road.

                         The roads are classified as “Republic” roads which are of a lower category from the M roads that the
                         Bank has been financing in the first three Highway Projects in Azerbaijan. These roads connect into
                         the major arterial M roads which provide this region with access to capital city Baku and other parts
                         of country.

                         In addition, the Project would support maintenance reform in Azerbaijan. This furthers the
                         institutional strengthening initiated in the Third Highway Project under which there is a consultancy
                         to help ARS improve its management and maintenance of the M road network.

                         Component 1: Regional Road Reconstruction. (i) reconstruction of R45 Shirvan-Salyan (40 km)
                         road, (ii) R46 Salyan-Neftchala (43 km) road, (iii) about 100 km of local roads in the region, and
                         (iv) technical supervision consultancy.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening for Maintenance and Management of the Main Road
                         Network. (i) establishment of 6 Regional Motorway Maintenance Units based on a corridor approach
                         and scaling up of maintenance activities by those units, and (ii) institutional support to ARS on
                         strengthening of recently established Main Roads Management Unit (MMU).

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance for Regional Roads and Related Development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Project Implementation, Monitoring and Impact Evaluation and Design of Future
                         Road Investments.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area is located along the 41km R45 Shirvan-Noxudlu-Salyan Road, 43km R46 Salyan-
                         Neftchala Road, and local roads connected to them, as well as in the area of affiliated facilities, such
                         as asphalt plant, aggregate crashing plant, borrow pits, construction camps and access roads. The
                         area, being immediately adjacent to the Kura River and the Caspian Sea, is characterized by a
                         number of wetlands of various size and ecological value, which are located along the existing routes
                         of regional roads. Also, the regional roads cross several villages/settlements, small shops and socila
                         objects such as schools and pass by the agricultural lands.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Within the road agency AzerbaijanYolServis (AYS), the Ecology and Safety Sector (ESS) is
                         responsible for the environmental management. The capacity of the ESS was found to be weak and
                         was strengthened under the Azerbaijan Highway 2 and 3 Projects through training sessions provided
                         by the EA&EMP Consultants as well as under the Public Investment Capacity Building Project
                         through a detailed training program on environmental aspects of construction management and
                           supervision (combining classroom and field work). The proposed project will be implemented by the
                           Project Implementation Unit which will be responsible for the implementation of EIA/EMP and will
                           closely coordinate its monitoring activities with ESS. The PIU is staffed with the full time
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialist, who attended the World Bank organized safeguard
                           training and also has gained considerable practical experience. Under the proposed project specific
                           measures will be developed and incorporated to improve environmental compliance. Likely
                           measures include strong road-specific EMPs, ensuring that EMPs are incorporated in detailed
                           designs and in bidding documents and contracts (with penalty clauses for non-compliance), further
                           strengthening the staffing and capacity of the AYS Environmental/Social group, and WB ensuring
                           close supervision throughout the project life.

                           The Land Acquisition Department (LAD) in the AYS is responsible for land acquisition. The
                           capacity of LAD in land acquisition under OP 4.12 is still limited, and the recent legal and
                           administrative reform with regards to land acquisition means LAD needs substantial capacity
                           development to comply with the new administrative requirements. LAD's capacity is also
                           strengthened under the ongoing Public Investment Capacity Building Project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Daniel P. Owen (ECSSO)
                           Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             This policy is triggered because civil works to
                           BP 4.01                                            be implemented under the project represent
                                                                              environmental risks which are mainly temporary
                                                                              and limited by the period of construction, and
                                                                              manageable and mitigatable. The potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              impacts may include destabilization of slopes in
                                                                              sensitive areas, loss of tree plantations in
                                                                              various sections alongside the existing road,
                                                                              disturbance of drainage systems, extraction of
                                                                              road construction materials, increased dust
                                                                              production and air and noise pollution,
                                                                              disturbance to wildlife in the project area,
                                                                              especially disturbance to wildlife ecosystems,
                                                                              including those in the wetland areas, etc.

                                                                              The client will prepare separate and specific
                                                                              Environmental Assessment Reports and
                                                                              Management Plans for each of the roads
                                                                              proposed to be rehabilitated under the Project.
                                                                              The project will deal with two types of the
                                                                              roads:
                                                                              1) two regional roads which have been
                                                                              identified;
                                                                              2) up to 100 km local roads connected to the
                                                                 regional roads, which have not been identified
                                                                 and are not likely to be identified prior to
                                                                 appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Therefore the chosen safeguard instruments will
                                                                 bear dual purpose: (i) for the regional roads, will
                                                                 provide for EA and regional road specific
                                                                 EMPs; (ii) for local roads will serve as a
                                                                 framework, providing for the EA review of the
                                                                 area from which the local roads will be selected
                                                                 later on, and identifying the procedure to be
                                                                 followed when the local roads are identified,
                                                                 which is the preparation of the road-specific
                                                                 EMP Checklists.

                                                                 The TA on formulation of development
                                                                 strategies for the towns within the catchment
                                                                 area of the project should also consider
                                                                 environmental and social aspects, and the results
                                                                 of this TA should be made publicly available.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    TBD

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered and a Resettlement
                         4.12                                    Policy Framework is required. While there is no
                                                                 envisaged land acquisition foreseen in the
                                                                 rehabilitation of R45 and R46 roads, the as yet
                                                                 unidentified 100km of local roads included in
                                                                 the Project may involve acquisition and/or
                                                                 displacement of affected persons. For the R
                                                                 road sections, the land immediately bordering
                                                                 the existing road falls within the RoW under the
                                                                 remit of the State or respective municipalities,
                                                                 and acquisition of private land will not be
                                                                 necessary. Design modifications involving
                                                                 slight deviations from standard can be
                                                                 introduced in sections of road upgrading where
                                                                 encroachment risks are an issue. This might
                                                                 include pavement reduction to avoid cutting into
                                                                 orchards and modifications in areas where the
                                                                 slope reach from road will need to be extended
                                                                                                                                 to accommodate raising the embankment. A
                                                                                                                                 number of roadside vendors and restaurants may
                                                                                                                                 be affected during construction works. For the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 local roads, the Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 is to be prepared by the Borrower and disclosed.
                                                                                                                                 The RPF will cover: (i) the description of areas
                                                                                                                                 covered by the Project; (ii) the legal basis and
                                                                                                                                 screening process for land acquisition,
                                                                                                                                 resettlement and land use in connection with
                                                                                                                                 works and construction activities to be carried
                                                                                                                                 out under the Project; (iii) the resettlement
                                                                                                                                 principles and entitlements of Project affected
                                                                                                                                 people based on different categories of impact;
                                                                                                                                 (iv) the procedures for valuation, compensation
                                                                                                                                 and other assistance provided to the affected
                                                                                                                                 people, including the grievance process; and (v)
                                                                                                                                 the responsibilities, procedures and
                                                                                                                                 requirements for the development and
                                                                                                                                 implementation of site specific Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Action Plans.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The road specific Environmental Assessments and Management Plans will launch in late January
                                      2014 and expected to be completed by end March 2014. The client will carry out public
                                      disclosure of the draft EAMPs for each road and local roads in the project area and furnish to the
                                      Bank detailed Minutes of both public consultation meeting during March 2014. The InfoShop
                                      submission will be handled once the EAMPs are reviewed and cleared by the Bank and duly
                                      disclosed in country.

                                      The Resettlement Policy Framework preparation will be launched in early 2014 and is expected to
                                      be completed by end of March, 2014 with an RPF deemed satisfactory by the Bank, prior to public
                                      disclosure. Draft Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared in accordance with policy.

                                      Social dimensions of regional roads development will be addressed through close attention in this
                                      project to roads-induced socio-economic benefits and the shared prosperity agenda. This will
                                      entail vigilance and assessment work on differential benefits of regional roads upgrading for
                                      communities, social groups of different income levels, disaggregated by gender, livelihood base,
                                      etc.


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Elizabeth C. Wang
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Lola Ibragimova (RSA)            Date: 24-Jan-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy (SM)   Date: 24-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
