                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7062
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Zambia                             Project ID:    P145335
                            Project Name:      Health Services Improvement Project (P145335)
                            Task Team          Netsanet Walelign Workie
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          06-Jan-2014                        Estimated   26-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHE                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (30%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Child
                                              health (20%), Population and reproductive health (20%), Ma laria (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      67.50           Total Bank Financing:                   52.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 52.50
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                              15.00
                              Total                                                                                       67.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is "to contribute to improved delivery and utilization of maternal,
                           newborn and child health and nutrition services in project areas."
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         The proposed project will support the Government of Zambia’s efforts to accelerate progress towards
                         maternal and child health MDGs and for it to be better prepared for emerging challenges, especially
                         non-communicable diseases. The project will support strengthening service delivery, while focusing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on results and reducing inequities. Activities will be targeted to provinces that are poorer and
                         underserved, in rural and peri-urban areas, with a combination of innovations, to scale-up coverage
                         of high impact MNCH and nutrition interventions. Specifically, the project will support supply side
                         interventions such as improving availability of skilled care, increasing availability of related health
                         and nutrition commodities, and strengthening referral linkages. This will be complemented by
                         community-based demand side approaches to enhance utilization of services. Institutional capacities
                         of Ministry of Health (MOH) and Ministry of Community Development, Mother and Child Health
                         (MCDMCH) will be supported to enhance evidence-based policy analysis, health systems
                         performance, and management of adjustments to changing roles and responsibilities in light of the
                         decentralization process. The project will also support project management and implementation
                         competencies, particularly in the targeted provinces and districts, as well as the establishment of an
                         independent verification mechanism for results-based financing. The project will be structured under
                         three components and implemented over five years.

                         Component 1: Strengthen capacity of primary and community level MNCH and nutrition services
                         (US$22 million IDA; US$12 million HRITF)

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthen training capacity of nursing schools, and the General Nursing
                         Council (US$10 million IDA). This sub-component will support the Government’s short and
                         medium term plans to address the shortage of skilled health workers at district hospitals and health
                         centers in rural and peri-urban areas in the five targeted provinces. Specific support will include: (i)
                         strengthening the capacity of nursing schools to produce health personnel skilled in midwifery;
                         including revision of pre-service training curricula to include MNCH and nutrition, provision of
                         instructional capacity in video and other ICT-based learning technologies, teaching aides and
                         equipment and provision of practical experiences; (ii) provision of additional training for graduating
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enrolled nurses and registered nurses, to be deployed in project areas, in relevant MNCH and
                         nutrition competencies (in the interim until the new curricula is on stream at nursing schools); and
                         (iii) supporting the General Nursing Council in enforcing its regulatory and coordination function
                         including by reviewing the regulatory framework and institutional capacity, standards for nursing
                         and midwifery education, training and practice including mentorship and continued professional
                         development opportunities, accreditation and re-certification. Engagement of skilled nursing
                         graduates into project target areas will be supported by implementation of a strong rural pipeline
                         approach in the target training institutions, government commitment to deploy graduates into target
                         facilities, as well as enforcement of a temporary rural bonding strategy.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthen performance, referral system and linkages across different levels of
                         care through innovative financing approaches (US$12 million IDA; US$12 million HRITF grant).
                         This sub-component, through a results based approach, aims to strengthen accountability, the extent
                         and quality of primary health care (district hospital, heath center and health post) as well as
                         community level service delivery platforms to effectively scale up a package of high impact MNCH
                         and nutrition interventions, along the continuum of care. Specific support will be provided to: (i)
                         introduce the results based approach to the community level with the aim to improve the referral and
                         linkages to health facilities, accountability of community health workers and revitalize existing
                         structures, and contribute to increased utilization of quality MNCH and nutrition services. The
                         community approach will be implemented in a phased manner in order to strengthen the design and


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         learn lessons with a potential for scaling-up. Pre-pilot activities will be implemented in one district to
                         design the approach, with a separate grant from HRITF. The first phase of implementation of the
                         community RBF pilot will be overlaid in the existing facility intervention districts; (ii) to enhance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health systems performance at the decentralized level, District Health Management Teams (DHMT),
                         will be paid based on results against a graded performance management framework including quality
                         assessments, development and application of standard protocols and guidelines, supervision and
                         mentorship, functioning of the referral system, maintenance of equipment, and implementation of
                         medical waste management guidelines; (iii) support the implementation, completion and evaluation
                         of the ongoing facility level RBF pilot. An impact evaluation is scheduled for July 2014 and will
                         inform Government’s decisions in fine tuning approaches including scaling-up.

                         Component 2: Support country systems using results-based approaches to improve availability of
                         essential commodities (US$16 million IDA).

                         Under this component, existing systems will be supported to improve the availability of essential
                         commodities at storage and distribution points, and health facilities. Initial advance resources will be
                         provided to MOH and MCDMCH to enable them undertake agreed and clearly defined set of
                         separate activities to contribute towards the achievement of agreed targets in project areas. Using a
                         results-based approach, disbursements will be made after meeting the requirements and/or targets
                         linked to the management, storage, distribution, and availability of drugs and medical supplies at
                         health centers. A rapid review of stock outs, storage and distribution capacities, and staff competency
                         at health centers will be undertaken to provide a baseline. Within this framework, certain types of
                         capital investments could be integrated into the disbursement-linked indicators. This could include
                         health storage enhancements (not new construction), training as well as supervision and mentoring of
                         provincial and district supply chain management staff, transport vehicles and related operating costs,
                         and contracting of private sector or community transports to move essential supplies from the hub to
                         health centers.
                          
                         Component 3: Strengthen project management, monitoring and evaluation, policy analysis, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         establishing a results verification mechanism (US$13 million IDA; US$3 million HRITF)

                         Sub-component 3.1: Project management and implementation, monitoring and evaluation (US$7
                         million IDA). This sub-component will strengthen project implementation capacity of MOH and
                         MCDMCH with particular attention to the Province and District levels. Support will include:
                         Addressing technical gaps and building capacity for the day-to-day administration of project
                         activities, monitoring resource use, procurement processing activities, administering withdrawal and
                         disbursement procedures, consolidating the financial management (FM) aspects of project
                         implementation, project reporting; as well as coordinating all relevant sector ministries, Government
                         departments, health professional training institutions and associations, civil society organizations and
                         the private sector. Support will also be provided to strengthen the HMIS, roll out and integration of
                         community level MNCH and nutrition information into DHIS-2.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Support evidence based policy analysis and health financing innovations (US$4
                         million IDA) This sub-component will support the Government's efforts to produce evidence-based,
                         analytical and operational knowledge in MNCH and nutrition, health financing, planning and
                         budgeting. Further, training and technical support will be provided for similar purposes to mid-level
                         health managers using a combination of approaches including: (i) peer-to-peer learning, and through
                         existing Technical Working Groups; (ii) short-term courses in health financing, planning and
                         budgeting; and (iii) in-country and international discussion forums through face-to-face interaction,

                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         video, web-based, and audio seminars.

                         Sub-component 3.3 Establish independent verification arrangements (US$2 million IDA; US$3
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million HRITF). In a results-based approach payments are disbursed based only after an independent
                         verification that the agreed-upon results have been attained. The verification process has to ensure
                         the accuracy and consistency of reporting on qualitative and quantitative performance indicators
                         before funding is released. This sub-component will support the design and establishment of the
                         verification mechanism for all results-based activities under the project, including sub-component 1.2
                         and component 2, as well as costs to be incurred by the selected independent verification firm in
                         carrying out this responsibility in the five targeted provinces during project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be based in Zambia and will support MCH and nutrition services in the project target
                         areas. The project target areas are rural and peri-urban districts in five of the country’s ten provinces:
                         Luapula, Muchinga, Northern, North-Western, and Western provinces. These provinces were
                         identified based on: (i) high poverty levels, (ii) low human opportunity index – immunization, (iii)
                         high under-five mortality, (iv) low coverage of skilled birth attendance, (v) high prevalence of
                         stunting under-five, and (vi) complementarity with both geographic and program-based initiatives
                         supported by other CPs. Complementarity will be emphasized to the greatest extent possible to
                         optimize benefits from other initiatives by Government and CPs in the health sector.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Safe disposal of medical waste is expected to be
                          BP 4.01                                              the key environmental issue in the project. A
                                                                               Health Care Waste Management Plan has been
                                                                               developed under the ZANARA and Malaria
                                                                               Booster projects with unsatisfactory
                                                                               implementation. The current Waste Management
                                                                               Plan (WMP) covers the period 2010-2014. For
                                                                               now will be enough to review the WMP to ensure
                                                                               its applicability to this new IDA operation given
                                                                               that the current Plan is valid until 2014, and there
                                                                               will be a need for an update sometime in 2014.

                                                                               A legal covenant will be included in the
                                                                               development agreement of the new project to
                                                                               ensure implementation of the plan after 2014.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No




                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                            Pest Management OP 4.09               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        No               This policy is not triggered because the civil
                            4.12                                                   works are minor rehabilitation of existing
                                                                                   facilities only, and there is no need for land
                                                                                   acquisition. No losses of assets or restriction of
                                                                                   access to resources is anticipated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37             No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              This is an environmental category B project. The project will be implemented in rural and peri-
                              urban districts in five provinces: Luapula, Muchinga, Northern and North-Western and Western.
                              These provinces have been selected based on set criteria including: (i) poverty levels, (ii) two key
                              indicators-skilled birth attendance coverage and malnutrition prevalence, (iii) complementarity
Public Disclosure Copy




                              with other cooperating partners supported initiatives, and (iv) implementation capacity of districts.
                              Project activities do not involve land acquisition for project activities. There will be no land
                              acquisition under this project, no losses of assets or restriction of access to resources is anticipated.
                              The MOH, MCDMCH and training institutions have acceptable proof of ownership of the existing
                              project activity sites and there are no disputes in this regard. Thus, there are no involuntary
                              resettlement issues associated with this project, and OP 4.12 is not to be triggered.

                              The current HCWMP covers the period of 2010-2014. Many of the critical issues remain the same
                              as the ones identified at the time of the preparation of this plan, such as inter alia: (i) inadequacies
                              of the regulatory framework; (ii) poor health-care waste management practices; (iii) poor
                              information systems on health care waste generation and disposal; (iv) inadequate knowledge and
                              practical skills of those involved in health care waste management; (v) lack of appropriate
                              equipment and technologies; (vi) lack of regional/centralized disposal facilities in non-urban areas;
                              (vii) low segregation of waste according to categories such as by type, color of bags and bins and
                              size. Medical waste management in the health institutions revealed serious weaknesses. In June
                              2013, a national assessment of the HCWM was carried out to assess legislative, institutional and
                              infrastructural challenges.
                              Due to poor implementation performance, the MoH, on its own initiative, decided that a review of
                              the current HCWMP was deemed necessary and the plan is currently being reviewed.



                                                                           Page 5 of 8
                          These are the major issues associated with the HCWMP:

                          (a)     There are still inadequacies in the legal regulatory, policy and administrative framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                          of health care waste management and treatment.

                          (b)     Inefficiency in the management of health care waste management practices with regard to
                          handling waste collection, segregation, storage transportation and final disposal.

                          (c)     Providing adequate support (financial and technical) on equipment and appropriate
                          technology for those handling waste.

                          (d)     Improving the health care waste management information system within the context of
                          Health Management Information System (HMIS) and Strengthening its Monitoring and
                          Evaluation.

                           (e)       Promoting public private partnership (PPP) for better health care waste management. As
                           an innovative activity, the project could promote a PPP with the private sector to improve national
                           health-care waste management practices and create a sustainable health-care waste management
                           system.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There are no potential impacts other than medical waste, as discussed above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Medical waste is inevitable in health care. There were therefore no alternatives considered, other
                           than various methods of managing such waste.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Government of Zambia has already prepared a National Health Care Waste Management Plan,
                           2010-2014, and a number of measures have also been taken in recent years:
                           (i) Environmental Management Act was revised in 2011 in partnership with the University of
                           Zambia, MOH Directorates and the Zambia Environmental Management Agency, to give specific
                           or general directions to local authorities regarding collection and disposal of waste and to
                           formulate and provide standards and regulations for the sound management of health care waste,
                           (ii) In June 2013, a national assessment of the HCWM was carried out to assess legislative,
                           institutional and infrastructural challenges. The assessment took into consideration issues in
                           generation, storage, transportation, final disposal, knowledge gap for members of staff and
                           expenditure for HCWM.

                           Government is at the moment in the process of updating the National Health Care Waste
                           Management Plan.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include Ministry of Health, Ministry of Community Development, Mother
                           and Child Health, NGOs, private and mission health facilities, municipal councils and health
                           facilities, health workers, patients, and people living near health facilities and dump sites.



                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-May-2009
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Oct-2010
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Zambia                                                           15-Jun-2009
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Netsanet Walelign Workie
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 10-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:

                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)   Date: 13-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 8 of 8
