                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC12524

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kyrgyz Republic                Project ID:      P154778
                            Project Name:     Third Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (P154778)
                            Task Team         Anna Cestari
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         14-Dec-2015                    Estimated        28-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWADR                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (60%), Sanitation (30%), Public administration- Water, sanitation
                                              and flood protection (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (70%), Rural policies and institutions (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     16.25                   Total Bank Financing:         13.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         3.25
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               13.00
                              Total                                                                     16.25
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Third Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (RWSSP-3) is part of a programmatic
                           framework, for which a vision was already laid out in the ‘National Program for Water Supply and
                           Sanitation’ approved by the Government in September 2014. Accordingly, RWSSP-3 will have a
                           stronger focus on assisting the Government in the development of service delivery options and
                           building up the management capacity of community and local government entities as well as the
                           overall oversight, planning and advisory capacity of State sector authorities. The DO for the
                         proposed new project will be:

                         ‘To assist the Kyrgyz Republic in i) improving water supply and sanitation services for the target
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rural communities, and ii) building up capacities at all levels of State and local sector institutions in
                         the WSS sector.
                         C. Project Description
                         1. Description

                         The proposed RWSSP-3 will build and expand on the experience of the recently completed
                         RWSSP-2, and take into account lessons learned from the experience of other donors such as ADB
                         (and, if meaningful, EBRD). Until now budget shortages and limited donors’ engagement have
                         prevented significant progress, a situation that has brought the improvement of WSS to the top of the
                         requests from the rural population to the Government. The project will focus on achieving concrete,
                         verifiable and sustainable results in the improvement of actual WSS delivery to participating rural
                         communities as well as providing critically needed support to State and local authorities to further
                         their ability to develop and improve WSS sector policies and institutions and strengthen their
                         capacity to efficiently implement the project and subsequently ensure technically and financially
                         sustainable management of system operations.

                         The proposed project will include the following four main components:

                         (a) Water supply infrastructure and equipment investments: This component will address the needs
                         for rehabilitation of existing and/or construction of new water supply systems in up to 25 villages
                         benefitting possibly up to 50,000 people, including wells, pumping stations, networks, communal
                         standpipes, connection manholes, etc. as well as the provision of service equipment including but not
                         limited to chlorination devices, maintenance tools, and spare parts.

                         (b) Sanitation development: This component will finance the retrofitting of existing sanitary facilities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in schools and other community facilities as well as programs to support the construction of
                         improved individual household latrines by community members. The component, whose precise
                         features must be further discussed with, and agreed to by, the health sector authorities, will also seek
                         to attract external financing to support the development and implementation of additional educational
                         campaigns to promote improved health and hygiene practices.

                         (c) Development of sector strategies and institutions: This component will support strategic studies
                         and technical assistance to assist the Government in making informed policy decisions for the
                         development, modernization and reform of the WSS sector. It will also support consultancies and
                         studies to help develop and implement (i) capacity building activities for State agencies; and (ii)
                         capacity building activities for CDWUUs, local authorities, and other WSS local institutions that
                         might be created.

                         (d) Project management: This component will finance the project management costs of the PMU
                         related to staffing, consultancies and equipment costs, M&E program, and financial management
                         including internal and external financial audits.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Although admittedly rural water supply and sanitation systems remain in poor conditions throughout
                           the entire country, the limited resources available for the proposed project will make it necessary to
                           focus on a geographically limited area in order to ensure efficiency in project implementation
                           management and keep its cost – and that of Bank supervision – within reasonable limits. Subject to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the consent of the Government it is therefore proposed to only select communities – on a competitive
                           basis - in one or two oblasts of Northern Kyrgyzstan.
                           It is expected that the most part of these investments will be implemented on public land and within
                           existing rights of way.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower and the Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS) have implemented
                           several World Bank projects, have extensive experience and are familiar with WB policies and
                           procedures, including Safeguards aspects. ARIS, in particular, has an extensive experience of
                           working with rural communities as well as the NGO community and its continuing involvement can
                           be expected to help minimize potential problems.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alisher Khamidov (GSURR)
                           Asli Gurkan (GSURR)
                           Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Effective measures have been put in place under the
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      RWSSP-2 to address and closely monitor the
                                                                           safeguards issues. An Environmental Management
                                                                           Framework (EMF) will be prepared and disclosed
                                                                           prior to appraisal. Each investment to be financed
                                                                           under the project will be reviewed for safeguard risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           in line with the OP4.01.
                                                                           For sub-projects where designs are completed prior
                                                                           to appraisal, site-specific Environmental
                                                                           Management Plans (EMPs) will be prepared by
                                                                           ARIS and disclosed also prior to appraisal. The
                                                                           Project is expected to have limited negative
                                                                           environmental and social impacts, as physical works
                                                                           will be undertaken to only construct/rehabilitate local
                                                                           facilities. Its only minor impact will be temporary
                                                                           nuisances resulting from construction activities,
                                                                           which will be mitigated by including into the work
                                                                           contracts specific measures to be taken by
                                                                           contractors and close supervision of compliance by
                                                                           ARIS.
                                                                           With regard to potential social impacts the conflict
                                                                           filter will be applied. Specifically, ARIS will explain
                                                                           to beneficiaries and the public the benefits from the
                                                                           project; apply clear criteria for the selection of sub-
                                                              projects; disseminate grievance redress standards and
                                                              measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    The environmental screening process will screen for
                         OP/BP 4.11                           the presence of physical cultural resources. In
                                                              addition, chance find procedures will be included in
                                                              all works contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Component (a) will finance works for the
                         BP 4.12                              rehabilitation of existing and/or the construction of
                                                              new infrastructure including wells, pumping stations,
                                                              networks, communal standpipes and connection
                                                              manholes. Similar to its predecessor project,
                                                              rehabilitation/construction works may lead to land
                                                              acquisition/demolishing of structures, and
                                                              resettlement. Temporary/permanent loss of economic
                                                              livelihoods may also be possible as a result of
                                                              chopping down fruit trees, affecting land plots that
                                                              bear annual crops for community members. In order
                                                              to mitigate such potential impacts, OP 4.12 is
                                                              triggered. Resettlement Policy Framework will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              prepared before appraisal, followed by site-specific
                                                              RAPS if needed, once the project sites are known.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No

                         Projects on International      Yes   The project will support activities that could take
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 place on trans-boundary waterways as defined in OP
                                                              7.50. (i.e. in the basins of the Chui and Syr-Darya
                                                              rivers, respectively).
                                                              Nevertheless, it is anticipated that investments
                                                              supported under RWSSP3 will not (i) adversely
                                                              change the quality or quantity of water flows to the
                                                              other riparians; and (ii) will not be adversely affected
                                                              by the otherriparians' possible water use.
                                                              Project investments are expected to support the
                                                              rehabilitation, improvement or minor additions or
                                                              minor expansions of existing schemes. The Team
                                                              will therefore seek an exemption from the OP 7.50
                                                              riparian notification requirement.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of the EMF and RPF for RWSSP3 will start in May 2015 and be completed and
                                      disclosed prior to appraisal (November/December 2015).
                                      Site specific EMPs and RAPs will be prepared with the designs and they will be disclosed in due
                                      course during project implementation.
                                      Not specific studies are required because the project investments will be similar in nature and
                                      scope to those implemented under RWSSP2.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anna Cestari
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 30-Apr-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)                                                                                            Date: 10-Jun-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
