                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC12275

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                  Project ID:       P151416
                            Project Name:      Urban Development Project (P151416)
                            Task Team          Kremena M. Ionkova,Paula Restrepo Cadavid
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          01-Dec-2015                      Estimated         15-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sub-national government administration (25%), Urban Transport (25%), Solid
                                               waste management (25%), General water, sanitation and flo od protection sector
                                               (25%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Other public sector
                                               governance (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     13.20                      Total Bank Financing:         12.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             1.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    6.60
                              IDA Grant                                                                      5.40
                              Total                                                                         13.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDO of the proposed project is to improve (i) access and quality of municipal services and (ii)
                           the energy efficiency of urban infrastructure in participating municipalities. This will be achieved
                           through mobilizing financial resources (i) to improve access and quality of municipal services such
                         as water supply, sanitation, solid waste management, and municipal roads, (ii) to improve the energy
                         efficiency of existing urban infrastructure such as municipal social infrastructure buildings (i.e.
                         schools, etc.), street lights and municipal mechanical equipment, and (iii) to strengthen the capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of participating municipalities and utilities to plan and deliver local services.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Proposed Project will consist of the following components:
                         Component A: Urban Development. The project will finance investments aimed at improving service
                         provision in participating municipalities. The project is expected to focus on 3-4 cities. The selection
                         of these cities will be made in consultation with Government and sector stakeholders. The selection
                         criteria for investments within each city will be defined during project preparation but special
                         attention will be made to assure the coverage of poor and underserved urban areas such as
                         Novostroiki. Technical supervision for the development of the above mentioned investments will
                         also be financed through this component. Designs and associated safeguards documents will be
                         prepared with support from ECADev Trust Fund mobilized for this purpose. The activities of this
                         component will be carried out under two separate sub-components:
                         •         Sub-component A1: Municipal Services - expected to finance sub-projects for the upgrading
                         and/or expansion of municipal infrastructure in the areas of water supply, sanitation, solid waste
                         management, basic social infrastructure and municipal roads, and
                         •         Sub-component A2: Energy Efficient Municipal Infrastructure - will focus on improving the
                         energy efficiency of municipal infrastructure in participating municipalities. It is expected to include
                         investments such as switching to more energy efficient street lighting options and reducing the
                         energy intensity of existing water and sanitation networks. In addition this sub-component will
                         include a pilot aimed at improving the energy efficiency of public buildings – through building
                         retrofit - such as schools and health centers. Investments made under this component will yield not
                         only energy savings but will contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions and mitigation of Climate
                         Change. This sub-component is expected to be financed partially through resources allocated to the
                         Kyrgyz Republic under the Climate Change mitigation window of the Global Environmental Facility
                         (GEF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B: Institutional Strengthening. This component will finance (i) the procurement and
                         installation of financial management and planning tools required to improve the managerial capacity
                         of municipalities and to reduce commercial losses by utilities and; (ii) targeted technical assistance to
                         municipalities and utilities towards improving their technical and managerial capacities. Institutional
                         support funds under this component could potentially be available to more municipalities than those
                         that will undertake investments under Component A.
                         Component C: Implementation Support. This component will finance incremental costs of the
                         implementing agency, and will include: (i) contracting of local experts to assist the implementation
                         unit and participating municipalities in the implementation of the project investment programs; (ii)
                         the maintenance of the Monitoring and Evaluation System M&E, created under the BOUIP project,
                         to continuously monitor and evaluate the performance and results of the project; (iii) the project
                         related operating costs of the implementing unit including consulting fees, in-country travel
                         expenditure and mandatory contributions to the Kyrgyz Social Fund; (iv) training of staff and other
                         persons associated with project implementation; and (v) annual audit of project accounts.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is nationwide in scope but the physical investments will be undertaken in 3-4 cities. All
                         these will be implemented on public land and within existing rights of way.
                           The proposed UDP is expected to contribute to Climate Change mitigation through theEnergy
                           Efficiency sub-component A2. This subcomponent is expected to yield energy savings and contribute
                           to the reduction of GHG emissions through the implementation of a pilot to improve the Energy
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Efficiency of municipal infrastructure. In addition, a parallel activity, financed through a GFDRR
                           Trust Fund, will be developed during project preparation and is expected to contribute to the better
                           integration of disaster risk reduction in urban planning. Finally, when feasible, investment sub-
                           project will be screened to identify potential climate change and disaster risks and integrate
                           appropriate resilience measures.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Community Development and Investment Agency (ARIS) would be responsible for project
                           preparation and implementation given its long experience with Bank-financed operations, capacity in
                           following Bank procurement, financial management and safeguard procedures. ARIS has built a
                           positive track record in safeguards monitoring and compliance throughout the implementation of
                           Bishkek and Osh Urban Infrastructure Project (BOUIP) and the earlier Small Towns Infrastructure
                           and Capacity Building Project. UDP is expected to become effective shortly after BOUIP reaches its
                           Closing date, which will ensure continuity of implementation capacity for UDP. ARIS will carry out
                           project implementation in close cooperation with the participating municipalities and key
                           counterparts and will be responsible for managing the implementation of the project, including the
                           preparation of detailed design and engineering studies, tender documents, as well as procurement,
                           technical and financial supervision of contract implementation, financial management and
                           accounting of project accounts, continuous monitoring and evaluation M&E, control of safeguard
                           compliance as well as routine communications with the World Bank.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Asli Gurkan (GSURR)
                           Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes            Effective measures have been put in place under the
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     BOUIP to address and closely monitor the
                                                                          safeguards issues. An Environmental Management
                                                                          Framework (EMF) will be prepared and disclosed
                                                                          prior to appraisal. Each investment to be financed
                                                                          under the project will be reviewed for safeguard risks
                                                                          in line with the OP4.01. For sub-projects where
                                                                          designs are completed prior to appraisal, site-specific
                                                                          Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be
                                                                          prepared by ARIS and disclosed also prior to
                                                                          appraisal. The Project is expected to have limited
                                                                          negative environmental and social impacts, as
                                                                          physical works will be undertaken to only construct/
                                                                          rehabilitate local facilities. Its only minor impact will
                                                                          be temporary nuisances resulting from construction
                                                                          activities, which will be mitigated by including into
                                                                          the work contracts specific measures to be taken by
                                                              contractors and close supervision of compliance by
                                                              ARIS.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              The conflict filter will be applied. Specifically, the
                                                              PIU will explain to beneficiaries and the public the
                                                              benefits from the project; apply clear criteria for the
                                                              selection of sub-projects; disseminate grievance
                                                              redress standards and measures; carry out targeted
                                                              conflict assessments in some geographic areas.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    The environmental screening process will screen for
                         OP/BP 4.11                           the presence of physical cultural resources. In
                                                              addition, chance find procedures will be included in
                                                              all works contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    Indigenous Peoples' as per OP 4.10 are not present in
                         4.10                                 the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                         BP 4.12                              prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal. For sub-
                                                              projects where designs are completed prior to
                                                              appraisal, if the implementation of investments may
                                                              result in the involuntary acquisition of land and the
                                                              related impacts as detailed by OP 4.12RAPs will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              prepared also prior to appraisal. For all other sub-
                                                              projects, RAPs will be prepared as needed during
                                                              UDP implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      TBD   Determination whether OP/BP 4.27 is triggered will
                                                              be made prior to Appraisal, following the
                                                              identification of sub-project locations and types, and
                                                              reflected in the Appraisal stage ISDS.
                         Projects on International      Yes   The project will support activities that could take
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 place on trans-boundary waterways as defined in OP
                                                              7.50. (i.e. in the basins of the Chui and Syr-Darya
                                                              rivers, respectively),
                                                              Nevertheless, it is anticipated that investments will
                                                              not (i) cause appreciable harm to the other riparian as
                                                              it will not adversely change the quality or quantity of
                                                              water flows, and (ii) it will not be appreciably
                                                              harmed by the other riparian possible water use.
                                                              Further, the project aims to improve efficiency of
                                                              water use and to substantially reduce municipalities’
                                                              high water consumption rates. Project investments
                                                                                                                        are expected to support the rehabilitation,
                                                                                                                        improvement or minor additions or minor expansions
                                                                                                                        of existing schemes and not affect the rights of other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        users. The Team will therefore seek an exemption
                                                                                                                        from the OP 7.50 riparian notification requirement.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The preparation of the EMF and RPF will start in April 2015 and be completed by June, 30 2015.
                                      The EMF and RPF will be disclosed prior to appraisal (December 2015).

                                      Some of the investments under UDP will be designed prior to appraisal, along with site specific
                                      EMPs and RAPs (if needed). The preparation of such EMPs and RAPs will commence in August
                                      and be completed by November 2015, and disclosed prior to appraisal (December 2015).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kremena M. Ionkova,Paula Restrepo Cadavid
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                          Date:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name:                                         Date:
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
