                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA7312

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Cameroon                         Project ID:    P146795
                                                      Parent         P104525
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing to Cameroon Health Sector Support Project (P146795)
   Parent Project    Cameroon Health Sector Support Investment (SWAP) (P104525)
   Name:
   Task Team         Gaston Sorgho
   Leader:
   Estimated         03-Mar-2014                      Estimated   21-May-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTHW                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Central government administration (20%), Sub-national government
                     administration (10%), Health (70%)
   Theme(s):         Health system performance (25%), Population and reproductive health (25%),
                     Child health (25%), Tuberculosis (13%), HIV/AIDS (12%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:              20.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           20.00
     Total                                                                                 20.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         Yes
   Repeater
   project?



                                            Page 1 of 8
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To increase utilization and improve the quality of health services with a particular focus on child
   and maternal health and communicable diseases.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) does not change: To increase utilization and improve the
quality of health services with a particular focus on child and maternal health and communicable
diseases.

The overall objective of this Additional Financing, which does not differ from the original project, is
to improve health outcomes among women and children in targeted areas of Cameroon. To that end,
the PDO is to increase utilization and improve the quality of health services with a particular focus
on child and maternal health and communicable diseases. The requested additional financing will be
used for two purposes: (i) to allow more time and resources for the project to meets its development
objectives and complete its impact evaluation, and (ii) to extend the project targeted areas to the
poorest departments of Cameroon in the northern regions of the country. The proposed Additional
Financing will help to better align IDA’s support to Cameroon’s health system with an enhanced
focus on results. It will also support the Government’s commitment to improve access to quality
health services for women and children in rural areas with a focus on the poor.

The proposed Additional Financing of a US$20 million IDA Credit will support prolongation of
implementation of activities under Component 1 of the project for an additional 22 months past the
original closing date of March 31st, 2014 (the project closing date was extended for 22 months
through a level-2 restructuring that was completed in March 2014). Component 1: District Service
Delivery uses Performance-based Financing in 26 health districts in four administrative regions
(North-West, South-West, East and Littoral).

The Health Results Innovation Multi Donor Trust Fund (HRITF) of US$20 million will support
scale-up of Performance Based Financing to additional target populations in the poorest regions of
Cameroon. Building on the successful PBF pilot in 26 health districts currently included in the
operation, the government is keen to expand this initiative to the Northern Regions of the country
(Adamaoua, North and Far-North). The proposed trust fund will support a range of activities under
Component 1 (District Service Delivery) in the Northern Regions. This component will provide PBF
payments to health facilities and community health workers in the targeted regions conditional on the
quantity and quality of services delivered.

The project components are as follows:

Component 1: District Service Delivery (US$35 million: US$17.5 million IDA AF and HRITF US
$17.5 million). In the 26 districts currently covered by the Project and the eight additional
departments where PBF will be scaled-up, this component will provide PBF payments: (i) to health


                                             Page 2 of 8
facilities in the targeted regions conditional on the quantity and quality of services delivered via in-
clinic activities and/or via health-outreach activities, and (ii) to community health workers for
providing selected basic health services as well as ensuring community organization to support
positive health behavior.

Community health workers who are sub-contracted by health facilities with PBF contracts, will use
PBF payments to (i) increase the quantity and the quality of (a) selected basic health services for
common illnesses such as malaria, acute respiratory infections and diarrheal illnesses, (b) outreach
activities in support to facility-based health workers, and (c) referrals of community members to
health facilities for illness episodes that cannot be treated at the community level; and to (ii) keep a
certain percentage of the payment as a bonus which will be based on their performance.

Component 2: Institutional strengthening (US$5 million: US$2.5 million IDA AF and HRITF US
$2.5 million). The component supports institutional strengthening at national, regional, and district
levels, particularly focusing on PBF contract design and management and establishing a unified
health management and geographic information system to generate up to date, reliable, financial and
programmatic data. The Component also supports project management and implementation.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is currently being implemented in the North-West, South-West, Littoral and East
Regions. The Additional Financing will extend the project location to selected districts in the North,
Far North and Adamaoua regions.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

 6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project will increase the production of
 BP 4.01                                               medical waste. The Waste Management Plan
                                                       produced for the Parent project will remain
                                                       applicable in the case of the Additional Financing.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

 Pest Management OP 4.09              No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              Indigenous peoples such as the Baka live in the
                                                       original project zone of the Eastern region and the
                                                       proposed Additional Financing of US$20 million
                                                       IDA will support prolongation of implementation
                                                       of activities under Component 1 in this region for


                                               Page 3 of 8
                                                       additional 22 months. The IPPF was developed
                                                       and disclosed during the preparation of the
                                                       original project. The IPPF will be updated,
                                                       maintained and implemented accordingly, with
                                                       specific action plans being prepared at the local
                                                       level. Early on in project implementation a social
                                                       audit will be conducted to assess in-depth
                                                       perceived and real benefits of the project among
                                                       the indigenous populations in the targeted
                                                       regions. During project implementation
                                                       Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) will be prepared
                                                       to ensure that: free, prior and informed
                                                       consultations leading to broad community support
                                                       are held; the IPs are not adversely affected by the
                                                       project; they receive culturally appropriate
                                                       benefits from the project; there is a grievance
                                                       redress mechanism; and, there is monitoring and
                                                       evaluation of the projects impacts on and benefits
                                                       for IPs.
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The Additional Financing retains the Environmental Assessment category of the original project, i.
     e., Category B. It also triggers the same safeguards policies as the parent project: OP/BP. 4.01-
     Environmental Assessment and OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples. The project activities will not
     result in large scale negative impacts. Nevertheless, as the project seeks to increase of the
     utilization and the improvement of the quality of health services with a particular focus on child
     and maternal health and communicable diseases, this will, even at a small scale, increase medical
     waste production particularly Health Care Risk Waste (HCRW). The MWMP will remain one of
     the safeguards instruments for this Additional Financing and it includes relevant mitigation
     measures to avoid or minimize potential adverse impacts. It was disclosed in country and at the
     InfoShop on April 04, 2008.

    There are Indigenous Peoples present in the East Region of Cameroon, which is targeted by the
    original project and Additional Financing. The project is expected to have a positive social impact
    by improving access to health care services for poor and vulnerable households. Component 1


                                               Page 4 of 8
  (through the payment for performance) will provide incentives for health facilities to target
  vulnerable groups in their catchment areas and provided subsidized care to these groups, leading to
  improved financial access for the poor and vulnerable. The IPPF which was prepared, consulted
  upon, and disclosed in April 2008 under the original project remains valid for this AF. During
  implementation of the parent project, the borrower implemented measures to ensure that IPs in the
  project area were informed about project activities, consulted about their preferences as project
  beneficiaries, and able to benefit from the health services provided by the project (through pre-
  paid enrollment in health care mutual or direct assumption of health care costs). During
  implementation of this AF, a social audit will be conducted to assess in-depth perceived and real
  benefits of the project among the indigenous populations in the targeted regions. Indigenous
  Peoples Plans (IPPs) will be prepared to ensure that: free, prior and informed consultations leading
  to broad community support are held; the IPs are not adversely affected by the project; they
  receive culturally appropriate benefits from the project; there is a grievance redress mechanism;
  and, there is monitoring and evaluation of the projects impacts on and benefits for IPs.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Based on the project environmental studies, no indirect and/or long-term negative impacts are
  expected.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  None.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Borrower agreed to maintain the implementation of the Medical Waste management Plan
  prepared and disclosed for the parent project. The Ministry of Public Health has a unit that is
  responsible for environmental issues which works in close collaboration with the Ministry of
  Environment, Nature Protection and Sustainable Development (MINEPDED). The Unit has well
  trained staffs and when necessary seeks support from MINEPDED or external consultants. It was
  agreed that the same arrangement will be maintained during the implementation of the Additional
  Financing period.

 Medical Waste Management Practices are expected to improve through the intervention as they
 are a key component of quality of service delivery assessments that are used to pay performance
 subsidies to health facilities. Thus health facilities will receive direct incentives to improve
 medical waste management practices.

 The assessment of the waste management implementation was satisfactory as most of the actions
 proposed were implemented including follow-up workshops. Component 1: District Service
 Delivery (through the payment for performance) will provide incentives for health facilities to
 reduce staff absenteeism and to improve staff responsiveness with patients. As a result, health
 facilities with PBF contracts will in turn provide more and better care for medical waste
 management. The improved management of Medical waste will be a PBF indicator.

 The Government also prepared and disclosed an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
 in 2008 to ensure that the Indigenous Peoples located in the East region would benefit from the
 project. Consultations with beneficiaries, the Government, the Performance Purchasing Agency
 (PPA) in the East region, and local community-based organizations hired to conduct client


                                            Page 5 of 8
  satisfaction surveys, have confirmed that Indigenous Peoples in the East region have been
  benefitting from the intervention in several ways: (i) improved availability and quality of health
  services, community outreach campaigns by local health agents and community leaders for
  improved health knowledge and health-seeking behavior, with a focus on vulnerable populations,
  (ii) including specific components of the intervention to push for increased access to and
  utilization of health services among vulnerable groups through targeted subsidies at the point of
  service delivery, and (iii) supervision and implementation support activities to monitor and assess
  if the health intervention was benefiting vulnerable groups and indigenous peoples. The PPA in
  the East region has maintained a continuous dialogue with indigenous groups in the region to
  assess their perception of the intervention and incorporate their recommendations into their PBF
  approach tailored for the East region.

  Early on in project implementation a social audit will be conducted to assess in-depth perceived
  and real benefits of the project among the indigenous populations in the targeted regions. During
  project implementation Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) will be prepared to ensure that: free, prior
  and informed consultations leading to broad community support are held; the IPs are not adversely
  affected by the project; they receive culturally appropriate benefits from the project; there is a
  grievance redress mechanism; and, there is monitoring and evaluation of the projects impacts on
  and benefits for IPs.

  The project is expected to have a positive social impact by improving access to health care
  services for poor and vulnerable households. Component 1 (through the payment for performance)
  will provide incentives for health facilities to target vulnerable groups in their catchment areas and
  provided subsidized care to these groups, leading to improved financial access for the poor and
  vulnerable. PBF subsidies will also aim to reduce staff absenteeism and to improve staff
  responsiveness with patients. As a result, health facilities with PBF contracts will in turn provide
  increased and improved care for marginalized populations and also improve medical waste
  management.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The IPPF and Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP) were originally discussed at in-country
  workshops with key stakeholders and local media covered the dissemination prior to the launch of
  the parent project. The documents were disclosed in-country on April 4, 2008 and at the Infoshop
  on April 3rd, 2008. It was agreed that the Medical Waste management Plan prepared in 2008
  despite its relevance, will need an update early on during the AF project implementation to define
  more concretely what will be implemented in the new project areas sites. During the update
  process, all relevant stakeholders will be consulted and the updated MWMP will be disclosed in-
  country and at the InfoShop. During project implementation the PIU and Performance Purchasing
  Agency managers will consult and organize knowledge sharing sessions on waste management
  best practices. During implementation support missions, the World Bank environmental and Social
  safeguards team will ensure that the main stakeholders are consulted and also that the
  environmental and social indicator are integrated in the PBF payments criteria.

  The main stakeholders are among other:
  Local communities closed of the Health Care facilities
  Communities Based Organizations in charge to sensitize local communities
  National and International NGOs involved in the Health issues
  Health Centers staffs


                                             Page 6 of 8
  Administrative and Traditional authorities

  The IPPF and MWMP were discussed at in-country workshops with key stakeholders and
  disclosed at the Infoshop and local media covered the dissemination.
  During the project re launching the IPPF and the MWMP will be shared by the main stakeholders.
  During the project implementation the PIU and the PBF managers will consult and organize
  knowledge sharing sessions on the waste management best practices.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Apr-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Apr-2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Cameroon                                                         04-Apr-2008
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Apr-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Apr-2008
"In country" Disclosure
  Cameroon                                                         04-Apr-2008
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?



                                               Page 7 of 8
    If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
    Development Unit or Sector Manager?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Gaston Sorgho
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 16-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                             Date: 16-Apr-2014




                                              Page 8 of 8
