                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA1040

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Cambodia                         Project ID:    P151984
                                                       Parent         P143774
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:      Cambodia PFMMP-Additional Financing P151984 (P151984)
   Parent Project     Cambodia PFM Modernization Project (Sodeth Ly co-TTL) (P143774)
   Name:
   Task Team          Leah April
   Leader:
   Estimated          08-Dec-2014                      Estimated   26-Jan-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GGODR                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Central government administration (100%)
   Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (40%),
                     Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Tax policy and admini stration
                     (20%), Law reform (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       7.50           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 0.00
     Cambodia Public Financial Management Partnership                                         7.50
     Total                                                                                    7.50
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?



                                             Page 1 of 5
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objective is to enhance public financial management by strengthening:
   (a) revenue mobilization and (b) budget execution processes through the implementation of the
   Financial Management Information System (FMIS). Progress against the principal objective will
   be measured by the contribution made to the PFMRP’s Key Performance Indicators and Targets
   set forth under the Stage Two of the PFMRP.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The Project Development Objective, “to enhance public financial management by strengthening: (a)
revenue mobilization and (b) budget execution processes through the implementation of Financial
Management Information System (FMIS),” remains relevant and no changes are required.

The additional financing will address gaps in financing and scale up support to the same two main
components ((1) revenue mobilization strategy and SCS operations support and (2) improving budget
execution processes through the implementation of the FMIS) until the project end date. The first
component is revised to “Mobilization of Revenue and Project Management Functions of the GSC”
to reflect the function of the “SCS operations” corresponding to the SCS’ new name and structure
within the GSC.

Component 1: Mobilization of Revenue and Project Management Functions of the GSC

This component has two sub–components under the original PFMMP and will remain the same.

Sub-component A: Mobilization of Revenue: This sub–component aims to facilitate the preparation
of a credible and sequenced Revenue Mobilization Strategy (RMS) for the RGC and monitoring the
RMS implementation. The AF will enable the extension of support beyond the monitoring activities
to include capacity building and implementation of revenue mobilization strategy through key
general departments, namely the General Department of Economic and Public Finance Policy,
General Department of State Property and Non-Tax Revenue, General Department of Customs and
Excises, General Department of Taxation, and General Department of Financial Industry. Support for
this sub-component is rather focused and will cover two main areas: capacity building to strengthen
revenue administration and implementation support for the RMS. This sub-component will
complement other donors’ support for revenue mobilization as a part of the government’s broader
PFMRP under a Sector Wide Approach (SWAp).

Sub-component B: Project Management Functions of the GSC: This sub–component supports project
management functions of the GSC corresponding to the original function of the “SCS operation.”
Financing to support consultants and costs associated fiduciary obligations involving project
management, monitoring and evaluation, and coordination and reporting under the GSC is provided
to (i) support the progress and implementation of the project; and (ii) ensure that resources for the
project are managed in a strategic, transparent, and effective manner. The current funding available


                                            Page 2 of 5
will last about 18 months from the start of the project and the AF will fill the financing gap for this
sub-component until the project end date.

Component 2: Improving the budget execution processes through the implementation of the FMIS

This component entails two sub components in the original PFMMP, namely the acquisition of the
FMIS and implementation support for the FMIS. Both of these sub-components will remain the
same.

Sub-component A: This sub-component aims to strengthen budget execution processes by providing
funds for the MEF to acquire the FMIS. The FMIS will modernize the financial operations of budget
and treasury units and will be built around a core budget and treasury system supporting all budget
execution functions starting from budget allotment, commitment to payment stages. Key general
departments involving in the budget allotment and execution processes planned to be covered by the
FMIS include General Department of the National Treasury (which includes the capital and 23
provincial treasuries), General Department of Budget, and General Department of Sub-National
Administration Finance. The AF will support (1) budget integration and comprehensiveness under
the FMIS by providing funds to refine the quality and deepen the implementation of budget strategic
plans that integrate the government budget and donors’ funds, (2) capacity building and training on
the uniform account code structure and the use of new chart of accounts based on IPSAS, the
implementation of program-based budget, and budget entity reforms.

Sub–component B: Support for the FMIS includes ongoing technical assistance for the FMIS
implementation comprising of business process mapping and reengineering, FMIS project
governance, contract management, and change management. Specific support under the AF will
include extension of funding to cover capacity building and key FMIS functional, software, and
change management experts throughout the project period.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Peter Leonard (OPSOR)

 6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The project will finance consulting services,
 BP 4.01                                              goods, training and workshops. There are no civil
                                                      works or any activities that may have negative
                                                      environmental implications. The project has been
                                                      categorized as C.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

 Pest Management OP 4.09              No              No safeguard policies are triggered.




                                              Page 3 of 5
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              No safeguard policies are triggered.
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              No safeguard policies are triggered.
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              No safeguard policies are triggered.

   Projects on International        No               No safeguard policies are triggered.
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               No safeguard policies are triggered.
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:

   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.

   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
     on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


  B. Disclosure Requirements
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?




                                             Page 4 of 5
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Leah April
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/      Name: Robert R. Taliercio (PMGR)                  Date: 03-Dec-2014
   Manager:




                                             Page 5 of 5
