                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC9582

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Iraq                             Project ID:      P150933
                            Project Name:       Electricity Distribution Reform and Investment Project (EDRIP) (P150933)
                            Task Team           Simon J. Stolp
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           12-Mar-2015                      Estimated        15-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEEDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):           State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (50%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (20%), Infrastructure services for p rivate sector development
                                                (20%), Urban services and housing for the poor (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    500.00                      Total Bank Financing:        500.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         500.00
                              Total                                                                         500.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project’s Development Objectives are to (i) increase the capacity and efficiency of the electricity
                           distribution system, (iii) reduce system losses, and (iii) improve the management of the electricity
                           distribution sector operations and capital investment programs.
                           C. Project Description
                         The Government of Iraq has requested the World Bank’s assistance in addressing the issues affecting
                         its electricity distribution sector, in order to ensure the delivery of the increased electricity supply
                         that will be made available through its ongoing significant investments in generation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transmission infrastructure.

                         In response to this request the Bank is currently providing Technical Assistance aimed at analyzing
                         Iraq’s distribution sector, and outlining a roadmap for critical reform and investment in the sector.
                         This technical assistance has highlighted the need to:

                         1) Improve the reliability of electricity distribution infrastructure and thereby improve electricity
                         service delivery;
                         2) Reduce system losses – technical and non-technical;
                         3) Improve the management of the electricity distribution sector operations and capital investment
                         programs.

                         This $500M lending operation flows directly from the above mentioned Technical Assistance, and
                         supports the implementation of priority reforms and investments aimed at addressing the most
                         significant issues affecting the performance of Iraq’s electricity distribution sector. At this early
                         stage, it would be too ambitious to consider implementation of significant reform across each of the
                         areas that have been defined in the abovementioned roadmap. The objective of the reform
                         component of this Project is therefore to meet fundamental requirements through a first stage of
                         reforms, and through these develop a comprehensive platform upon which reform can continue on an
                         evolutionary path over time. The Ministry of Electricity (MoE) has requested this Project not just to
                         access capital investment financing, but also out of a desire for the technical support of the World
                         Bank in guiding these critical reforms and investments, and also the MoE’s broader capital
                         investment programs.

                         The project will improve the level and quality of electricity supply across Iraq, by improving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         distribution infrastructure, reducing technical and non-technical loss of electricity within the
                         distribution system, and by improving the management of distribution sector operations and capital
                         investment programs. Improvements in distribution sector infrastructure will be focused on areas of
                         high poverty, low reliability of electricity supply, and high technical and non-technical losses.

                         Reforms and investments to affect improvements in the above areas will be organized under three
                         components designed to 1) secure technical assistance, and investments required to implement legal,
                         regulatory, institutional and market reforms, 2) provide for significant infrastructure investments to
                         improve the capacity of the existing distribution networks, reduce technical and non-technical losses
                         and improve the overall reliability of the distribution system, and 3) provision of project and contract
                         management and support services along with capacity development and training. These components
                         are described below:

                         Component 1 – TA and Investments for Distribution Sector Reform (USD 50M)

                         The Project will draw on the ‘Roadmap for Reform and Investment in Iraq’s Electricity Distribution
                         Sector’, which is currently being developed through World Bank Technical Assistance, to implement
                         a first stage of high priority, but basic, sector reforms. Fundamental requirements for performance
                         improvement will be addressed through this component. This component will also provide a
                         comprehensive platform upon which later reforms can build, as outlined in the Roadmap currently
                         under development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Distribution Sector Investment (USD 430M)

                         High priority investments in the following areas, to improve the capacity and efficiency of the
                         distribution system, and decrease losses:

                         (a) System rehabilitation, service delivery and technical loss reduction program:

                         Designed to target the highest poverty regions, with lowest levels of service, and the highest
                         incidence of loss, comprising of investments in the following areas :

                         The following key infrastructure will be refurbished/re-supplied to remove distribution constraints
                         and improve system efficiency:

                         a)       supply and install 60 x 33/11kV substations;
                         b) supply and install 500km of 33 kV overhead feeders;
                         c)       supply and install 500km of 33kV underground feeders

                         Infrastructure work will be undertaken in existing distribution corridors, and will not involve either
                         involuntary resettlement or affect physical cultural resources. Lessons have also been learned from
                         early infrastructure projects in Iraq’s energy sector – this project focuses on relatively simple and
                         straightforward replacement or re-build, rather than more complex rehabilitation.

                         (b) Commercial loss reduction program:

                         Designed to target larger industrial, commercial and residential consumers, and areas with capacity
                         to pay, where non-technical losses are highest, and comprising a significant metering program, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvements in billing and commercial systems.

                         Component 3 – Project and Contract Management Support (USD 20M)

                         Given the size and complexity of the project and the number of separate activities it will involve,
                         project management firms will be hired to support MoE in the implementation of components 1 and
                         2.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will involve activities and investments in all 7 distribution directorates/regions, and,
                         subject to permissible local security conditions, will cover all of the Governorates in Iraq apart from
                         the autonomous Kurdish region. Infrastructure work will for the most part be standardized, and
                         specific site locations across the 7 directorates are expected to have similar characteristics – urban
                         distribution corridors, on land already publicly owned.

                         The Project will involve rehabilitation (re-build and replacement) and extension of distribution
                         infrastructure in existing locations and distribution corridors. The Project is not expected to have
                         significant safeguard-related impacts. The potential impacts are considered to mostly related to
                         construction activities, and to be minor, site specific, and of limited duration. All impacts can be
                           readily managed with standard procedures of good engineering, construction management and traffic
                           management. Investments will include: - refurbishment and reconstruction of distribution
                           substations; replacement of underground and overhead 33kV feeders; and, installation of new digital
Public Disclosure Copy




                           meters and communication systems. Given that these works will be undertaken in existing
                           distribution corridors it is expected that no new land acquisition will be required by the Project, and
                           that there will be no cultural resources issues. Environmental and Social Management Plans
                           (ESMPs) will be prepared for all project sites, where these are identified prior to appraisal. If any
                           project sites are not identified prior to appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) will be developed prior to appraisal to cover these sites, and ESMPs completed,
                           approved and disclosed in-country and at the infoshop prior to commencement of construction.

                           Reforms undertaken through this Project will not involve significant restructuring of distribution
                           directorates, and will not affect staff, therefore no social studies/consultations are envisaged as part
                           of the reforms executed under the Project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Safeguards management continues to be weak within most Iraqi institutions, including the MoE.
                           MoE has, however expressed a desire to improve environmental and social management of its
                           infrastructure programs, and has shown significant improvement in its safeguards management of
                           ongoing and completed World Bank projects in the sector. The Project will take advantage of
                           development in safeguards capacity within other Projects, by drawing on the experience of these
                           staff, and ensuring that they are included in the Project Management Team for this Project in at least
                           advisory roles. The Project will also support appropriate safeguards management through
                           procurement of specialist project management firms to oversee and guide the management of both
                           reform and investment programs – these firms will also be charged with monitoring safeguards
                           performance. Finally the Bank safeguards team will continuously provide guidance to the
                           Government team including training as and when necessary during the preparation and operation
                           phases.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mutasem El-Fadel (MNSEE)
                           Ibrahim Ismail Mohammed Basalamah (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The policy is triggered due to the minor and site
                           BP 4.01                                                specific impacts associated with the
                                                                                  refurbishment and reconstruction of distribution
                                                                                  substations; replacement of underground and
                                                                                  overhead 33kV feeders; and, installation of new
                                                                                  digital meters and communication systems.
                                                                                  Environmental and Social Management Plans
                                                                                  (ESMPs) will be prepared for all project sites,
                                                                                  where these are identified prior to appraisal. If
                                                                                  any project sites are not identified prior to
                                                                                  appraisal, an Environmental and Social
                                                                                  Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                                                                                 developed prior to appraisal to cover these sites,
                                                                                                                                 and ESMPs completed, approved and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 in-country and at the Infoshop prior to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 commencement of civil works.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            Work will be conducted within existing
                                                                                                                                 distribution corridors and without effects on
                                                                                                                                 critical and non-critical habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            There are no impact on forests.

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            This policy is not triggered.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            This policy is not triggered as civil works will
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         be confined to existing distribution corridors,
                                                                                                                                 with no effect on physical cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered.

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered as there will be no
                                 4.12                                                                                            lake take or restriction of access to assets.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             This policy is not triggered.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Mar-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMPs for identified project sites will be commenced in September 2013, and completed,
                                      approved, and disclosed in-country and at the infoshop prior to appraisal. In the event that project
                                      sites are not identified in some cases, an ESMF will be prepared prior to appraisal to cover these
                                      sites, and ESMPs will be completed and disclosed in accordance with the ESMF guidelines prior
                                      to the commencement of construction or civil works.

                                      MoE has stated that squatters or encroachers do not exist in the distribution corridors where work
                                      will be undertaken, however depending on the situation, RPFs (in the case there is a possibility
                                      that squatters/encroachers exist on the potential corridors to be financed) or RAPs (in the case
                                      squatters/encroachers exist on the corridors defined before appraisal) will be prepared before
                                      appraisal if necessary.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Simon J. Stolp

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)       Date: 07-Jul-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager:   Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (PMGR)   Date: 07-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
