                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7654

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belarus                         Project ID:       P149697
                            Project Name:      Transit Corridor Improvement Project (P149697)
                            Task Team          Simon David Ellis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Sep-2014                     Estimated         18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                           Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), Other public sector
                                               governance (40%), Regional integration (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    300.00                     Total Bank Financing:        250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     50.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       250.00
                              Total                                                                       300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve transport connectivity and safety for domestic and
                           international road users on selected sections of the M6 road.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1: Improvement of the M6 transit corridor. This Component provides for the
                           reconstruction and upgrading of a section of the M6 road, from a two-lane to a four-lane road. The
                         road would be designed for the European standard axle load of 11.5 tons and also include two-level
                         interchanges and road safety features according to European standards. The section to be upgraded is
                         located on a 153 km section between Minsk and Grodno. The road improvement would meet two
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strategic objectives for the government by: (i) linking Minsk to Grodno as part of their national
                         strategy of connecting all six Oblast centers to high standard roads; and (ii) to developing
                         international transit corridors to promote cross border trade. The M-6 links Minsk to Grodno and also
                         to the Polish border. Following improvement the road would be tolled. The route carries a substantial
                         proportion of transit traffic with volumes ranging from 8-10,000 vehicles per day of which 35
                         percent are trucks. Based on preliminary estimates the cost for the US$153 km section is US$413
                         million (excluding VAT) and the Bank would finance approximately US$200 million (75 km) of that
                         cost. Through counterpart finance the Government would finance VAT, design, supervision and
                         audit costs. The remainder of the section will be financed through the Government budget as part of a
                         separate financing program.

                         Component 2: Modernization of sector institutions, Logistics and Impact Analysis. This Component
                         of the project will finance technical assistance studies to support the on-going reform of the roads
                         sector and the move to commercialize key economic entities such as the contractors and consultants.
                         It will also support MoTC in developing its strategic capability to plan and manage developments in
                         the transport sector. Related to this the component will also support increasing logistics performance
                         as the country, according to the Bank’s Logistics Performance Indicator, is currently slipping behind
                         its regional competitors. This could perhaps include a new Logistics Strategy and even transit
                         corridor strategies for the M-6. The component will also finance impacvt analysis if the transit
                         corridor.

                         Impact assessment will document potential income impacts on the bottom 40 percent of the proposed
                         improvements in the transit corridor. Main activities would include the design, data collection and
                         analysis of relevant data, conducting an assessment of potential poverty and social impacts in the
                         corridor with recommendations for enhancement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The section to be upgraded is located between Minsk and Grodno and is a 153 km part of the
                         highway from Minisk to Grodno and on to the Polish border. The project area is generally flat with
                         some rolling sections. The road mainly crosses farmland but there are sections of forest land and
                         several rivers and creeks to cross. Good construction practices and reasonable housekeeping during
                         the upgrade of the road will ensure that negative impacts on flora, fauna and landscapes are
                         minimized. While the alignment goes through the protected area - Landscape Sanctuary
                         "Naliboksky" at km 91.07 - km 101.0, no impacts on natural habitats or important ecosystems are
                         expected. There are a number of settlements along the way and there will be need for limited land
                         acquisition, physical resettlement and some provision of sound barriers for houses that are close to
                         the road.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The MoTC is the national authority in charge of road construction and maintenance in Belarus and
                         will have the overall responsibility for the implementation of the proposed project. MoTC has
                         formally delegated the responsibility for managing the day-to-day preparation and implementation of
                         the proposed project to the Republican Unitary Enterprise MINSKAVTODOR-Center (MA-C). MA-
                         C is one of six regional operational subsidiaries in charge of the management and maintenance of a
                         part of the country’s road network; it is located in Minsk.
                           Within MA-C, a Project Implementation Team (PIT) will be created, which will consist of
                           experienced officials from MA-C, GRODNOAVTODOR- Center (responsible for the region where
Public Disclosure Copy




                           much of the proposed road is located) and other road sector agencies who have been assigned to
                           work on the various aspects of project preparation and implementation. Through the on-going project
                           the team at MA-C has developed good expertise in environmental issues and handled environmental
                           management very effectively. The EIA that has been prepared for the new project is also of high
                           quality. The on-going project did not have any land acquisition and resettlement issues whereas the
                           proposed new project will have to address these issues. As such the Bank will provide additional
                           support to MA-C in this area to ensure that their specialists have the necessary knowledge and
                           training.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                           Klavdiya Maksymenko (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The overall project is proposed as
                           BP 4.01                                            environmental category "B" in accordance with
                                                                              the Bank's operational policies. The Ministry of
                                                                              Transport through Belgipodor have already
                                                                              prepared a first draft of the EIA report which is
                                                                              of good quality. The EIA includes: baseline
                                                                              data on the environmental characteristics of the
                                                                              project area, national and WB EA legal
                                                                              requirements and institutional responsibilities;
                                                                              potential environmental impacts; project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              alternatives analyzed; and a detailed
                                                                              Environmental Management Plan. The EIA will
                                                                              be updated based on additional information
                                                                              received during the detailed design of the road
                                                                              upgrade.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No              The alignment goes through the protected area
                                                                              "Zakaznik Naliboksky" at km 91.07 - km 101.0.
                                                                              The EIA suggests that only low-value trees at
                                                                              some sections nearby the alignment will be
                                                                              removed and no impacts on critical natural
                                                                              habitats or important ecosystems are expected.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The upgrading of the road from two lanes to
                                 4.12                                                                                            four lanes will require some land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 along the length of the road. Physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 resettlement is, however, to be expected on only
                                                                                                                                 a very limited scale and concerns a few
                                                                                                                                 households. In some cases the land plots of the
                                                                                                                                 households will need to be acquired for projects
                                                                                                                                 purposes. It is also projected that as the result of
                                                                                                                                 widening of the road some houses will appear
                                                                                                                                 so close to the road that it would not be possible
                                                                                                                                 to ensure noise protection to the acceptable
                                                                                                                                 standards by installing sound barriers, these
                                                                                                                                 houses would have to be resettled. Individual
                                                                                                                                 preliminary consultations were held by the
                                                                                                                                 client with the households that are likely to be
                                                                                                                                 affected.The specific number and exact location
                                                                                                                                 of such households will be identified only after
                                                                                                                                 finalization of the technical design. In this
                                                                                                                                 regard, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared for appraisal and the site
                                                                                                                                 specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared once the alignment for the roads has
                                                                                                                                 been finalized.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The full EIA documents including a detailed and specific EMP will be prepared, disclosed and
                                      consulted upon in country in local language and in English in the Infoshop before project appraisal
                                      which is planned in July 2014. The RFP will also be prepared and will be disclosed in the
                                      country in local language and in English in the Infoshop prior to appraisal of the project. The
                                      RAPs will be prepared once the alignment has been finalized which is likely to be in August 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Simon David Ellis

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 01-Jul-2014
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)   Date: 07-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
