                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1459
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ukraine                           Project ID:    P128344
                            Project Name:     Social Safety Nets Modernization Project (P128344)
                            Task Team         Katerina Petrina
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         30-Jan-2014                       Estimated   19-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSH3                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (80%), Central government administration (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (60%), Other social development (20%), Other social
                                              protection and risk management (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     300.00           Total Bank Financing:               300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     300.00
                              Total                                                                                     300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                              A. Project Development Objective(s)
                              The Project’s Development Objective is to improve the performance of Ukraine’s social


                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                            assistance and social services system for low-income families. The Project Development
                            Objective would be achieved by:
                            • Expanding the GMI program to increase the access of the extreme poor to a last resort poverty
Public Disclosure Copy




                            reduction program;
                            • Supporting measures for more efficient administration of social benefits and services through:
                            (a) strengthening performance management to be supported by the national MIS; (b) streamlining
                            oversight and control procedures under a central unit for social inspection, and (c) integrating data
                            on benefits and services into a single MIS for all local offices under the MoSP’s subordination
                            and
                            • Designing and implementing the entire range of social welfare servicesaimed at vulnerable
                            children in four selected oblasts, from prevention to quality of service delivery and
                            deinstitutionalization of children.
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                          3. Project Description
                         The Project would be implemented over six years, through an Investment Project Financing (IPF)
                         IBRD loan in the amount of US$300 million plus government counterpart funds of approximately
                         US$6.8 billion to finance the GMI program.
                         The Project would consist of three inter-related components. The first component would co-finance a
                         share of the GMI social assistance program and improvements of the administration of benefits and
                         services. Disbursements would be triggered by achievement of specific results. This component
                         would support the Government’s reform agenda, namely: (a) a gradual expansion of the GMI
                         program; (b) modernization of administration to ensure efficient oversight and controls in both
                         benefits and services, and improved data management tools (MIS system) to support operational
                         decisions and policy making, and (c) effective social support to families in need and vulnerable
                         families through integrating provision of benefits and services and supporting de-institutionalization
                         of children services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The second and third components would finance selected investments in critical inputs. Using
                         standard World Bank IPF procedures, the Project would facilitate: (a) the administrative
                         modernization of the network of offices that provide social benefits and services; and (b) child de-
                         institutionalization. Administrative modernization would be supported with the further development
                         of the Management Information System built under the previous project. Component 3 would finance
                         the investments intended for transformation of institutional care into family- and community-based
                         care in four selected oblasts. The relevant plans for transformation of the residential care in the two
                         oblasts will be prepared and costed under the ECAPDEV Grant.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located nationwide; the specific project sites are going to be selected during
                         implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Agnes I. Kiss (ECSOQ)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project activities are not expected to cause significant adverse environmental and
                              social impacts and may be summarized as follows: (a) Dust and noise due to the rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                              activities; (b) Dumping of construction wastes, accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants,
                              paints, and solvents, etc; and (c) Asbestos (although at this stage it is not known if asbestos has
                              been used in premises to be proposed for rehabilitation, but taking into account it large usage in
                              the former USSR it is possible to fins such material used as an insulation material and/or roofing
                              material). In the case of inappropriate handling of asbestos this material might be a real health
                              concern for the construction workers, and the general public in the vicinity of the rehabilitated
                              premises in particular when it is inhaled. All these potential environmental impacts are minor and
                              could be easily managed during the project implementation.
                              Any works that might be financed under the project will not involve any change in the existing
                              footprint of facilities and all land used are public and that there are no squatters or occupants that
                              will be involuntarily displaced, either physically or economically, therefore OP4.12 is not
                              triggered. At the same time the project will also bring positive social impacts as the proposed
                              activities would improve the performance of Ukraine’s social assistance and social services system
                              for low-income families, also providing better childcare services.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Long term impacts are positive and relate to better performance of Ukraine’s social assistance and
                              social services system for low-income families.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address potential adverse impacts the borrower has prepared an Environmental Management
                           Framework which provides: (a) potential project impacts; (b) generic mitigation measures for
                           identified environmental impacts focused, in particular, on handling of construction generated
                           wastes, and storage of hazardous materials under project supported activities, measures to reduce
                           noise and dust; (c) description of the EMP Checklist; (d) requirements for conducting monitoring
                           activities; and (e) institutional responsibilities for its implementation. The EMF will be integrated
                           into the Project's Operational Manual, as well as an Environmental Management Plan "check list"
                           will be used as part of all contracts involving equipment and works. The subprojects EMP will be
                           also integrated into the construction contracts for individual sites, both into specifications and bills
                           of quantities and the Contractors will be required to include the cost in their financial bids.

                           The overall responsibility of the implementation of subprojects which will involve civil works and
                           respectively of appropriate procedures and principles regarding the environmental assessment,
                           monitoring etc., lies with the Ukraine Social Investment Fund (USIF). USIF has been created
                           about 10 years ago to implement WB project that involved hundreds of micro community projects
                           and has both the capacity and experience to ensure environmental safeguards while implementing
                           civil works. It follows its Environmental guidelines which are in compliance with the WB EA
                           requirements. The USIF will ensure that the subproject applicants are informed sufficiently about
                           the relevant environmental and EA issues. In this regard this body will be responsible for: (a)
                           coordination of environmental and EA related issues; (b) preparing the EMP Checklist for all
                           proposed for funding subprojects; (c) supervision and monitoring of the environmental impacts
                           within the overall monitoring of the subprojects implementation; (d) communication with an EIA
                           competent authority (MoE); (e) reporting to the Bank with regard to EMPs implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Environmental Management Framework was publicly disclosed on the USIF and the MoSP
                           websites for soliciting feedback from all interested parties on its provisions.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ukraine                                                          20-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Katerina Petrina
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Penelope Jane Aske Williams (SM)            Date: 11-Feb-2014




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
