                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2312

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P132277
                            Project Name:       Jiaozuo Green Transport and Safety Improvement Project (P132277)
                            Task Team           Fei Deng
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Feb-2014                      Estimated        15-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (90%), General transportation sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.19                Total Bank Financing:      100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      100.19
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Total                                                                         200.19
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve safety, efficiency, accessibility,
                           and eco-trips by enhancing road safety leadership and multi-sectoral coordination, developing public
                           transport and non-motorized transport options within integratedcorridors/areas, as well as by piloting
                           a green tourist corridor in support of Jiaozuo’s social-economic transformation.
                           C. Project Description
                           Based on the findings of Jiaozuo City and Municipality, it has been tentatively agreed that the project
                         will include four components. Detailed descriptions are provided in Annex III of the Project Concept
                         Note. The project shall include the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A – Safe System Integrated Corridors/Area Development (US$83.4 million): The
                         objective of the component is to make transport safer in the central business district of Jiaozuo City
                         by piloting the Safe System approach and to learn from the pilot to allow for further replication of
                         the Safe System approach to take place in Jiaozuo and other Chinese cities. This component will
                         focus on area development with a holistic approach that integrates road safety, public transport, non-
                         motorized traffic, traffic management and law enforcement. Approximately 21 km of corridors
                         within the central business district of Jiaozuo City has been selected which will consist of (i) data
                         collection; (ii) implementation of integrated corridor infrastructure; (iii) the development of targeted
                         road safety educational campaigns, the enhancement of enforcement of road safety laws, and the
                         improvement to post-crash services; as well as (iv) the preparation of guidelines to allow the
                         replication of projects applying the Safe System approach in other cities throughout the country.

                         Component B – Green Tourist Corridor Development and Improvement (US$40 million): The
                         component aims to support sustainable and safe tourism by adopting the Safe System approach,
                         which embeds road safety principles (traffic calming, separated lanes for motorized and non-
                         motorized transport modes, signage, etc.) into the design and operation of the corridor. In addition,
                         this component will aim to promote green transport, specifically bicycles. Several tourist corridors
                         were proposed and alternative analysis is being conducted to select the most suitable one to be
                         included in the project.

                         Component C – Public Transport Infrastructure Improvement (US$71.2 million): This component is
                         designed to assist Jiaozuo Municipality at-large to improve the service quality of its public transport
                         system aimed at achieving the goal of “green city”. Subcomponents will include (i) implementation
                         of improved public transport interchanges; (ii) installation of an advanced public transport operation
                         management system; (iii) construction of parking facilities and maintenance depots; and (iv)
                         procurement of eco-buses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component D – Institutional Strengthening (US$5.4 million): This component will allow Jiaozuo to
                         have the capacity to sustainably maintain and improve transport service and road safety. Included in
                         this component are (i) establishment and capacity building for a permanent road safety steering
                         committee; (ii) training for the government agencies responsible for implementation of the
                         components; and (iii) studies on the implementation and sustainability of key project activities for
                         replication in other Chinese cities.

                         The total cost of the proposed project is US$200 million, of which US$100 million will be financed
                         by an IBRD loan and US$100 million from counterpart funding.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Jiaozuo Municipality, a prefecture-level city in northern Henan Province, is bordered to the north by
                         the Yun Tai Mountains. The municipality is north of the provincial capital of Zhengzhou and
                         northeast of Luoyang, the second largest city in the province. The municipality has a surface of 4,071
                         square kilometers, and administers four districts, two county-level cities, and four counties, of which
                         the total population is over 3.5 million with an urban population of nearly one million according to
                         the 2010 census. The majority of the project is in the urban area of Jiaozuo City. An 8.6 kilometer
                           loop of the green corridor, part of the 16.9 kilometers green corridor will be situated in a mountain
                           area north of the city’s urban area.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           This is the Bank’s first engagement with Jiaozuo Municipality. The clients lack experience with
                           Bank funded projects and are unfamiliar with the Bank’s safeguards policies. However, they have
                           exhibited strong commitment during project identification. A Project Leading Group (PLG) at the
                           municipality level (led by the Vice-Mayor and consisting of directors from at least 15 local
                           government agencies) will guide and supervise the project preparation and implementation. A Project
                           Management Office (PMO), established at the Jiaozuo Finance Bureau, will manage and coordinate
                           the preparation and implementation of the project. The PMO will be expanded to meet the Bank’s
                           requirement for technical works, environmental and social safeguards, financial management,
                           procurement, and project management. Multiple Project Implementation Units (PIUs) within the
                           relevant government agencies will be responsible for preparing and implementing all the project
                           subcomponents. Their duties include the management of the feasibility study and engineering
                           designs, social and environment safeguard preparation, monitoring and evaluation, as well as
                           financial management and procurement in accordance with Bank guidelines.

                           The safeguarded documents such as EIA, EMP and RAP (and a possible RPF) reports will be
                           prepared by the PMO with consultation by environmental and social consultants with adequate
                           experiences on Bank projects in China. Training to the PMO and PIUs on safeguards was provided in
                           very early stage of project preparation, and will continuously be provided to the PMO and PIUs
                           throughout the project preparation and early implementation. The timely interaction between the
                           Bank’s Task Team and the clients will help improve the clients’ capacity to the acceptable level
                           during project preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Youxuan Zhu (SEGOM)
                           Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Feng Ji (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Overall, the project will improve road safety,
                           BP 4.01                                               reduce traffic congestion and accidents, as well
                                                                                 as contribute to reduction of energy
                                                                                 consumption and vehicle emission in Jiaozuo.
                                                                                 There may be nuisances associated with small
                                                                                 scale construction (e.g. disturbance to local
                                                                                 communities and traffic, dust, noise, vibration
                                                                                 wastewater, and disposal of spoil materials).
                                                                                 During operation, positive impacts include
                                                                                 reduction of vehicle noise and emission, and
                                                                                 improvement of road safety. Adverse impacts
                                                                                 include disposal of waste from the parking and
                                                                                 maintenance depots, as well as at public
                                                                                 transport interchanges. These adverse impacts
                         are localized, limited, and can be readily
                         mitigated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is proposed as a category B project
                         considering the type, location, sensitivity, and
                         scale of the project as well as the nature and
                         magnitude of its potential environmental
                         impacts.

                         All sites that require civil works will be
                         identified prior to appraisal. Project EA
                         instruments will include an EIA and a stand-
                         alone EMP. Ancillary facilities and alternative
                         analysis (e.g. the selection of green corridor,
                         and options for the safe integrated corridor will
                         be included in the feasibility study and the EIA.
                         An Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
                         will be prepared by appraisal based on the Bank
                         Safeguards policies and local laws/regulations.
                         The EMP will include the following aspects:
                         (i)      For construction of parking and
                         maintenance depots, as well as public transport
                         interchanges, environmental codes of practice
                         (ECOPs) for construction contractors will be
                         developed to address construction related
                         impacts including solid and wastewater
                         management, source and transport of
                         construction materials, disturbance to local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         businesses, etc.
                         (ii)     For re-allocation of road space,
                         environmental codes of practice (ECOPs) for
                         construction contractors will be developed and
                         included in bidding documents. The
                         specifications shall include requirements for
                         notification of public civil works, restoring local
                         businesses during construction, on-site traffic
                         safety management, and mitigation of other
                         construction related nuisances.
                         (iii)    Mitigation measures to address waste
                         and wastewater to be generated from the
                         parking and maintenance depots, as well as the
                         public transport interchanges during operation
                         phase.
                         (iv)     Chance find procedures for physical
                         cultural resources.
                         (v)      Implementation and supervision
                         arrangements for the mitigation measures
                                                                 specified above.
                                                                 (vi)      Capacity building activities and budget
                                                                 for implementation of the EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 (vii)     Public consultation will be carried out
                                                                 during the EIA preparation.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Under Component B, the project will optimize
                                                                 allocation of road space, and protect road slopes
                                                                 to improve road safety for a tourism road
                                                                 connecting Jiaozuo and a touristic area. The EA
                                                                 will include the assessment of potential impacts
                                                                 on parks and natural habitats (if any) and
                                                                 management, and will map and characterize the
                                                                 natural habitats (if any) under this policy within
                                                                 the project’s geographical area as well as the
                                                                 project’s area of influence. This will be used as
                                                                 a basis to whether this policy is triggered or not.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                 involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                 critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                 habitats as defined under the policy. Hence, this
                                                                 policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not lead to purchase or use of
                                                                 any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project activities will be carefully selected
                         BP 4.11                                 to avoid negative impacts on the physical
                                                                 cultural resources (PCRs). The EA will assess if
                                                                 any PCRs would be likely affected by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project. Chance find procedures will be included
                                                                 in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    According to the social screening, there are no
                                                                 ethnic minority communities in the project
                                                                 affected areas. The policy of OP/BP 4.10 will
                                                                 not be triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Among three investment components, the
                         4.12                                    integrated road safety corridor component will
                                                                 not involve any land acquisition since most of
                                                                 proposed measures will be carried out within the
                                                                 current right of way and will not include
                                                                 demolition. For the green tourist corridor
                                                                 development and improvement component, due
                                                                 to upgrading the existing tourist roads, a certain
                                                                 amount of land acquisition might be required.
                                                                 For the Public Transport Infrastructure
                                                                 Improvement Component, a series of public
                                                                 transit facilities (two interchanges, one terminal,
                                                                 two depots, and one maintenance building will
                                                                                                                                 be implemented) will require acquisition 21.7 ha
                                                                                                                                 of land including 20 ha of farmland and 1.7 ha
                                                                                                                                 of urban construction land. For the affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 urban land, certain demolition and relocation
                                                                                                                                 will be involved.

                                                                                                                                 Following the requirements of the resettlement
                                                                                                                                 policy of the World Bank, a resettlement plan
                                                                                                                                 will be required for both the Green Tourist
                                                                                                                                 Corridor Development and Improvement
                                                                                                                                 Component, and Public Transport Improvement
                                                                                                                                 Component. For the integrated safety corridor
                                                                                                                                 component, a resettlement policy framework
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared in case a small amount of
                                                                                                                                 demolition and land acquisition might be
                                                                                                                                 required.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                                                                                                                 Not applicable
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Not applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not applicable
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard related studies have been launched. They are expected to be completed by end of
                                      April 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fei Deng

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 03-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
