                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8491
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Apr-2014, 16-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kosovo                             Project ID:    P143055
                            Project Name:     Kosovo Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Project (P143055)
                            Task Team         Jasneet Singh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         07-Apr-2014                        Estimated   18-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSEG                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (80%), Other Renewable Energy (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (20%), Climate change (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         34.00                Total Bank Financing:      32.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         1.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               32.50
                              Total                                                                                     34.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are to: (i) reduce energy consumption and fossil fuel use in
                           public buildings through energy efficiency and renewable energy investments; and (ii) enhance the
                           policy and regulatory environment for renewable energy and energy efficiency.

                           To achieve these PDOs, the proposed project will provide:


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         (i) investment finance for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects in eligible central
                         government-owned buildings;
                         (ii) demonstrations on the commercial viability and program models for energy efficiency and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         renewable energy investments in municipal buildings;
                         (iii) support to develop a robust policy and regulatory framework which will help attract investments
                         in and scale-up renewable energy and energy efficiency; and
                         (iv) support for project implementation.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be supported by a US$32.5 million IDA credit to provide the necessary investment
                         financing and policy support in order to meet the above PDOs and government EE/RE targets. Given
                         the nascent state of the market in Kosovo today, it is proposed that the investment component focus
                         on the public sector, which can demonstrate the benefits of EE/RE and help build the demand for
                         related products and services. Such an approach can also help institutionalize technical standards and
                         quality control for further market development, demonstrate commercial viability and enhance
                         awareness of such investments, establish institutional capacity in the government agencies and
                         suppliers to incorporate EE/RE into their facilities, and catalyze the supply chain for clean energy
                         goods and services. The common ownership would also allow the project to be done at a greater and
                         rapid scale than typical market-based schemes, thereby creating more consistent and stable demand
                         while helping to foster various business models, such as energy service companies (ESCOs). As the
                         markets and institutional capacities develop, and household energy pricing continues to move
                         towards cost recovery levels, investment programs in the residential sector (where about 72 percent
                         of the EE potential in building sector lie) will become more viable.

                         In order to realize the PDOs, three components will be carried out. These include: (i) EE and RE
                         investments in public buildings; (ii) RE and EE policy and regulatory support, as well as related RE
                         resource assessments; and (iii) project implementation support. Details are provided below.

                         Component 1: Energy efficiency and renewable energy investments in public buildings (US$24.0
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million). Under this Component, EE and RE investments (“subprojects”) would be undertaken in
                         public facilities (both central-owned and municipal government buildings). It is expected that such
                         subprojects will generate demonstrable energy cost savings and social co-benefits. Specific criteria
                         have been agreed and are provided below. Detailed energy audits will be conducted to identify
                         economically justified measures (i.e., simple payback period under 10-12 years with adjustment for
                         comfort levels) and would focus on typical building-level energy measures such as building envelope
                         (windows, doors, wall/roof insulation), heating systems (boilers, piping and insulation, radiators,
                         valves/controls, meters), fuel switching (lignite/oil to biomass or district heating when viable),
                         cooling and ventilation, pumps/fans, lighting, and improved operations and maintenance practices.

                         Two sub-components are proposed. These include:
                         (a)      EE and RE investments in central government buildings (US$18 million). There are some
                         330 centrally-owned government buildings across the country with more than 180,000 m2 of floor
                         area. Centrally owned buildings span several ministries, with the main users being Education, Health,
                         Justice and Culture. All these buildings have very high energy use and most meet or exceed norms
                         for internal comfort levels, with estimated energy savings potential of over 40 percent. Under this
                         subcomponent, it is proposed to finance eligible EE and RE investments in central government
                         buildings—about 150-200 buildings—thereby significantly reducing energy use and public
                         expenditures in heating and power services. Agreed eligibility criteria will include: (i) buildings must
                         be owned by the central government (excluding publicly-owned enterprises); (ii) buildings must be


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         structurally sound, not had a full EE renovation in the past 10 years, and be at last 5 years old; (iii)
                         there are no plans for office moves, closure or privatization; and (iv) some buildings related to
                         defense or police (e.g., prisons) would not be eligible.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Pilot EE investment program for municipalities (US$6.0 million). Municipal public buildings
                         account for 1,480 buildings, representing some 2.36 million m2. A pilot municipal EE financing
                         program is now being designed to test schemes to accelerate the transition to more commercial
                         financing, such as requirements for partial co-financing, partial payments to contractors based on
                         actual energy savings, and mechanisms to allow the funds to revolve. The program is expected to
                         involve 1-2 rounds of competitive calls in the latter years of the project for municipal proposals for
                         grants to support building and street lighting improvements with some co-financing requirement, or
                         possibly a budgetary mechanism to recover part of the funds. This component would test various
                         schemes in order to help MED formulate a broader program to address the full municipal market.

                         Component 2: Policy and regulatory support for RE/EE (US$2.80 million). The Law on Energy
                         Efficiency, 1st and 2nd NEEAPs, NREAP and other packages approved by GOK provide a strong
                         base for sustainable energy development within Kosovo. Now, greater effort is needed to develop the
                         necessary secondary legislation, regulations, rulebooks and other aspects to allow implementation to
                         take place, while conforming with EU guidelines and helping them to meet their obligations under
                         the Energy Community Treaty. In addition, reliable and complete resource data is needed to help
                         foster further investments.
                         Under this component, two subcomponents are proposed:
                         (a)      Support to ERO for RE and EE development (US$1.6 million). This subcomponent will
                         focus on four areas: (i) support for the regulatory regime as it relates to RE, including FiTs (except
                         for solar PV) and consumption-based DH tariffs to ensure an effective and economically efficient
                         policy and regulatory regime; (ii) streamlining the permitting and licensing process, including
                         mechanisms to monitor applications; (iii) support for formalizing the grid integration rules, including
                         grid balancing, curtailment, etc.; and (iv) further analyses on FiT cost recovery mechanisms and
                         impacts on consumer affordability. This package of regulatory support includes stakeholder
                         roundtables and public consultations, development of guides and information to potential project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developers and ERO staff training. ERO will also undertake one detailed RE assessment (small
                         hydro), complete with site specific measurements, in coordination with relevant ministries and
                         technical agencies, to provide more comprehensive and reliable data and analysis and disseminate it
                         to potential project developers.
                         (b)      Support to MED for EE secondary legislation (US$1.20 million). While the EE Law is in
                         place, secondary legislation remains underdeveloped. Further MESP has recently adopted or plans to
                         adopt a number of laws relating to buildings (e.g., Condominium Law, Law on Construction, EPBD)
                         which then have to be implemented. Under this subcomponent, support will be provided to MED to:
                         (i) develop a sustainable municipal EE financing scheme (e.g., revolving EE fund) to scale-up the
                         municipal EE pilot program under Component 1b; (ii) review of public procurement rules as they
                         relate to energy efficient equipment and services (e.g., ESCOs); (iii) develop an implementation plan,
                         training, etc. on the EU energy performance in buildings directive (EPBD), in cooperation with
                         MESP; (iv) develop an implementation plan for the new obligation to establish homeowner
                         associations (HOAs) and help pilot some to implement EE measures (with MESP); and (v) develop
                         an implementation plan for the Law on Construction, which covers new and renovated buildings,
                         training of inspectors, capacity building of local firms on EE designs and construction practices, etc.

                         Component 3: Project implementation support (est. US$2.20 million). The project will also support
                         the main implementing agency, KEEA, to help ensure effective project implementation of the other
                         three components. This would include: (i) creation of a project implementation unit (PIU) within

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         KEEA to carryout Components 1-2, including support for procurement, financial management,
                         technical oversight, project monitoring and reporting, and financial audits; (ii) technical studies and
                         super vision, including conducting of building energy audits, development of detailed designs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bidding documents, construction supervision, project commissioning, waste disposal studies, etc.;
                         (iii) targeted training of design firms, construction companies and other EE/RE service providers and
                         information dissemination related to early project impacts and results; and (iv) training of KEEA and
                         PIU staff to ensure effective implementation of the project and sustainability of project activities and
                         goals.

                         Grant funding in the amount of €700,000 has been mobilized from the Western Balkans Investment
                         Framework (WBIF) to help analyze the investment needs and potential of the central government
                         buildings. Specific outputs would include an update to the national public building stock inventory
                         and completion of about 200 detailed energy audits in government buildings (for investments in
                         Years 1-3), and an environment report about potential hazardous materials from the building
                         renovations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Environmental impacts are foreseen to be positive due to the energy and carbon savings to be
                         achieved under the project. Project locations will be throughout Kosovo as the central and municipal
                         buildings are throughout Kosovo.

                         The main potential environmental impacts that derive from the rehabilitation activities are the
                         following:

                         •       Dust and noise: To avoid these impacts it is needed to follow up the existing best
                         construction activities which are well known and applied in the country and set up in the EMP
                         Checklist.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Waste handling and spill response: Routine rehabilitation activities will generate solid and
                         liquid wastes including drywall, machine oil, paints, and solvents. Minor spills of fuel and other
                         materials are likely to occur during the course of civil works. Improper handling of on-site wastes
                         and response to spills could result in adverse effects on the local environment including groundwater.

                         •        Asbestos: It is very likely that asbestos has been used in premises to be proposed for
                         rehabilitation as an insulation material and/or roofing material. In the case of inappropriate handling
                         of asbestos, this material might be a real health concern for the construction workers, and the general
                         public in the vicinity of the rehabilitated premises in particular when it is inhaled.

                         An Environmental Management Framework has been prepared for all components under the Project
                         as the specific identification of building to be renovated under the Project is not yet known. The draft
                         EMF was published on the website of Ministry of Economic Development on March 31 and the
                         Public hearing was organized on April 8, attendants sheets and minutes of meeting were integrated in
                         the final EMF disclosed on the Infoshop also on April 8, 2014.

                         The Environmental Management Framework contains the following aspects:
                         (a)     short description of the project and its activities
                         (b)     assessment of Kosovo and the WB EIA related legal requirements and administra-tive
                         conditions;


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         (c)       a list and general assessment of potential impacts that might be associated with the different
                         types of subprojects;
                         (d)       Environmental Guidelines for proposed subprojects that provide environmental screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                         criteria, a scheme for an assessment of potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be
                         undertaken for identified subprojects in all stages - from identification and selection, through the
                         design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results, as well as the
                         requirements to an EMP Checklist; and,
                         (e)       EMF implementing responsibilities.

                         The Environmental Guidelines part of the EMF consist of the following:
                         (a) practical mitigation measures for the EE activities of the selected subprojects described above. In
                         this regard the guidelines cover, in particular, the handling of construction generated wastes, and
                         storage of hazardous materials under project supported activities, measures to reduce noise and dust;
                         measures for preventing health and safety issues;
                         (b) screening procedure for identifying Category C subprojects which do not require an EA, as well
                         as category B subprojects for which it is necessary to apply the EMP Checklist;
                         (c) description of the EMP Checklist and its use; and
                         (d) requirements for conducting monitoring activities on implementing EMPs

                         Furthermore the EMF comprises of:
                         o       the discussion of appropriate disposal solution of hazardous waste in Kosovo incl. asbestos
                         cement, dust containing lead and others
                         o       information on good international practice and requirements regarding removal and handling
                         of asbestos and lead-based paint
                         o       information on good international practice and requirements regarding removal, handing
                         packaging, collection and treatment options for mercury containing CFLs;
                         o       typical cost (incremental) of proper handling, storage and treatment of hazardous materials;
                         o       information on international practices regarding provision of information, training and
                         licensing requirements for the safe removal and handling of the hazardous materials mentioned
Public Disclosure Copy




                         above.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Katelijn Van den Berg (ECSEN)
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                         Trandelina Baraku (ECSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             In accordance with the Bank’s safeguard policies
                         BP 4.01                                               and procedures, including OP/BP/GP 4.01
                                                                               Environmental Assessment, the project is placed
                                                                               into the Bank’s Category B which is applied to all
                                                                               proposed projects that have potential minor
                                                                               environmental impacts. As at this stage, the
                                                                               subprojects to be financed are not yet identified,
                                                                               the Bank requires that client will screen all
                                                                               proposed subprojects and ensures that subproject
                                                                               beneficiaries carry out appropriate EA for each



                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                                                                                subproject. For this purpose the Ministry prepared
                                                                                an Environment Management Framework (EMF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                An Environmental Management Framework for
                                                                                all components of the Project has been prepared,
                                                                                public consultations were held on April 8, 2014
                                                                                and EMF was made final and disclosed on
                                                                                Infoshop.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              It has also been confirmed that there will be no
                                                                                impacts on Forests and Natural Habitats as all
                                                                                public and social building are located within the
                                                                                existing settlements.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              It has also been confirmed that there will be no
                                                                                impacts on Forests and Natural Habitats as all
                                                                                public and social building are located within the
                                                                                existing settlements.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No              As the project deals with renovation of public
                                                                                buildings, Pest Management policy does not
                                                                                apply.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             The Ministry also confirmed the project will
                            BP 4.11                                             avoid support civil works in public and social
                                                                                buildings which might be considered as Physical
                                                                                Cultural Resources, but as a safety precaution
                                                                                WB OP 4.11 is triggered with the detailed
                                                                                procedures to follow included in the EMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              As the project deals with renovation of public
                                                                                buildings, Indigenous Peoples' policy does not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                apply.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              As the project deals with renovation of public
                            4.12                                                buildings, Involuntary Resettlement Policy does
                                                                                not apply.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              As the project deals with renovation of public
                                                                                buildings, Safety of Dams does not apply.
                            Projects on International           No              As the project deals with renovation of public
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                buildings, International Waterways policy does
                                                                                not apply.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 As the project deals with renovation of public
                            7.60                                                buildings, Disputed Areas policy does not apply.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Most of the construction activities will generate insignificant environmental impacts if any, which
                              are site-specific, temporary in nature and very easily manageable during the project


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                          implementation. The main potential impacts that derive from the rehabilitation activities are the
                          following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          •       Dust and noise: To avoid these impacts it is needed to follow up the existing best
                          construction activities which are well known and applied in the country and set up in the EMP
                          Checklist.

                          •       Waste handling and spill response: Routine rehabilitation activities will generate solid and
                          liquid wastes including drywall, machine oil, paints, and solvents. Minor spills of fuel and other
                          materials are likely to occur during the course of civil works. Improper handling of on-site wastes
                          and response to spills could result in adverse effects on the local environment including
                          groundwater.

                          •        Asbestos: It is very likely that asbestos has been used in premises to be proposed for
                          rehabilitation as an insulation material and/or roofing material. In the case of inappropriate
                          handling of asbestos, this material might be a real health concern for the construction workers, and
                          the general public in the vicinity of the rehabilitated premises in particular when it is inhaled

                          In the case of Category B subprojects with more significant impacts related to hazardous wastes
                          and materials, it is, PMU will complete the EMP Checklist of the EMF, identifying and defining
                          the mitigation measures to be implemented during the EE activities. The EMP Checklist will
                          become a part of the construction works contracts and the re-quired mitigation measures would
                          constitute an integral part of the subproject implementation. All contractors will be required to use
                          environmentally acceptable technical standards and procedures during carrying out of works.
                          Additionally, contract clauses shall include requirements towards compliance with all national
                          energy efficiency, construction, health protection, safeguard laws and rules as well as on
                          environmental protection.

                          Also detailed guidance for dismantling, handling, transport and disposal/treatment of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          hazardous materials in line with Kosovo legislation and international good practices have been
                          included in the EMF.

                           While the project will aim to avoid renovations in buildings on the list of cultural heritage, the
                           process to follow in case of renovations works in these type of buildings have been included in the
                           EMF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long term impacts are foreseen with the proper handling of the hazardous materials under the
                           Project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Details have been provided about good international practices in those cases where practices in
                           Kosovo for handing and disposal/treatment of hazardous waste is not fully in line with good
                           international procedures.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Implementing Agency, Ministry of Economic Development (MED) has selected an


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           environmental specialist as part of the Project Management Unit to specifically deal with the
                           environmental issues. Several meetings have been organized between MED and the Ministry of
                           Environment and Spatial Planning to clarify requirements for hazardous material demolition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           handling, transport and disposal/treatment and training will be organized on good practices and the
                           implementation of EMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Ministry of Economic Development, Ministry of Environment and Spatial Planning, landfill
                           management company, contractors responsible for demolition and packaging of hazardous
                           materials from the buildings under renovation, construction supervisor, persons using the public
                           buildings. Public Consultations are planned in the week of April 1, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kosovo                                                           31-Mar-2014
                           Comments: EMF was published in English and Albanian on the website of the Ministry of
                                         Economic Development
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jasneet Singh
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                Date:
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: John R. Butler (SM)                            Date: 16-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
