                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5079
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Senegal                           Project ID:    P129472
                            Project Name:     Senegal Health & Social Financing (P129472)
                            Task Team         Christophe Lemiere
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         26-Sep-2013                       Estimated   19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTHW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (70%), Other social services (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (60%), Nutrition and food security (20%), Social
                                              safety nets (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      40.00           Total Bank Financing:                20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              20.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                           20.00
                              Total                                                                                    40.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall project objective is to improve health and nutritional outcomes among women and
                           children in regions among the poorest. To that end, the proposed Project Development Objective



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         (PDO) is to increase utilization and quality of maternal and child health care and nutritional services,
                         especially among the poorest households in selected regions of Senegal.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project design envisages the three following components, one for strengthening the supply-side
                         of the health system, another one for strengthening the demand-side, and a last one to strengthen the
                         capacities of health authorities.

                         Component 1. Strengthening the supply-side of health system through Result Based Financing for
                         Health and Nutrition Services ($22.5 million, including HRITF $18 million +IDA $2 million +
                         USAID $2.5 million)

                         This component would be financed by IDA ($2 million), the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for Health
                         Results Innovation ($18 million) and USAID ($2.5 million). It would support the improvement of
                         health and nutrition service delivery in Senegal, especially in six selected regions, with a Result
                         Based Financing (RBF) mechanism.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Financing of Result Based Financing credits (HRITF $12.8 million + USAID
                         $2.5 million)

                         This sub-component would directly contribute to the extension of the existing supply-side pre-pilot
                         Result-Based Financing (RBF) scheme in six selected regions in a phased manner. This sub-
                         component would fund the payment of RBF credits to health facilities and to RBF regulatory entities
                         health district teams, Regional Health teams ($12.8 million). Health facilities could then use their
                         RBF credits for office equipment, training consulting services, operating costs (including drugs) and
                         (performance-based) top-ups for civil servants.

                         In the four selected regions, health facilities (i.e. Government-run and private not for profit facilities)
                         would sign a RBF contract with the RBF team and receive quarterly payments corresponding to their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         achieved performance upon a defined set of indicators. An Independent Verification Agency (IVA)
                         would verify the reality of the achieved results and CBOs would counter-verify them. Then, the
                         Government would validate the RBF results and the payments could be transferred. The set of
                         incentivized indicators (defined by the Ministry of Health) focuses mostly on maternal and child
                         health and nutrition.

                         Sub-Component 1.2. Building capacities for RBF extension ($7.2 million, including HRTIF $5.2
                         million + IDA $2 million)

                         With training, equipment, operating costs and consulting services, this sub-component will support
                         several efforts for building capacities at central level. The objective here is to strengthen the
                         capacities of the Ministry of Health (MoH) to pilot strategically the health care delivery system. The
                         expenditures here will consist of IT and office equipment, consulting services, training and operating
                         costs.

                         This sub-component will strengthen the capacities of the MoH to support the extension of the RBF
                         mechanism in 6 regions. $7.2 million will be dedicated to these activities. This budget will cover (i)
                         capacity building for the RBF teams at central, regional and district levels and support to the RBF
                         unit to ensure a smooth implementation of RBF (trainings, communication, supervision) ($2.2
                         million), (ii) payment of the IVA and CBOs ($5 million).


                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         Component 2. Demand side interventions for improving accessibility of health care services ($14
                         million, including $12 million IDA and $2 million HRITF)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support several mechanisms whose main purpose is to subsidize demand for
                         healthcare and nutrition services.

                         These mechanisms are:
                         a.     the Universal Health Insurance Coverage Scheme (i.e. Couverture Maladie Universelle or
                         CMU)
                         b.     the national program for improving demand for nutrition services;
                         c.     Vouchers and CCT for health services.

                         Sub-component 2.1. Support to the implementation of the Universal Health Insurance Coverage
                         scheme ($ 7 million)

                         The objectives of this sub-component are to help the Government implementing the Universal Health
                         Insurance Coverage scheme, called Couverture Maladie Universelle (CMU).

                         As mentioned earlier, the CMU consist mostly in creating at least one mutuelle (i.e. community-
                         based health insurance scheme) in each commune of Senegal and in subsidizing heavily (at a 50%
                         rate) t he premiums. An additional mechanism (i.e. Equity Fund) will ensure that the households
                         identified as poorest will pay neither a premium nor copayments. This CMU is therefore based on an
                         ambitious strategy of voluntary enrollment in community-based health insurance.

                         The sub-component will support the implementation of the CMU in the selected four regions (the
                         same regions targeted by the RBF component) by:
                         (i). Strengthening institutional capacities at the central level for implementing the CMU; and
                         (ii). Support the implementation of the Equity Fund in three of the four selected regions , as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the development of the national targeting system.

                         A first group of activities will therefore strive to strengthen the capacity of the national entities
                         involved in the implementation of the CMU ($4.4 million):
                         -        Training the main actors about regulatory, financial and strategic areas related to health
                         insurance coverage implementation (study tours, international and regional workshops, short and
                         long term training);
                         -        Procuring equipment to existing entities such as CACMU, DGAS and DGPN (strategic
                         entities), and being created entities such as ONAMS/FNGMS (regulatory entities) and FNS
                         (financial entities);
                         -        Hiring consultants to help with designing national strategies on the targeting system (for the
                         poorest), the registration of mutuelles, and the Equity Fund institutional arrangements.

                         To support the implementation of the Equity Fund, another activity will have to be supported: the
                         identification (or targeting) of the poorest households ($2.6 million). A national and unified
                         identification system is currently being developed, with technical support from the Bank. The sub-
                         component will contribute to this effort. Practically, this will require (i) consultant services and (ii)
                         investments in IT equipment. Workshops and training sessions will also be organized to present and
                         discuss the identification system with main CMU implementation actors.



                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         Sub-component 2.2. Strengthening demand for nutrition services and behavior change ($5 million)

                         The objective of this sub-component is to enhance the demand from the population for nutrition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services and for behavioral change, so as to improve nutrition for children and pregnant women. This
                         sub-component will directly fund the CLM (Cellule de Lutte contre la Malnutrition) to carry on the
                         current nutrition program in Senegal (Nutrition Enhancement Program II) in the four selected
                         regions.

                         NGOs (called “Agences d’Exécution Communautaire? - AEC) would be contracted to implement the
                         different community-based platform of nutri tion services. One “AEC? is approximately covering
                         one health district. They would work closely with local councils to implement the package of
                         nutrition services and activities at the community level. Three kinds of activities would be
                         implemented: (i) growth promotion and monitoring for children between 0 and 24 months in
                         communities; (ii) Behavioral Change Communication (BCC) activities; and (iii) detection and
                         community care of malnutrition.

                         Community growth promotion and monitoring/ community IMCI (Integrated Management of
                         Childhood Illness) consists in monthly weighting of under 2 years old children, discussions with their
                         mothers, as well as visiting at home children who need a specific monitoring. Some nutrition
                         education activities would also be organized with the mothers.

                         AECs would be in charge of BCC activities in order to increase the knowledge and use of good
                         nutrition practices in communities. CBOs would also promote malaria prevention by the use of
                         bednets, and associate community health workers for promoting micronutriments, Vitamin A and
                         iron supplementation.

                         AEC would also ensure detection and care of acute malnutrition: every three months, active detection
                         campaigns for children between 6-49 months would be organized. Severe acute malnourished
                         children would be referred to health centers and moderate acute malnourished children would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         taking care of at the FARN (“Foyer Alimentation et Réhabilitation Nutritionnelle? or Food and
                         Nutrition Rehabilitation Home) or through home visits.

                         Sub-component 2.3. Setting up demand-side RBF (i.e. conditional cash transfers) to improve access
                         to health care (HRITF $2 million)

                         The objective of the sub-component is to boost demand for health services by supporting households
                         to overcome particular barriers they could face to access institutional health care.

                         This sub-component will fund vouchers and conditional cash transfers mechanisms to increase
                         demand for nutrition and health services in the four selected regions. Two indicators would be
                         incentivized through vouchers mechanisms: (i) four ANC visits by pregnant women; (ii) assisted
                         deliveries at the health center. The indicator "care of severe malnourished children detected in
                         communities" will be targeted through a CCT. The vouchers will be implemented through the AEC
                         contracted by the CLM at the local level. Communication and information activities to women about
                         the cash transfers’ benefits and the modalities would be provided by the AECs which are active and
                         present at the community level. Voucher reimbursement would be channeled to beneficiaries with
                         different modalities depending on the existence or not of decentralized financial structures in the
                         community. As for the nutrition CCT, it willl be managed according to the procedures of the national
                         CCT program.

                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                         As in all RBF mechanisms, results achieved would be controlled and verified by the RBF IVA before
                         payments. First, as the antenatal care (ANC) indicator and assisted deliveries are also incentivized at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the health center level, the data generated by the supply-side RBF would be used to assess the reality
                         of utilization by women of these services. Verification in the health center’s registers could be
                         performed by the IVA and counter-verification by CBOs.

                         Some innovative RBF mechanisms to increase capacities and accountability of communities’
                         stakeholders would also be explored and funded in the second phase of the project.

                         Component 3. Strengthening capacities for better M&E and supervision, and Project Implementation
                         (IDA US$6 million).

                         This component will support activities to increase the capacity of and reliance on national health
                         systems. The component will include four sub-components, all focusing on capacity building.

                         Sub-component 3.1. Capacity building for better regulation of the hospital sector ($3 million IDA)

                         The first sub-component will be the Strengthening of the hospital sector and the hospital Directorate
                         of the Ministry of Health (DES). To that effect, the project will provide USD 3 million to strengthen
                         the existing hospital information system and more precisely to roll out a Unified Hospital
                         Information System in the main hospitals, so as to better track production and costs. It will support
                         the design and piloting of a new hospital payment system and the development of an improved
                         planning tool for hospital care (i.e. Regional hospital mater plans). The capacities of the MoH for
                         controlling hospitals will also be strengthened. This sub-component will imply consulting services,
                         training and IT equipment.

                         Sub-component 3.2. Capacity building for better M&E of the overall health system ($2 million IDA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A second sub-component will strengthen the M&E capacity for the overall health system. The sub-
                         component will support the National Statistical Agency (i.e. ANSD) for its “continuous survey?. This
                         “continuous survey? is an annual survey, combining (i) a household survey (where DHS indicators
                         are measured) and (ii) a health facility survey. It is implemented by the Government, with financial
                         support from USAID and technical assistance by Macro. With the proposed sub-component, the
                         Bank will take over the financial support so far provided by USAID. $2 million will be allocated to
                         this activity. Expenditures will consist of consulting services, training and workshops, and operating
                         costs.

                         Sub-component 3.3. Capacity building for better general and financial management within the health
                         system ($1 million IDA)

                         The main activity within this sub-component is to enhance the capacities for the DAGE (in charge of
                         all matter related to financial management at the MoH), with an amount of $1 million (IDA). The
                         objective here is to implement the recommendations of the joint (Bank-USAID) fiduciary assessment
                         (forthcoming) and strengthen the capacities of the DAGE, especially to enhance its ability to manage
                         this project. The Ministry of Health and Social Action (MSAS) has prepared a Medical Waste
                         Management Plan (MWMP). The Project will support its updating and its implementation; it This
                         component will also contribute to the funding of training and equipment in medical waste
                         management, as defined by the updated Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP).

                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project locations are rural areas in Senegal. The main criteria for selection of the Project regions are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the situation of maternal health and child nutrition indicators. The regions with worst results on these
                           indicators have been selected: Djourbel, Kodla, Kaffrine, Sedhiou, Tambacounda and Kedougou.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No                 The project will not support any investment
                            BP 4.01                                              (including civil works) that is likely to harm
                                                                                 natural environment. The subsidies and other
                                                                                 incentives in Component1 will certainly increase
                                                                                 the number of healthcare beneficiaries, and thus
                                                                                 may induce an increase in medical waste
                                                                                 production by health facilities. However the
                                                                                 associated risks may be prevented through the
                                                                                 implementation of the updated National Medical
                                                                                 Waste Management Plan, an adequate
                                                                                 sensitization of health workers, and as well as the
                                                                                 setting of a related indicator among the
                                                                                 performance indicators to be monitored.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                             The project will not support any investment (including civil works) that is likely to harm natural
                           environment. The subsidies and other incentives in Component1 will certainly increase the number
                           of healthcare beneficiaries, and thus may induce some increase in medical waste production by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           health facilities. However the associated risks may be prevented through the implementation of an
                           updated National Medical Waste Management Plan, including training of health workers and
                           investments in equipment such as incinerators.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             None.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The borrower has en existing Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP), which is being
                           updated with the support of the project. The MWMP will include an action plan, with additional
                           training and purchase of equipment. With its component 3, the Project will contribute to the
                           implementation of the updated MWMP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             N/A
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Christophe Lemiere
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 09-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                            Date: 15-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
