                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSC8796

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Dominican Republic                 Project ID:       P147277
                            Project Name:        DO Distribution Networks Rehabilitation (P147277)
                            Task Team            Sergio Augusto Gonzalez C
                            Leader:
                            Estimated            26-Feb-2015                        Estimated         22-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEDR                              Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (60%), Urban
                                                 Economic Development (20%), City-wide Infrastructure and Servi ce Delivery
                                                 (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    232.00                         Total Bank Financing:          120.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:          12.00
                              Financing Source                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                             0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                              120.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                        100.00
                              Total                                                                              220.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a            No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           11.      The proposed project development objective is to help the three distribution companies
                           (EDEs) to improve their operational and commercial performance through: (i) reduction of energy
                           losses in the distribution networks; (ii) the rehabilitation of selected circuits, (iii) the normalization of
                           non-authorized users in rehabilitated circuits (iv) the deployment of remote metering and macro-
                         metering systems to pinpoint theft, (v) the increase of the availability of energy supplied, and (vi) the
                         improvement of billing and cash collection.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         14.      Concept. The proposed project seeks to build on the significant successes under the
                         Distribution Rehabilitation and Loss Reduction Project (as confirmed in the Implementation Results
                         and Completion Report – ICR) while recognizing the limitations in regard to the impact that a single
                         such project can have on ensuring the EDEs overall financial sustainability. In this regard, the
                         proposed project takes into account the findings and lessons learned reflected in the ICR. The
                         proposed project it is part of the coordinated support (with the other IFIs) to the Government in its
                         power distribution loss reduction program and as such would scale up the first project’s notable
                         achievements which included securing and exceeding the targets in regard to outcomes at the level of
                         the circuits actually rehabilitated under the project. Furthermore, the project allows for coordination
                         for an additional US$100 million from the European Investment Bank. Although not proposed as an
                         objective under the project (taking into account the ICR findings), the proposed project would help
                         the EDEs move, through increased efficiency in technical and commercial operations, towards
                         eventual financial sustainability. In continuity of the first project that closed on September 30, 2013,
                         the proposed project’s activities will continue to: (i) improve the quality of service by expanding the
                         provision of 24-hour service: (ii) increase the number of regularized customers receiving electricity
                         service; (iii) help the EDEs increase their revenue collection rates through improved quality of
                         service and social contracts with the consumer communities; and (iv) help the EDEs strengthen their
                         institutional capacity for commercial activities, including billing and collection.

                         15.     The proposed US $ 120million project consists of the following four components:

                         1.     Infrastructure Rehabilitation                                                (US $
                         103.7million)
                         1.1.   Remote Metering Systems                                                      (US $
                         24.12million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.2.   Grid Rehabilitation and Modernization                                        (US $ 74.7million)
                         1.3.   Grid metering and monitoring                                                 (US $ 4.87million)

                         2.      Commercial TA to the EDEs                                                    (US $ 3.60million)

                         3.      Social Management                                                            (US $ 4.56million)
                         3.1.    Social Management Plans                                                      (US $ 3million)
                         3.2.    Communication Campaigns                                                      (US $ 1.56million)

                         4.      Coordination Monitoring and Evaluation                                   (US $ 8.24million)
                         4.1.    Institutional Strengthening and Integrating an IT platform for CDEEE and the EDEs, and
                         Forecasting and demand analysis Software tool                            (US $ 5.24million)
                         4.2.    Coordination and Monitoring of the Distribution Rehabilitation Program (US $ 3million)

                         16.      Component 1: Rehabilitation of power distribution grids and normalization of clients in
                         targeted areas. (Indicative cost: US$103.7 million). Based on rehabilitation action plans elaborated
                         by the EDEs and CDEEE, this component will finance: (1.1) the supply and installati on of a remote
                         metering system and equipment for the large customers connected to the medium voltage networks
                         and the small – residential and commercial – customers located in energy intensive networks; (1.2)
                         rehabilitation of medium and low voltage circuits in the targeted areas (about 33 circuits for the three
                         EDEs); and (1.3) supply and installation of macro-metering equipment in mid-voltage branches and
                         micro-metering in power transformers, to better track and monitor power flows and bottlenecks, and
                         energy balance and commercial losses in the distribution grids.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         17.    Component 2: Technical assistance to the EDEs on customer relationship management and
                         commercial culture diffusion. (Indicative cost: US$ 3.6 million). This component will support design
                         improvement and implementation of the commercial action plans elaborated by the EDEs and
                         CDEEE.

                         18.      Component 3: Social management. (Indicative cost: US$ 4.56 million). This component will
                         finance the design, implementation and impact evaluation of Social Management Plans (SMPs)
                         whose objectives would be to contribute to: (i) re-establish transparency and trust between the EDEs
                         and their customers; (ii) improve the bills recovery and response time to customers; (iii) conduct
                         proactive communication campaigns on the impact of electricity theft and non-payment of bills; and
                         (iv) raise awareness of targeted customers on the benefits of energy efficiency and basic actions
                         regarding the use of electricity. For each of the areas of distribution circuits to be rehabilitated under
                         the project, social teams within the EDEs designated staff will use participative methodology to
                         conduct socioeconomic diagnosis and a deep analysis of the quality of electricity service and its
                         impact on electricity theft. Technical assistance will be provided to the EDEs to strengthen the
                         capacity of their staff. The component will also finance independent impact evaluation of the SMPs
                         once implemented.

                         19.      Component 4: Technical Assistance, Coordination, monitoring and evaluation of the
                         Distribution Networks Modernization and Loss Reduction Program. (Indicative cost: US$
                         8.24million). This component will finance consulting services to: (i) assist CDEEE to design and
                         execute a Loss Reduction and Commercial Recovery program, aiming at a yearly reduction of 4
                         percent of distribution losses over five years; (ii) assist the EDEs in the supervision and operational
                         reception of the infrastructure investments under the project; (iii) monitor the evolution of the
                         technical and commercial indicators for the circuits rehabilitated under the project; (iv) monitor the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effective and perceived quality of service for the circuits rehabilitated under the project as well as for
                         the entire program; and (v) strengthen the capacity of the project implementation entity; (iv) Support
                         the institutional strengthening of CDEEE and the EDEs through the purchase of IT systems
                         (hardware and software). This will facilitate the processing and handling of information for the
                         commercial, billing and collection management systems in each of the EDEs.

                         20.     The total cost for the four components is estimated at about US$120 million to be financed
                         by the World Bank as a SIL (terms to be determined).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The geographical scope of the project is nationwide. The CDEEE and its three companies (EDEs)
                         cover the entire country’s power distribution sector. The energy generation is mainly thermal (86%)
                         and only 13% of hydroelectricity. The forest land covers about 40% of the island. The number of
                         kilometers of power lines to be rehabilitated by Component 1 is not known yet but it will be
                         identified during project preparation. The planned activities within the project do not include civil
                         works or construction of new transmission o distribution electrical lines.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementing agency is the Dominican Corporation of State Electrical Utilities (Corporación
                           Dominicana de Empresas Eléctricas Estatales, CDEEE) and its three companies: EDE-Norte, EDE-
                           Sur and EDE-Este. The first two are 100% public owned and EDE-Este is only 50%. All EDE’s are
                           in charge of transmission, distribution and commercialization of the electricity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Bank has supported CDEEE and the three EDEs since 2007 through the Electricity Distribution
                           Rehabilitation Project (P089866) which closed in September 2013 and overall and environmental
                           safeguards rating were ranked as satisfactory. A Bank team is currently preparing an ICR.

                           CDEEE and the three EDEs will be responsible of overall project activities, including environmental
                           management of the project. Thus the institutional arrangements, staffing and capacity to implement
                           environmental management of the project activities is expected to be in place.

                           During project preparation an environmental assessment of previous project environmental
                           management and supervision capacity will be assessed, including requirement of environmental
                           permits, implementation of the Environmental guideline of CDEEE in work and by contractors,
                           inclusion and implementation of the standard environmental provisions in the bidding documents for
                           investments carried out under the Project.

                           CDEEE has an environmental guideline in place for distribution electrical works dated from 2007
                           which was accepted by the Bank in the previous project. This guideline or other environmental
                           instruments in place of the implementing agencies will be reviewed or updated to be acceptable to
                           the Bank and current project. An environmental specialist from the environmental unit of the
                           CDEEE will be appointed to support the PIU on supervising the environmental management of the
                           Project. Consequently, an action plan addressing capacity building and institutional strengthening
                           will be incorporated in the Project design according to the results of the assessment. The Project
                           Operations Manual will incorporated environmental management procedures as needed.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Elena Correa (GEEDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (GSURR)
                           Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The proposed works to be completed under the
                           BP 4.01                                             Project pertain to the rehabilitation of
                                                                               distribution medium (69kV;34.5kV; 15kV;
                                                                               12.47kV; 7.2kV; y 4.16kV) and low voltage
                                                                               lines (120/208V o 240/415V) and the
                                                                               installation of metering systems. The works will
                                                                               not involve construction of new facilities, or
                                                                               electrical lines but the rehabilitation
                                                                               (replacement of existing power lines and related
                                                                               equipment) and installation of new meter
                                                                               systems. Based on the project characteristics, a
                                                                               category B is proposed. Most works will be
                                                                               performed in the right of ways of country roads.
                         Special attention will need to be taken in
                         forested and urban areas to reduce impacts
                         during construction.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project is expected to generate positive
                         impact to the people due to increase electricity
                         access due to the rehabilitation of the
                         distribution electrical grid, home connections to
                         beneficiaries and the reduction of electricity
                         interruptions which is common issue in the
                         country.

                         Potential environmental impact of the project
                         activities might be related to the rehabilitation
                         works of distribution power lines (changes of
                         poles (some of wood), transformers, insulators,
                         power lines, lights, other related electrical
                         equipment), management of hazardous electrical
                         waste (old transformers), disconnection of
                         power lines and interruption of service to local
                         communities during works.
                         A recent rehabilitation distribution project by
                         EDENORTE in the Municipality of Villa
                         González required the installation of 80.6 km of
                         power cables of medium voltage, 65 km of low
                         voltage cable, 1978 concrete power poles, 205
                         transformers and 1,704 street lights.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To ensure that any environmental issues by the
                         project activities are appropriately addressed by
                         the selected implementing agencies, CDEEE
                         will prepare an Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment of the proposed project
                         works following the OP 4.1 and will update the
                         current CDEEE Environmental Guideline to
                         meet World Bank safeguards policies and
                         national applicable legislation. The
                         accumulative effect of electrical solid waste will
                         be a key element to supervise in order to apply
                         best international best practice, including
                         handling, transportation, and final disposition of
                         materials contaminated by polychlorinated
                         biphenyls (PCBs). ESIA documents will be
                         consulted with relevant stakeholders and
                         disclose at the World Bank and CDEEE web
                         sites before appraisal.
                                                                 The ESIA will include the valuation of impacts
                                                                 on natural resources (trees, birds, bats),
                                                                 community and workers health and safety (e.g.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 working at heights, electric shock,
                                                                 electromagnetic fields, etc), and the preparation
                                                                 of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP).
                                                                 ESIA will include programs to reduce impacts
                                                                 in the project areas and ensure communication,
                                                                 health and safety, grievance redress
                                                                 mechanisms, screening of voluntary land
                                                                 donations; among others programs. Also the
                                                                 ESIA will include tools for screening;
                                                                 monitoring and supervision of works and an
                                                                 estimated budget to ensure application of agree
                                                                 mitigation and prevention measures.

                                                                 Measures from PGA will be converted in
                                                                 explicit bidding clauses for the future bidding
                                                                 documents so contractors comply with
                                                                 environmental legislation and worker’s
                                                                 occupational health and safety local labor
                                                                 regulations.

                                                                 The client has been informed of the WBG’s
                                                                 Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
                                                                 Guidelines for Power Transmission projects in
                                                                 order to consult during EIA preparation and
                                                                 implementation of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   This is concept ISD. At the appraisal ISDS the
                                                                 team will inform if natural habitats could be
                                                                 affected and if this policy will need to be
                                                                 triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No project activities are involved with forest
                                                                 management. Thus the Forest safeguard policy
                                                                 is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The Project does not involve the purchase or
                                                                 increased use of pesticides.. Thus the Pest
                                                                 Management s policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered as precautionary
                         BP 4.11                                 measure to avoid impacts to the country’s
                                                                 diverse cultural and historical resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                                 Indigenous Peoples that meet the four criteria of
                                                                 OP/BP 4.10 within the project area that could
                                                                 potentially benefit or be adversely affected by
                                                                 the Project’s investments.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The Project does not involve land acquisition or
                                 4.12                                                                                            imposition of easements or rights of way. The
                                                                                                                                 planned works involve the rehabilitation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 existing medium and low voltage power lines
                                                                                                                                 and the installation of metering systems. The
                                                                                                                                 works do not involve construction of new
                                                                                                                                 facilities or electrical lines. Most works will be
                                                                                                                                 performed in the right of ways of country roads
                                                                                                                                 and are not expected to cause physical or
                                                                                                                                 economic displacement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                                 project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No project activities are involved in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways as defined under OP/BP
                                                                                                                                 7.50. Thus the International Waterways policy
                                                                                                                                 is not triggered.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activities are involved in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas as defined under OP/BP 7.60. Thus the
                                                                                                                                 Disputed Areas policy is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment should be finalized and disclosed before appraisal
                                      which is planned by Nov 1, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Sergio Augusto Gonzalez C

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 17-Oct-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (SM)                                                                                         Date: 17-Oct-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
