                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7793
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2014, 20-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                        Project ID:    P125597
                            Project Name:      Kabul Municipal Development Program (P125597)
                            Task Team          Deepali Tewari
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Feb-2014                        Estimated   05-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDU                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%), General
                                               transportation sector (20%), Solid waste management (20%), Wast ewater
                                               Collection and Transportation (20%), Sub-national government administration
                                               (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       110.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                       110.00
                              Total                                                                                       110.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to:
                           (i)    Increase access to basic municipal services in selected residential areas of Kabul city;


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         (ii)    Redesign KM’s Financial Management system to support better service delivery; and
                         (iii)   Enable early response in the event of an eligible emergency.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will have the following four components:
                         Component A. Infrastructure Upgrading Program (US$85 million)
                         16.      This component will support the following:
                         A (i) Upgrading of basic municipal infrastructure (US$65 million): This subcomponent will
                         finance an estimated US53 millions of works that will deliver basic municipal services to people in
                         un-served settlements on government owned land, thereby integrating such areas with the main
                         fabric of the city. Works could include: neighborhood or community roads and drains, culverts,
                         footpaths, street lighting, community parks, community solid waste collection points, and water
                         supply if feasible . It will also finance rehabilitation of trunk roads and drains within existing rights
                         of way (ROW) valued at US$12 million.
                         A (ii) Service Delivery Support for Sanitation and Roads Departments (US$20 million): This
                         subcomponent will finance critically needed low-energy use Goods for KM’s departments of
                         Sanitation, and Roads: equipment for emptying septic tanks; suction of accumulated rain water;
                         sweeping of roads; emergency equipment for clearing snow off primary arterial roads; and for the
                         maintenance of secondary and community roads rehabilitated over the last few years. It will also
                         finance GPS trackers on 667 vehicles of the roads and sanitation departments, control room
                         equipment for monitoring usage and fuel consumption. Recurrent costs will be financed by KM from
                         its own funds. The subcomponent will also finance the services of an international advisor to support
                         the Departments of Sanitation and Roads to design and implement actions to improve the efficiency
                         of services delivered.

                         Component B. Redesign KM’s Financial Management System (US$3 million)
                         This component will finance (i) an individual consultant as Financial Management Advisor to the
                         Deputy Mayor of KM for Finance and Administration, and (ii) a consultancy firm to develop a fully
                         costed, time-bound realistically sequenced action plan for the implementation of institutional reforms
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that integrate IT solutions for revenue management, accounting, and management development in
                         KM.

                         Component C. Studies (US$5 million)

                         This component will support the following subcomponents:
                         C (i) Household Survey (US$1 million): This subcomponent will finance data collection through
                         geo-referenced household surveys for service delivery that will be outsourced to private firms twice
                         during the project’s life and the one-time procurement of hardware and software for a paperless
                         survey .
                         C (ii) Drainage Studies (US$4 million): This component will finance the preparation of a master plan
                         for the storm water drainage system of Kabul city to meet the expected demand of year 2030 and
                         beyond. It will also finance a detailed study for the Kanal Wazir Abad or any other priority area and
                         surroundings, provide options for solving the flooding and surface water accumulation problems that
                         routinely impact the residents and businesses in the basin, as well as detailed engineering designs for
                         the preferred option. The study will be a basis for future donor support for infrastructure
                         development in Kabul, particularly the transport sector.
                         Component D. Project Management, Works Design and Supervision (US$17 million)

                         Project Management, Works Design and Supervision : This subcomponent will finance (i) the cost of


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         KMDP senior consultants (US$2.5 million) for the management of the project; incremental operating
                         costs for staff that will undertake detailed design for the community upgrading plans (CUPs) to be
                         financed during the project’s life, preparation of CUPs for future donor support, supervision of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         works, office support, and the costs of management, monitoring and reporting (US$11 million); (ii)
                         short-term individual consultants for specific tasks that may be needed during implementation (US
                         $1.5 million); (iii) professional training, workshops, and knowledge sharing events (US$1 million);
                         and (iv) an office building for KM’s infrastructure improvement program (US$1 million) on land
                         owned by the Municipality.
                         Contingency Emergency Response: This component will allow for a rapid response following an
                         adverse natural or man-made event that causes a major disaster, through the reallocation of project
                         funds . It could also be used to channel additional funds for emergency response should they become
                         available.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Kabul in both planned and unplanned settlements by the KMDP
                         Team. The civil works under Component 1 will finance upgrading and rehabilitation of the urban
                         infrastructure within the existing rights-of way (ROW) for roads, drains, water distribution pipes, etc.
                         The upgrading will be targeted in settlements, where paved access to houses is missing or deficient,
                         where narrow streets are not adequately leveled, and where there are deficiencies in the delivery of
                         basic municipal infrastructure and services. Upgrading of infrastructure and services in such
                         settlements will be done within the existing rights of way in settlements as it is a criteria for selection
                         of settlements for inclusion under the proposed project. The civil works are not expected to cause
                         significant and/ or irreversible environmental and social impacts. Overall the long term impacts will
                         be positive, while negative impacts will be of minor scope and duration, and typical for any tertiary
                         to secondary level infrastructure rehabilitation. The project is therefore classified environmental
                         Category B. All sub-projects to be financed are known at the time of project appraisal, but as
                         community upgrading plans are developed and field surveys undertaken to prepare designs for the
                         annual investments, there could be minor changes noted. This is so because the current boundaries of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         neighborhoods are derived from high resolution satellite imagery. In the event that field studies
                         highlight negative impacts, a framework approach has been adopted to address potential social and
                         environmental issues and ensure consistent treatment of social and environmental issues during the
                         course of implementation of the project. The Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) has been developed specifically for the proposed operations to avoid, reduce or mitigate
                         adverse social or environmental impacts.

                         For each subproject, site specific Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be
                         prepared for civil works. No physical relocation and resettlement is anticipated. However the ESMF
                         includes a framework for abbreviated RAP to guide preparation of abbreviated RAP in case of any
                         subproject involving land acquisition.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
                         Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The OP/BP 4.01 (EA) is triggered since most of
                          BP 4.01                                               the activities to be undertaken during project



                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                                                                         implementation involve rehabilitation and
                                                                         upgrading of the selected existing planned and
                                                                         mainly unplanned settlements in Kabul city. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         project has been classified as an Environmental
                                                                         Assessment (EA) category B- Partial Assessment.
                                                                         Implementation of sub-projects could have
                                                                         negative environmental impacts like noise,
                                                                         vibration, dust, traffic disruption, momentary
                                                                         clogging of drains and, accumulate solid and
                                                                         liquid waste from construction materials.
                                                                         Additional negative impacts during construction
                                                                         will occur due to haulage and final disposal of
                                                                         materials. The aforesaid negative impacts would
                                                                         be localized and temporary in nature and can be
                                                                         mitigated by proper environmental planning and
                                                                         monitoring.
                                                                         An ESMF has been prepared by Kabul
                                                                         Municipality. The ESMF provides an overview of
                                                                         the expected environmental and social issues,
                                                                         which may arise during the project
                                                                         implementation. It also offers comprehensive
                                                                         guidance on the site-specific environmental and
                                                                         social management planning to be carried out by
                                                                         the client for all sub-projects under KMDP.
                                                                         Site-specific ESMPs for the civil works supported
                                                                         under Project Preparation Grant (PPG) were
                                                                         developed and shared with the Bank over the
                                                                         month of January 2013. These were approved and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         disclosed in country on 22 April, 2013.
                                                                         Consultation on the site-specific ESMPs with the
                                                                         local stakeholders was conducted on April 8,
                                                                         2013 for works to be implemented under each
                                                                         sub-project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The ESMPs will comprise guidelines for Chance
                         BP 4.11                                         Find Procedures according to National Law. In
                                                                         case of any sub-project involving Physical
                                                                         Culture Resources, the KMDP Team ’s PMU will
                                                                         conduct an Environmental Impact Assessment
                                                                         and Social Impact Assessment (EIA/SIA),




                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                        including development of a Cultural Heritage
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No            Management Plan (CHMP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The proposed project triggers OP 4.12
                         4.12                                           (Involuntary Resettlement). Based on the
                                                                        experience of the now closed Kabul Urban
                                                                        Reconstruction Project (KURP), some of the
                                                                        proposed project activities such as urban
                                                                        upgrading, water supply and road may encounter
                                                                        some minor land acquisition and resettlement
                                                                        impacts.
                                                                        In the event that any minor land acquisition for a
                                                                        sub-project (e.g. realignment of a road), such land
                                                                        should either be available government land, or
                                                                        could only be obtained through compensation
                                                                        payments by the local community, or through
                                                                        private voluntary donations. The private
                                                                        voluntary donations will be documented as
                                                                        required by the ESMF, as well compensation
                                                                        payments made by the community in keeping
                                                                        with the exemplary practices under KURP. For
                                                                        government land, documentation will also be
                                                                        required to clarify that the land is free of
                                                                        encroachments, squatters or other encumbrances,
                                                                        and has been transferred for the project by the
                                                                        authorities.
                                                                        No activities will be supported that require
                                                                        involuntary land acquisition or the acquisition of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        land requiring the resettlement or compensation
                                                                        of more than 200 people. The ESMF includes a
                                                                        framework for abbreviated RAP to guide
                                                                        preparation of abbreviated RAP in case of any
                                                                        subject involving land acquisition.
                                                                        Draft ESMF with a framework for abbreviated
                                                                        RAP is satisfactory to the Bank and was disclosed
                                                                        in country on August 28, 2013 following
                                                                        consultations with the project stakeholders on
                                                                        August 12, 2013. The final version of ESMF
                                                                        along with a framework for abbreviated RAP was
                                                                        re-disclosed in-country on January 30, 2014 and
                                                                        through the InfoShop on February 3, 2014.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                         Projects on International        No            The OP/BP 7.5 is not triggered since the project
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           do not involve diversion of the existing sewerage




                                                                Page 5 of 9
                                                                                 system or diversion of the current water flow to
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Kabul river.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project is not expected to have significant impact on the environment. All planned physical
                              works are limited to rehabilitation of the existing right of way. They are unlikely to induce
                              significant and/or irreversible impacts. Therefore, negative social and environmental impacts of
                              the Project will be of minor scope and duration, and typical for any tertiary level basic
                              infrastructure and services, while the long term social impact will be positive.

                              An ESMF has been prepared by Kabul Municipality. It provides general guidelines for applying
                              environmentally and social sound practices to basic municipal infrastructure and services. The
                              ESMF also includes (i) provision for public consultation and participation among relevant
                              stakeholders, including affected people; and (ii) Environmental Guidelines for Contractors. Site-
                              specific ESMPs will be prepared for all sub-projects under KMDP. The site-specific ESMPs
                              specify environmental and social risks associated with delivery of basic municipal infrastructure
                              and services in respective locations, recommend related mitigation measures and provide
                              monitoring for tracking adherence to the mitigation plans. ESMPs cover both construction and
                              operation phases and will be mandatory for implementation by contractors responsible for
                              implementation of the sub-projects.

                              The project is not expected to involve relocation and resettlement because the upgrading activities
                              will consist of the provision or rehabilitation of infrastructure within the existing right of way of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              access paths and roads. However the ESMF includes a framework for abbreviated RAP to guide
                              preparation of site-specific abbreviated RAP in case of subproject involving any land acquisition.
                              Overall, the social impacts of the project investments are expected to be small scale and site-
                              specific; and thus easily remediable typical of category B projects.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There would be no potential indirect or long-term impact due to anticipated future activities in the
                              project area. The basic municipal infrastructure services are not expected to cause any potential
                              indirect or long term impacts because appropriate institutional arrangements for environmental and
                              social management would be put in place throughout project implementation.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The proposed project will finance upgrading and rehabilitating of infrastructure services within
                              existing right of way, therefore no alternatives were considered.
                              The initial screening of the areas to be financed through PPG confirmed that there would be no
                              land acquisition or resettlement, as all project physical activities are envisaged to be carried out
                              within the existing right of way. However, while all sub-projects to be financed under the
                              proposed project are known their limits reconfirmed during implementation through field surveys,



                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           OP4.12 was triggered as a precautionary measure and the ESMF along with a framework for
                           abbreviated RAP prepared to guide preparation of abbreviated RAP
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Kabul Municipality (KM), as implementing partner, will have the overall responsibility for
                           implementation of the Project.
                           The KM has established a Team, the KMDP Team, and delegated to it the day-to-day
                           implementation of the Project. This team consists of the same staff that were in the Project
                           Management Units (PMU) or KURP. The KMDP Team is thus adequately staffed and has the
                           capacity to address all aspects of the project implementation, including safeguard compliance.
                           The KMDP Team includes social and environmental staff that have gained over eight years of
                           experience through the implementation of the KURP which financed works similar in nature to
                           those to be financed by KMDP.

                           Safeguard capacity of the KMDP Team was assessed and found to be satisfactory. Apart from
                           first-hand experience with implementation of KURP, the staff have also received extensive
                           training over the implementation period of KURP. Environmental & Social impacts will be
                           mitigated following the measures and practices developed under KURP that were exemplary – it is
                           these practices that have been adopted for KMDP. Any additional training required for safeguards
                           will be provided during the implementation of the proposed project, and facilitated by the country
                           office based project team. The project includes funds to recruit an international consultant to
                           provide on–the-job training on supervision of ESMPs as needed, with a main focus on
                           preservation of cultural heritage and grievance redress mechanism and social inclusion.

                           The KMDP Team adheres to the requirements of the ESMF, ensures development of site-specific
                           ESMPs for all individual sub-projects. The ESMF has been disclosed in the KM web-site on
                           January 30, 2014 and in the Infoshop on 02/02/2014. The KMDP will provide general oversight
                           of the environmental and social compliance through regular supervision to ensure the quality of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the construction, and will directly intervene to resolve environmental and social issues identified
                           during supervision.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key project stakeholders are the KM, relevant KM district offices, the old city commission,
                           and other government bodies, which issue permits, including but not limited to NEPA, MoMP and
                           MoUDA. Local communities are direct beneficiaries of the project.

                           The draft ESMF along with a framework for abbreviated RAP was disclosed the KM’s web site
                           and public consultation meeting with participation of the relevant government agency and non-
                           government agencies.
                           Site specific ESMPs were prepared for the civil works financed through PPG. They were disclosed
                           to the affected communities at neighborhood level and discussed with them in a workshop held on
                           April 8, 2013. The same procedures will be applied to sub-projects financed by KMDP over its
                           implementation period. Site-specific abbreviated RAPs, if required, will be prepared, disclosed,
                           discussed with the affected communities, finalized, and implemented by the KMDP prior to
                           commencement of works in the specific gozars or neighborhoods.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                      30-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                      30-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Deepali Tewari
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 19-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                                Date: 20-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
