                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2815

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation              Project ID:      P144167
                            Project Name:      Vocational Education System Development (P144167)
                            Task Team          Mario Cristian Aedo Inost
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Sep-2014                     Estimated        12-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH2                           Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (47%), Secondary education (30%), Adult literacy/non-
                                               formal education (13%), Public administration- Education (1 0%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (75%), Education for all (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    400.00                    Total Bank Financing:        330.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    70.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      330.00
                              Total                                                                      400.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The higher order objective of the project is to contribute to the development of a professional
                           workforce that better contribute to the economic growth and social and economic development of
                           Russia and its regions. The modernized vocational education and training system envisioned under
                           the project would produce graduates with demand driven professional/occupational skills and generic
                           broad and transferable competencies, which could enable them to perform in environments of rapidly
                           changing labor markets, addressing the urgent need to increase the productivity and competitiveness
                         of the Russian economy.

                         The project specific Development Objective is to support the modernization of the VET system in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected Russian regions so that is more responsive to the needs of regional labor market needs.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would achieve its development objective through the implementation of the
                         following two components:

                         Component 1: Development of Regional Vocational Education Systems
                         The purpose of this Component is to develop different models of regional VET system and enhance
                         the replication effectiveness of the experience to be gained by the pilot regions in the other regional
                         VET systems in Russia. Based on objective criteria up to 10 pilot regions will be selected to
                         modernize their vocational education systems.

                         The Component will be divided into two thematic sub-components: i) modernization of the existing
                         vocational education institutions and ii) setting up new intermediary institutions and VET
                         development centers.

                         The first sub-component “Modernization of the existing vocational education institutions” is aimed at
                         increasing the relevance of the regional VET systems and enhancing the linkages to the regional
                         social and economic development strategies. The subcomponent recognizes that two distinct types of
                         employers are present in most of Russian regions: a major sector-specific employer and a mix of
                         small and medium enterprises. The proposed Project intends implementation of updated programs of
                         vocational education and training to address the needs of these two types of employers on the basis
                         of these two types of educational institutions: one-field (non-diversified) and multi-field
                         (diversified). This subcomponent will support the following activities: i) diagnostic studies of labor
                         market/offered VET programs and creation of new VET institutions network; ii) preparation and
                         implementation of the institutions development programs; ii) monitoring and evaluation of new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         network outcomes:

                         The second sub-component “Setting up new intermediary institutions and VET development centers”
                         is aimed to create new institutions, which should be instrumental for the adaptation of the VET
                         network to changing client demands, serve as catalysts in building a new network, linking the labor
                         market with the education market and establishing ties among individual institutions in the network.

                         The subcomponent will support the establishment of the following institutions:

                          a.     Regional Vocational Education Development Centers (CVED).
                          b.     Independent professional intermediaries between employers and VET.
                          c.     Centers for occupational qualifications evaluation and recognition.

                         At the same time this subcomponent will support the following activities:

                         1.      Acquaintance with Russian and international best practices, including those for assessing
                         potential sustainability of selected interregional centers to be established for delivery of short
                         vocational training programs for adults;
                         2.      Development of a regulatory framework;
                         3.      Development of a methodological framework and toolkits to link the labor and education and
                         vocational training markets;
                         4.       Training for personnel of new institutions;
                         5.       Development of resource capacity of the new institutions;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6.       Development of criteria and indicators for performance evaluation of educational institutions
                         and the entire regional network; and
                         7.       Methodological, advisory, technical, organizational, and regulatory support to establish new
                         institutions and keep them operational (in coordination with activities under Component 2).

                         Component 2: Development of Federal Capacity to Support Regional VET Systems and Project
                         Management
                         This component includes two sub-components: i) Development of federal capacity to support
                         regional VET systems and ii) Project management.

                         The first sub-component “Development of federal capacity to support regional VET systems “ is
                         aimed to develop programs, providing resources and setting up incentives and institutions to support
                         the regional VET systems and disseminate nation-wide innovations expected to emerge in the
                         regions under the proposed Project. In particular, this sub-component will support the following
                         activities: i) capacity building for the vocational education and training institutions and regional
                         administration for the regions supported by the project; ii) provision of resources to support the
                         regional VET systems; iii) setting up incentives and institutions needed to support the regional VET
                         systems; iv) development and implementation of a program to disseminate innovations that may arise
                         from the pilot regions supported by the project.


                         The second sub-component “sub-component “Project management” will provide the resources for
                         the day-to-day implementation of the proposed project by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), as
                         well as for monitoring and evaluating project implementation and outcomes. It would also provide
                         funds for evaluation studies and audits of the project financial statements, training activities to
                         support PIU’s implementation capacity and minor office equipment / supplies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is nation-wide and up to 10 selected pilot regions (not known at this stage) of the
                         Russian Federation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed Project will be implemented by the Ministry of Education and Science of the Russian
                         Federation. The Ministry has experience in implementing three educational projects over the period
                         2002-2008. All three completed educational projects were successfully implemented and highly rated
                         by the ICR and IEG assessments. However, there may be a lack of expertise in MOES in addressing
                         safeguard issues triggered by the proposed project, as previous projects did not trigger safeguards. In
                         order to support their capacity, the World Bank project team will provide ongoing guidance and
                         training on the project's relevant Bank safeguards policies (indigenous and environmental policies) to
                         the MOES and future Project Implementation Unit (PIU).
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO)
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          Environmental Assessment is triggered as the
                           BP 4.01                                        Ministry of Education and Science decided to
                                                                          include equipment renewal for vocational
                                                                          education and training schools under the project.
                                                                          As some of the equipment for technical
                                                                          vocational schools may require adjustment/
                                                                          rehabilitation works for their installation and
                                                                          operation this may introduce environmental
                                                                          impacts (dust, noise, operation of construction
                                                                          machinery/trucks, etc). An Environmental
                                                                          Management Framework (EMF) will be
                                                                          developed for the project and would be
                                                                          disclosed within-country as required by OP
                                                                          4.01. The EMF will be incorporated in the
                                                                          Project's Operation Manual.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes          The TVET school buildings that may be
                           BP 4.11                                        suggested for adjustment/rehabilitation works
                                                                          may be predominantly old, and some of these
                                                                          buildings may have some historic value, we are
                                                                          triggering OP 4.11. When the schools are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          selected the PIU would cheek if any of the
                                                                          buildings are on the list of the nation's historical
                                                                          and/or cultural heritage. In such cases, the
                                                                          building rehabilitation designs would have to be
                                                                          cleared wit the national authorities responsible
                                                                          for the preservation of cultural heritage to
                                                                          ensure that historic/cultural value of such
                                                                          buildings are not compromised as a result of the
                                                                          possible improvement works. These provisions
                                                                          will be included in the EMF.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes          Indigenous Peoples Policy OP 4.10 is triggered
                                                                          due to the presence of Indigenous People in
                                                                          some of the pilot regions selected for project
                                                                          implementation. No negative impacts are
                                                                          expected from the proposed project. No
                                                                          construction is likely to affect indigenous
                                                                          people communities but access to vocational
                                                                          training opportunities may be of particular
                                                                          significance for some IPs population.An
                                                                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                                                                                 will be prepared in full consultation with the
                                                                                                                                 affected indigenous people communities. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 IPPF will focus on documenting positive social
                                                                                                                                 impacts and ensuring broad community support
                                                                                                                                 of affected IPs.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      During project preparation the Government will inform the Bank about the possible inclusion of
                                      equipment renewal and about the selection of the pilot regions to be incorporated in the project.
                                      Should that decision trigger either/or the environment safeguard or the indigenous safeguard, the
                                      Environmental Management Framework (if needed) and/or an Indigenous People Policy
                                      Framework will be developed for the project by the time of appraisal. They will be discussed with
                                      the Safeguards specialists in the team.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inost

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Esma Kreso (RSA)                                                                                                     Date: 23-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Janssen Edelweiss Nunes Teixeira (SM)                                                                                Date: 23-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
