                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5074

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bangladesh                       Project ID:      P128012
                            Project Name:       Bangladesh Ghorashal Unit 4 Repowering Project (P128012)
                            Task Team           Mohammad Anis
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           12-Feb-2015                      Estimated        17-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEEDR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (50%), Thermal Power Generation (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        400.00                 Total Bank Financing:       300.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            100.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   300.00
                              Total                                                                         400.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective of the Project is to increase generation supply and efficiency;
                           C. Project Description
                           1. The proposed Project would repower one of the four 210 MW gas-fired steam units Ghorashal
                           power stations by adding one gas turbine & generator (GTG) and a heat recovery steam generator
                           (HRSG) to the existing steam turbine (ST) unit for an upgraded capacity of about 400 MW. The
                           targeted unit for repowering has already been identified through a feasibility study (completed in July
                         2012 by a consulting firm engaged through a Bank TA). This unit is currently generating 170MW
                         and the overall efficiency of the unit is around 31%. As it came out of the feasibility study, the
                         Project would increase the gross plant efficiency of the identified unit to 54% and the generation will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be more than doubled. Consequently, fuel consumption (per GWh) would be reduced by 43%. The
                         proposed Project will also be designed to operate the new gas turbine and existing steam plant
                         independently from each other through a bypass stack allowing operational flexibility for the
                         government.

                         2. Although the feasibility study looked into the alternatives of developing a new combined cycle
                         (CC) technology along with other repowering options and full repowering came out to be the most
                         economically viable options, the primary objective of this project is to increase the efficiency of the
                         existing unit to ensure better utilization of scarce natural gas. Efficiency improvement in the existing
                         plants is the government's key priority now.

                         3. The project would be built at the existing land and most of the existing civil structures would be
                         retained. That itself would reduce construction cost by 10 per cent as compared with new
                         construction on a green-field site. Existing auxiliary equipment would also be re-used with some
                         modification and refurbishment. Repowering of the facility will also help achieve reduction in
                         operation and maintenance (O&M) cost, reduction in emissions and other discharges and
                         minimization of capital cost expenditures.

                         4. With a nameplate capacity of 950 MW (including other two 55MW steam units), Ghorashal is the
                         largest power station in the country. The identified steam turbine unit at Ghorashal was installed in
                         1989. However, they are very robust machines, and the feasibility study has confirmed that there are
                         good prospects for cost effective refurbishment and upgrade of this unit that can increase its useful
                         life to another 25 years once repowered. Incorporating these machines into a new combined cycle
                         configuration is a challenging exercise, although international experience has demonstrated its
                         practicality. BPDB has already awarded contract to a consortium of Alstom and a Chinese developer
                         to repower the unit no 3 at Ghorashal. MIGA has been approached by HSBC Bank, Hong Kong to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide political risk guarantee to this project. MIGA is currently doing its due diligence. BPDB has
                         also tendered for repowering of unit 6. The feasibility study that was done for unit 4 has really paved
                         the way for the government to proceed to such conversion (from steam unit to combined cycle unit)
                         in Bangladesh.

                         5. As it is planned currently, the proposed operation has four components, notio nally estimated at
                         US$300 million in total. In addition to repowering of unit 4, the consulting firm in their feasibility
                         study report has recommended for upgrading the associated power evacuation system and installing a
                         gas pipe line. These two additional components have been included in the PCN at this stage, and
                         their inclusion will be reassessed during project preparation.

                         6. Component 1: Re-powering of the target unit ($250 million): This component would finance the
                         attachment of a new gas-fired gas turbine to the existing 4th steam unit at Ghorashal and a heat
                         recovery steam generator, power generator, and associated ancillary equipment for the full
                         repowering of the identified unit. This component has been proposed based on the feasibility study
                         by the consultant that has assessed various repowering options (feed water, hot windbox, hybrid and
                         full repowering).

                         7. Draft Pre-qualification document and Bid document (with preliminary technical specifications) for
                         this component have already been prepared by the consultants following the Bank guidelines and
                         reviewed by BPDB.Technical Specifications will be finalized after the Quick Scan RLA (Residual
                         Life Assessment) is complete and during the subsequent pre-bid conference with the potential
                         developers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         8. Component 2: Installation of a new 230 kV GIS substation and 230 kV high voltage line ($25
                         million): For evacuation of the additional power from the proposed project, a new 230 kV GIS
                         substation and a new 27 km long high capacity 230 kV double circuit transmission line to Tongi grid
                         substation need to be installed by Power Grid Company of Bangladesh (PGCB). The new GT has to
                         be connected to the new 230 kV GIS substation by means o f a step-up transformer, a 230 kV cable
                         and a 230 kV switchgear bay. The need for this component will be discussed in further details with
                         PGCB.

                         9. Component 3: Installation of a new gas pipe line (US$15 million): At present the gas is supplied to
                         Ghorasal Power Station from Titas Gas Transmission & Distribution System through a 16 inch
                         diameter pipeline and a Regulating & Metering Station (RMS) situated at the north east corner of the
                         Power Station complex. Due to space constraint, a new gas station will need to be installed at the
                         space available west of the proposed repowering site. One 16” gas line from inlet header of Titas
                         RMS to be installed up to the bus of the gas station as mentioned above. From this bus, several gas
                         lines will brunch out. Individual branch will lead through gas compressor and associated facilities
                         prior to connection to the individual unit to be repowered. This component, if agreed, will be
                         implemented by Gas Transmission Company Limited (GTCL).

                         10. Component 4: TA for institutional strengthening support ($10 million): To sustain the gains of
                         the conversion through re-powering, it would be necessary to build up implementation and O&M
                         management capacity and better monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of plant performance at the
                         power station. This component would finance an Owner’s Engineer (implementation support
                         consultant) for the Project to bolster project governance while ensuring effective management of the
                         construction and initial operation of the new power plant. This component would also support BPDB
                         in the development and implementation of processes, procedures, standards, monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management. Relevant training and study tours for the core BPDB project team and power plant
                         personnel would be organized so they become receptive and familiar with the operation of the
                         proposed installation. Using the experience at IDA financed Siddhirganj project, this component will
                         also explore whether ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) can be implemented at Ghorashal covering
                         all the units.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will be implemented in the existing Power Plant Complex at Ghorashal
                         (Location coordinates are: Latitude = 23.9797, Longitude = 90.637). Ghorashal falls in Narsingdi
                         district and is located 50 km north-east of Dhaka. The site can be accessed by either Dhaka-Sylhet
                         highway or Tongi-Narshingdi highway. The site is located besides the Sitalakha river and uses the
                         water from that river. The Ghrashal Power Plant consists of 6 gas fuelled boiler/steam turbine
                         installations. The units 1 and 2 are the first build installations (in the seventies), producing maximum
                         48MW each (design value 55 MW). The rest of the units have the same size and have 210 MW
                         maximum design capacity each. The unit 4 has been considered for repowering under the proposed
                         operation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Bangladesh power Development Board (BPDB) will be the implementing agency for the
                           component 1. BPDB is responsible for major portion of generation and distribution of electricity
                           mainly in urban areas except Dhaka and West Zone of the country. The Board is under the Power
                           Division of the Ministry of power, Energy and Mineral Resources, Government of Bangladesh.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Although BPDB has not implemented any recent project with the World Bank, it has undertaken
                           projects funded by external development partners that require management of environmental issues.
                           In addition, the country law also requires full environmental assessment of power plant. BPDB is
                           fully aware about the Bank requirement of environmental and social assessment of the project.

                           Power Grid Company Bangladesh (PGCB) and Gas Transmission Company Ltd. (GTCL) are the
                           implementing agencies for component 2 and 3 respectively. Both the agencies are now implementing
                           the Sidhirganj Power Project (P095065) and have experience on the World Bank safeguard policies.

                           During the EIA process, the safeguard capacity assessment of the implementing agencies will be
                           carried out.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)
                           Dr. M. Khaliquzzaman (GENDR)
                           Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project is expected to bring environmental
                           BP 4.01                                            benefit by increasing the efficiency of the power
                                                                              plant and subsequently reducing the emission.
                                                                              However, repowering will involve
                                                                              decommissioning of the existing boiler and
                                                                              associated equipment and also include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              installation of gas compressor, gas turbine,
                                                                              generator etc. Proper environmental
                                                                              management is required for both construction
                                                                              and operation phase. In addition, the project will
                                                                              support the new transmission line and
                                                                              substation. The environmental impacts of
                                                                              transmission lines construction are normally
                                                                              restricted to rights of way (ROW) and not
                                                                              significant. However, construction of new
                                                                              substation may require rehabilitation of the old
                                                                              substations and the key related environmental
                                                                              management issue would be the collection and
                                                                              disposal of old transformers and capacitors.
                                                                              New gas pipeline may also lead to some local
                                                                              environmental impact due to construction work.
                                                                              Environmental health and safety related risks in
                                                                              decommission of the existing boiler and new
                                                                              plant commissioning are major issues. Asbestos
                                                                              based insulators for steam pipes in the existing
                                                                 boiler/turbine system need to be removed during
                                                                 its decommissioning. Asbestos being a
                                                                 hazardous material has to be handled with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 special care. Currently, hydrazine is used in
                                                                 water treatment, which is a highly hazardous
                                                                 substance and a carcinogen. As per WBG EHS
                                                                 guidelines, Hydrazine should be replaced with a
                                                                 less hazardous substance which is now
                                                                 available. Due to anticipated morphology
                                                                 change of the Shitalakhya river during lifetime
                                                                 of the plant, the adequacy of current water use
                                                                 and supply availability have to be carefully
                                                                 looked into. An environmental impact
                                                                 assessment will be carried out during the
                                                                 preparation phase to identify the possible
                                                                 environmental impacts in component 1, 2 & 3.
                                                                 Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will
                                                                 be prepared for 3 components with appropriate
                                                                 mitigation and monitoring activities. The cost of
                                                                 EMP implementation will be estimated and
                                                                 included the bidding document. Separate
                                                                 monitoring plan, arrangement and costing will
                                                                 be made.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   Environmental issues during the construction
                                                                 phase of power transmission lines and gas
                                                                 pipeline may include impacts on terrestrial and
                                                                 aquatic habitat. The possible impact on natural
                                                                 habitats will be addressed through EIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project area does not include any
                                                                 designated forest area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Not relevant to the project

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   During the EIA, studies will be carried out
                         BP 4.11                                 whether the routes of transmission lines and gas
                                                                 pipelines pass through areas with physical
                                                                 cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   Although the proposed project is not expected to
                                                                 have any impact on indigenous people, the
                                                                 policy has been triggered as TBD since detailed
                                                                 information is not available now and social
                                                                 assessment will be carried out during
                                                                 preparation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The addition of lines, expansion of existing
                         4.12                                    networks and establishment of new sub-stations
                                                                 will require land; this may be public or private
                                                                 land depending on the routing of the lines and
                                                                                                                                 requirements of the substation location. Lying
                                                                                                                                 of 16 inch gas pipeline will lead to a small, but
                                                                                                                                 permanent loss of arable land, for which
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 compensation may be required. Thus OP 4.12
                                                                                                                                 has been triggered for the project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Not applicable here.

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The environmental and social assessments will be carried out for the project. The ESA preparation
                                      work is expected to start early August. The appraisal mission is currently planned in Feb, 2015.
                                      All the safeguards mitigation plans along with the ESA will be prepared and disclosed prior to
                                      appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mohammad Anis

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 09-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 22-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
