INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA7925
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uganda                     Project ID:  P145037
Project Name: Agriculture Cluster Development Project (P145037)
Task Team David J. Nielson,Joseph Oryokot
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Feb-2015                Estimated    07-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Crops (50%), Irrigation and drainage (5%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(40%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sect or (5%)
Theme(s):       Trade facilitation and market access (30%), Rural policies and institutions
(3 0%), Rural services and infrastructure (3 0%), Other ru ral development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    248.00             Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
2           BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               150.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                        98.00
Total                                                                     248.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to raise on-farm productivity, production and marketable
surpluses of selected agricultural commodities in specified geographic clusters.
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed project would support activities designed to raise both productivity and overall
production of maize, beans, cassava, rice, and coffee in 12 selected high potential agricultural areas
in Uganda termed "clusters" (see the paragraph below (and Annexes 7 and 8 of the PAD) for
additional explanation of the cluster concept). The proposed project would also support the
development of plans for rehabilitation and expansion of irrigation schemes for rice, and the
development of a national strategic plan for irrigation and water management. The project would
a        support activities to improve the marketing of agricultural commodities. The project would support
MAAIF's capacity to develop, improve, and implement policies and regulatory frameworks for the
production and marketing of the 5 selected commodities. Finally, the project would support the
development and operation of an ICT-based Agricultural Information Platform within MAAIF. The
Components are described in more detail below.
Support from the proposed project would be concentrated on production and marketing of the
selected commodities in 12 geographic clusters. A commodity cluster is an area covering on average
3 districts, with proven potential for at least two of the selected commodities. The cluster approach
provides opportunities for economies of scale in the delivery of value chain support services, and for
the utilization of common marketing infrastructure, input/output bulking and enhanced value addition
(grading and processing of produce). The cluster approach will make it possible for actors from
several districts to take decisions and actions together for issues that extend across the borders of
their respective districts. The proposed project will adopt a phased approach, starting in a small
number of clusters with one or two commodities, and then build toward a broader geographic
coverage and toward covering all of the 5 selected commodities.
Project components
The activities and investments to be supported under the proposed project are organized into four
components:
* Component 1 would support activities related to intensification of production of the selected
commodities at the farm level. This would include expanding access to and use of key agricultural
inputs and on-farm storage and coupling this with more accessible technical guidance on farm
practice and farm management (through ICT methodologies).
* Component 2 would support plans for the rehabilitation and expansion of existing small
irrigation schemes for rice, assist formation of water user groups and look at water management and
conservation.
*      Component 3 would support activities and investments to improve post-harvest handling and
marketing of the selected commodities and to improve the efficiency of output markets for these
commodities and would also support measures to eliminate bottlenecks and trouble spots in rural
access roads and market places.
*      Component 4 would support capacity building and operations of the key institutional actors
(particularly MAAIF, District governments, farmer organizations, and cluster committees).
Component 4 would also support activities to develop, improve, and implement policies and
regulatory frameworks for the production and marketing of the five selected commodities, as well as
development of new ICT-based knowledge management tools and capacities.
Page 2 of 9


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will support the development of plans to expand and develop selected gravity irrigation
schemes in lowlands totaling 6,400 ha of irrigated land in the 10 targeted Districts in cluster 2
(Iganga, Bugiri and Namutamba), cluster 3 (Pallisa, Tororo and Butaleja), cluster 5 (Soroti and
Serere), cluster 6 (Amuru and Nwoya), cluster 7 (Lira), and cluster 10 (Hoima). The exact locations
for the new irrigation schemes have not yet been selected, though they are expected to fall within the
above-listed 10 districts for rice commodity. In some cases, a scheme could lie astride two districts.
The project will prioritize expansion of existing schemes (about 1,000 ha) and the development of
small (about 3,000 ha) and medium (about 2,000 ha) scale schemes, and will not support construction
of large scale irrigation structures in order to minimize extent of environmental and social impacts. It
is anticipated that the development of lowland gravity irrigation schemes will be composed of the
following infrastructure: diversion weir from the river, main canal from the weir to the irrigated area,
distribution network canals, drainage network, internal road, protection dykes (in case of flooding
risk), and land leveling. Other amenities/equipment required for the irrigation infrastructure will be
part of irrigation infrastructure. Dams are not required because the irrigation schemes will target
permanent streams/rivers with enough water for irrigation and downstream use.
If the investment were to be realized after feasibility studies on identified schemes, it is anticipated
that there would be some consequences for Uganda's watershed. The initial examination of these
issues suggest that water for irrigation will be abstracted from the Nile basin watershed which is
shared by 10 countries namely, Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Kenya, Rwanda, Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. On the basis of maximum 35,000 M3/ha/yr as gross
water requirements for rice production, the impact would represent 210 M3/yr or 0.5% of the total
renewable water resources (39 KM3/year). Therefore the water abstraction volume is expected to be
minimal.
Some of the associated negative environmental and social impacts include water abstraction on
downstream users, loss of wetland habitat as a result of the irrigation infrastructure needed, point and
non-point pollution of water sources, soil erosion and siltation, acquisition of land for development
of irrigation infrastructure, water and land-use related conflicts. Most of these impacts are minor or
of low-intensity, site-specific and thus relatively straight forward to manage, with participation of the
Local Governments and WUAs. Infrastructures like dams will not be considered as they could lead to
flooding properties, settlement and affect biodiversity ecosystems. In Northern Uganda, where land
ownership issues are currently hotly debated, land ownership sensitivity analysis will be required.
The project will support rehabilitation of 1,700 km of farm access roads in total. The project will not
support opening up of new roads but rather concentrate on improving existing access roads. The
priorities for road investment at district level will be based on the size of agricultural production for
respective commodities. Access road works will include reshaping (slight earthworks), provisions for
culverts and small bridges and limited lateritic lining to treat critical points as needed. Roads design
could include drainage ditches where longitudinal slopes are accentuated. The likely environmental
and social impacts are expected to be minor given the low mechanized road works that will be
involved, the labor influx during construction will be small and the roads may not be expanded
beyond the already existing width.
The market infrastructure under component 3 will include rehabilitation and/or construction of
storage facilities/structures (network of warehouses and feeder stores) mainly at the Area
Page 3 of 9


﻿Cooperative Enterprises (ACE) level of 500 metric tons each. At this moment in time, it has not yet
been determined whether central warehouses of a larger capacity (5000 tons) may be needed.
The targeted crops are not the traditional cash crops. These crops make the bulk of the food crops
O
U         and women managed crops in communities where they are produced. It is therefore important that
the project recognizes the balance between trade and home consumption as well as the role of women
in production of the strategic commodities for export. In addition, 70% of the agricultural labour is
by women; however, they are disproportionately disadvantaged in respect to controlling assets of
production and productivity in agriculture. Some of the associated negative social impact this project
may include increased gender inequality and equity gap. Gender sensitivity analysis in the project
will be beneficial to the communities and will be undertaken during the compilation of the ESMF.
Designing interventions that bring women on board for equitable empowerment, poverty reduction
through affirmative actions, and women's participation and benefit on all project activities is
important to address this salient issue.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
Herbert Oule (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Component 1 and 3 involves irrigation and
OP/BP 4.01                              infrastructure activities (roads, irrigation related
infrastructure, grain storage and processing
facilities). These have a potential of causing
environmental impacts that require assessment and
mitigation recommendations. The specific location/
site and scope of all project components are not yet
known. Therefore, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) for the whole
project has been prepared, consulted upon, and
disclosed before appraisal. Once there is information
specific to individual sub-projects, site/project
specific Environmental Management Plans will be
prepared during implementation. The ESMF includes
an examination of potential cumulative and induced
impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         The watershed related project activities will be
carried out in wetlands, rivers and lakes. These
natural habitats may be affected by the proposed
project. The project will not support activities that
may lead to clearance of any protected ecosystem or
critical habitats. Screening of any likely
environmental and social impacts on natural habitats
has been guided under the ESMF and shall
subsequently be assessed under the respective ESIAs
and management of any potential impacts included in
the respective sub-project EMPs.
Page 4 of 9


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          By design, the project will not support and/or involve
any significant forestry conversion/degradation
activities.
Pest Management OP 4.09    Yes         Under the proposed project, improved and increased
agricultural activities and production may result in
increased use of pesticides and thus the resultant
environmental impacts. Therefore, a stand-alone
Integrated Pest Management Plan has been prepared,
consulted upon, and disclosed prior to appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        This policy is triggered because of the civil works-
OP/BP 4.11                              related activities and thus the procedure of handling
chance finds has been included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       The project may involve land acquisition leading to
BP 4.12                                 involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access
to resources or livelihoods. Since the exact locations
and potential adverse localized environmental and
social impacts of sub-project activities cannot be
determined prior to appraisal, the project has
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
appraisal a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No          The Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37) is not triggered
because the project will not involve construction of
dams. Dams are not required because the irrigation
schemes will target permanent streams/rivers with
enough water for irrigation and downstream use. An
operation and maintenance manual for each irrigation
scheme shall be prepared during technical designs.
The O&M manual shall include safety issues among
others. FAO Manual on irrigation O&M will be used
to ensure scheme sustainability.
Projects on International   Yes         Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 is
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    triggered because the project will support expansion
and development of irrigation schemes in the Lake
Kyoga basin and river tributaries which drain into the
Nile, an International Waterway which is shared by
10 countries namely, Burundi, Democratic Republic
of Congo, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda,
Sudan, Tanzania, and Uganda. Notification of the
riparian states will be done by GoU before appraisal.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No       The project will not be implemented in disputed
BP 7.60                                 areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 5 of 9


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Some of the associated negative environmental and social impacts include water abstraction on
downstream users, loss of wetland habitat as a result of the irrigation infrastructure needed, point
and non-point pollution of water sources from use of pesticides, fertilizers and other agro-
chemicals, soil erosion and siltation, water and land-use related conflicts. Most of these impacts
are minor or of low-intensity, site-specific and thus relatively straight forward to manage, with
participation of the Local Governments and WUAs. Infrastructures like dams will not be
considered as they could lead to flooding properties, settlement and affect biodiversity ecosystems.
The project will support rehabilitation of 1,700 km of farm access roads in total. The project will
not support opening up of new roads but rather concentrate on improving existing access roads.
The priorities for road investment at district level will be based on the size of agricultural
production for respective commodities. Access road works will include reshaping (slight
earthworks), provisions for culverts and small bridges and limited lateritic lining to treat critical
points as needed. Roads design could include drainage ditches where longitudinal slopes are
accentuated. The likely environmental impacts are expected to be minor given the low mechanized
road works that will be involved. Other impacts associated with the civil works include health and
safety of the workers and the general public, dust pollution, and construction waste/debris.
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected to arise from
this project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not relevant
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
O
ESMF, RPF and IPMP have been prepared by the borrower and were cleared by the Bank. These
will guide the preparation and implementation of site specific plans when the scope of the
proposed irrigation schemes expansion or new developments are outlined in the pre-feasibility
studies for each location.
Water use-related conflicts shall be managed through the Water User Associations and
Community Wetland Management Planning, which very much promote community dialogue and
harmony. Water abstraction shall be regulated by the Directorate of Water Resources
Management. Point and non-point pollution shall be managed by following the guidance provided
in the Integrated Pest Management Plan. Health and safety issues shall be addressed by use of
appropriate safety gear and following all the recommended safety guidelines.
The Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries - MAAIF will be the main
implementing unit of this project at national level, working in liaison with local governments in
the respective districts. The Ministry does not have Environmental and Social management
specialists. Given the fact that agricultural activities contribute cumulatively to environmental
degradation in Uganda, there should be residential in-house capacity in MAAIF for environmental
Page 6 of 9


﻿management. It is therefore recommended that MAAIF creates in-house positions of
Environmental and Social Development Specialists to handle safeguard issues. The Local
Governments have District Environment Officers, and District Community Development Officers,
some of whom are involved in the current Bank Financed ATAAS and NUSAF-2 Projects. Sub-
O
county extension staff shall also be involved in the implementation of safeguard policies.
However, the capacity development of both the National Level Steering Committee and the
respective District and Sub County staff shall be strengthened through a hands-on training on
safeguard requirements as part of the start-up phase of the project.
*         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consistent with best practice in developing ESMFs, consultations were held during field visits
with the key stakeholders and institutions including: MAAIF, NAADS, NARO, MUK, UNBS,
URA, NEMA, Uganda Coffee Development Authority, Local Government Officials especially the
DAO, Line Ministries and Lead Agencies including MWE, and NAADS Agricultural Extension
Workers. This was to ensure that the ESMF addressed existing challenges as captured on the
ground.
The choice of consultation methodologies was based on the type of audience, location and timing.
Government institutions were consulted in their respective establishments through focused
discussions on the project components, environmental and social impacts. Dialogue and interviews
were also held with a sample of smallholder farmers in the different cluster districts to capture the
existing pest and pesticides management methods and well as to collect data on the magnitude of
pest problems in the country. The local communities and farmers were consulted through 'barasa'
meetings and focused groups discussions.
Disclosure of project information was done through the local leaders, extension staff at the
Districts and Sub-counties, and through local daily newspapers on December 2, 2014 and infoshop
on December 11, 2014.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
0
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           1 1-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                   02-Dec-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11I-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                   02-Dec-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Page 7 of 9


﻿Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                15-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                     02-Dec-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[X] No[       ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Page 8 of 9


﻿OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [  ]  No [   ]   NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: David J. Nielson,Joseph Oryokot
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)         Date: 19-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (PMGR)              Date: 19-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


