                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC9107

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                            Project ID:      P148129
                            Project Name:       China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)
                            Task Team           Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           13-Feb-2015                      Estimated        02-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Urban Transport (98%), Flood protection (2%)
                            Theme(s):           City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (98%), Water resource
                                                management (2%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    260.00                      Total Bank Financing:         100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      160.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Total                                                                         260.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           17.     The Proposed PDO is to improve safe and affordable access to areas located in the Tianjin
                           main city, in all weather conditions, through an effective combination of mass transit, buses and non-
                           motorized transport, focusing on people in the bottom 60 percent in terms of income level.

                           18.     By leveraging the Tianjin mass transit and public transport system, the project will relieve
                           congestion. By focusing on a combination of NMT and public transport access, the project will
                         ensure a strong focus on the B40, and build on global best practices. By combining transit oriented
                         development with some of the public transport stations, the project will facilitate walkability. By
                         supporting a flood information system, the project will provide early warning and decision support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system for city managers, transport providers and the public to enhance urban traffic operation and
                         management capability during period of heavy rains or flooding.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will have the following components:

                         Component 1: Street Network Improvement (US$245 million, 96% of cost) :

                         (i)      Construction of bus corridor with high level of service (BHLS) to complement the existing
                         metro network;
                         (ii)     Access improvement to the mass transit system, including selected intersection
                         improvements, interconnection facilities (bike parking, bus connection, park and ride) and street
                         improvements for NMT access at about 10 metro stations. This subcomponent would increase the
                         catchment area of these metro stations and leverage past investments in the mass transit system;
                         (iii)    Street improvement for about 8 urban roads experiencing congestion and playing
                         microcirculation functions, focused on NMT friendly environment and connection with other
                         transport facilities;
                         (iv)     Pilot a Public Bike Sharing system with about 12,260 bicycles and 446 stations to support
                         last mile accessibility; and
                         (v)      Construction of about 8 bus stations including six bus terminals and two integrated hubs to
                         improve the quality of bus service, and to ease transfers between different modes.

                         Component 2: Flood Management Information System (US$6 million, 2.3% of costs): This
                         component includes investment in a geospatial information system that links flood hazard/water
                         logging modelling with: (a) meteorological forecasts, (b) real-time flood levels, and (c) transport
                         management systems, to provide an early warning and decision support system for city managers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transport providers and the public.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance (US$4 million, 1.6% of costs): The proposed topics for technical
                         assistance include:

                         (i)     Flood hazard assessment and performance assessment of existing and planned urban
                         drainage systems, with particular focus on the catchment area of the mass transit system;
                         (ii)    Sustainable green urban transport development strategic study for the Tianjin Central Area;
                         (iii)   Tianjin strategy to control motor vehicle ownership and use (including parking, congestion
                         charges), combined with GHG emission inventory and emission reduction strategy (potentially
                         together with GIZ);
                         (iv)    Decision making supporting system to enhance the Tianjin Central Area bus network and
                         develop a dynamic network improvement plan;
                         (v)     Diversified financing mechanisms for urban transport sustainable improvement, including
                         PPP options for bus terminals, public bike sharing system or BRT;
                         (vi)    Public bicycle management development and operation mechanism, and sustainable
                         development, considering the complementary role of private bikes and public bikes; and
                         (vii)   Comprehensive urban transport improvement and awareness rising for innovative
                         approaches.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project is located in the city of Tianjin, about 150 km southeast of Beijing. It is a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           renowned historic, cultural and portal city in China as one of the four municipalities directly under
                           the Central Government. By the end of 2010, the municipality spread over a total area of 11,946
                           km2, with a total population of 14.13million. Tianjin has formed a twin-center urban development.
                           The main center city is about 280.83 km2, and the Binhai center city is about 304.44 km2.

                           The physical activities of the proposed project are all within the central urban built-up area, i.e.
                           renovation of existing urban streets for BHLS and network improvement, and existing parking lots/
                           empty land reserved for urban utility for bus terminals and bicycle parking lots. There is no sensitive
                           ecological environment site/area identified at the time of identification within the project impact area.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Tianjin PMO (TPMO) was founded in the 1990s for the World Bank financed project Phase 1.
                           This project is the third World Bank loan project the PMO prepared and implemented. The TPMO
                           has extensive experience with World Bank safeguards policies and procedures. TPMO has entrusted
                           Tianjin Environmental Impact Assessment Center, an experienced EIA consultant which has been
                           involved in previous Bank projects in Tianjin. The task team will remain closely engaged to ensure
                           Bank’s safeguards policies be adequately addressed throughout the project preparation and
                           implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Peishen Wang (GTIDR)
                           Meixiang Zhou (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project will include construction activities
                           BP 4.01                                               with regards to the BHLS corridor, bus
                                                                                 terminals, public bike sharing system and street
                                                                                 improvement activities. Some of the bus
                                                                                 terminals may include fuel stations.

                                                                                 The project will have potential environmental
                                                                                 and social impacts related to increased truck
                                                                                 traffic due to material transportation, including
                                                                                 without being limited to noise, traffic
                                                                                 congestion and disruption, air pollution,
                                                                                 business disruption, waste management issues,
                                                                                 safety concerns, etc. during construction stage.
                                                                                 The volume of construction material will be a
                                                                                 small percentage of works taking place in
                                                                                 Tianjin. All such urban road construction
                                                                                 materials is expected to be purchased from
                                                                                 commercial suppliers and not from a new quarry
                                                                                 or borrow pit. The environmental concerns
                                                             during operation stage will mainly be
                                                             environmental compliance of bus terminals/
                                                             hubs in terms of waste management, traffic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             safety, the impacts in terms of road safety and
                                                             traffic of component 1, the impact of fuel
                                                             stations in bus terminals and induced indirect
                                                             and cumulative impacts on land use change
                                                             along BHLS corridor.

                                                             Based on current project design, the BHLS line,
                                                             street improvement and bus hub construction
                                                             will be within the existing right-of-way.
                                                             Existing hub sites or lots have been reserved for
                                                             bus hub and terminals. The environmental and
                                                             social impacts of the project are expected to be
                                                             site specific, well known and are expected to be
                                                             readily mitigated with good construction
                                                             management and known mitigation measures.
                                                             Therefore, this project is proposed as category B
                                                             project.

                                                             An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                                                             and a stand-alone Environmental Management
                                                             Plan (EMP) will be prepared as per
                                                             requirements of OP4.01.

                                                             The main environmental and social issues to be
                                                             addressed by the EIA/EMP will include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             construction dust and noise, waste management,
                                                             source of construction materials, traffic
                                                             disturbance, public accessibility and pedestrian
                                                             and motorists safety, disturbance of roadside
                                                             business, etc. The EIA will also address the
                                                             alternatives of BHLS corridors, the urban streets
                                                             chosen for rehabilitation and especially the
                                                             selection of locations of bus terminals and hubs.
                                                             The locations of the different sites will be
                                                             reviewed to ascertain that the risks of flooding
                                                             are integrated in the design.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The project activities are all within the urban
                                                             built-up area of Tianjin. Based on the current
                                                             proposal, there is no natural habitat involved in
                                                             the area of influence. Since the component
                                                             boundaries may still evolve, this OP/BP is
                                                             marked TBD at this stage, with confirmation to
                                                             take place, once the exact location of all sites
                                                             under the project is finalized, after confirming
                                                                 whether there could be an impact on natural
                                                                 habitats in the area of influence.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There is no forest in the proposed project area,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 therefore this policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve procurement of
                                                                 pesticide or have any impact on pest
                                                                 management practice. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Detailed survey of physical cultural resources
                         BP 4.11                                 will be conducted during EA preparation stage
                                                                 through field investigation, consultation with
                                                                 relevant authorities and general public to
                                                                 confirm whether there is any physical cultural
                                                                 resources within the area of influence of the
                                                                 project. Regardless of the survey findings, a
                                                                 chance-find procedures will be included in the
                                                                 EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    The project activities will be all implemented in
                                                                 the urban area of this historic city. There are no
                                                                 indigenous people in the project site according
                                                                 to the task team’s social screening and social
                                                                 assessment. While some Hui people live in the
                                                                 Tianmu Town though which the BRT route will
                                                                 pass, these Hui people have been well integrated
                                                                 with other communities in this urban area. They
                                                                 are well urbanized for a long history and live a
                                                                 similar life as the majority Han people do.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 These Hui people are not considered as IP under
                                                                 the Bank OP 4.10. Based on available
                                                                 information, the task team concluded the Bank
                                                                 IP policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The civil works under component 1 are
                         4.12                                    expected to be carried on existing urban land
                                                                 with no foreseen need for additional land
                                                                 acquisition or house demolition, based on
                                                                 information provided by the PMO and
                                                                 confirmed by the task team field investigation.
                                                                 All the project civil works are expected to take
                                                                 place within existing street right of way, or in
                                                                 areas under the control of the municipality-
                                                                 owned metro company or bus company, for
                                                                 which land was acquired for more than two
                                                                 years prior to the proposed project.

                                                                 The currently proposed project main civil works
                                                                 include:
                         - BHLS corridors to be built on an existing
                         urban street with sufficient carriage surface and
                         right-of-way, and no need for widening or land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         acquisition/resettlement;
                         - Access improvement at metro stations
                         which mainly involve re-organizing bike
                         parking, park and ride access/facilities at empty
                         street space around existing metro stations, with
                         little civil works envisaged;
                         - Street improvement including rehabilitation
                         and improvement of road surface and sidewalk
                         within existing right-of-way, with no land
                         acquisition and resettlement expected;
                         - 446 bike stations to be installed on sidewalk
                         spaces along existing streets;
                         - 10 bus terminals and hubs which will use
                         either existing bus terminals or municipality-
                         owned land lots reserved for urban utility
                         infrastructures under the city master plan at least
                         5 years ago.

                         No ground attachment are expected to require
                         relocation at this stage. If such need was to arise
                         (for example for public facilities such as power
                         line poles on street or pipes), it will not affect
                         any individual person but rather be addressed
                         through collaboration with relevant government
                         agencies such as the State Grid company.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A Social Assessment including a detailed
                         survey and field investigation is under way and
                         will provide further supporting information and
                         confirmation on such aspects.

                         Upon the finalization of components, a review
                         will confirm whether any land acquisition is
                         required and whether any public facility
                         relocation or demolition is required. It will
                         include a due diligence review of the status of
                         land acquired for the project within recent 2-3
                         years before the project identification. In case of
                         legacy issues of land acquisition, a RAP will be
                         prepared to take remedial actions, and
                         monitoring and evaluation will be continued in
                         project implementation.

                         A resettlement policy framework will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared to manage any currently unforeseen
                                                                                                                                 needs for involuntary resettlement that might
                                                                                                                                 appear during project implementation in case
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 there is any change to project sites which
                                                                                                                                 requires land acquisition or involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve any dams,
                                                                                                                                 therefore, the policy is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            involve any international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                 7.60                                                                                            involve any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      EA October 15, 2014
                                      Social Assessment October 15, 2014
                                      Resettlement Framework October 15, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 29-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 31-Aug-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
