INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSAl 145
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kiribati                    Project ID:  P154012
Parent        P122151
Project ID:
Project Name: Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project Additional Financing (P154012)
Parent Project Kiribati Road Rehabilitation Project (P12215 1)
Name:
Task Team       Pierre Graftieaux,Christopher R. Bennett
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Dec-2014                Estimated    03-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Other public sector governance (10%),
Other urban development (10%), Infrastructure service s for private sector
development (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      17.64             Total Bank Financing:     6.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            4.64
IDA Grant                                                                     6.00
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                           7.00
Total                                                                        17.64
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 9


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project will improve the condition of South Tarawa's main road network and help strengthen
road financing and maintenance capacity.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
Component A: Civil Works - This component consists of the main civil works activities to be
undertaken on the South Tarawa road infrastructure. The activities include:
-Reconstruction and Rehabilitation of Paved Roads on South Tarawa. The road from the Betio Toll
booth to the junction with the Ananau Causeway (22.4 km), the Ananau Causeway to just past the
airport terminal (2.2 km), and the road from the Ananau Causeway junction towards Temaiku (2.2
km) and then to the south of the airport where it will reconnect with the Ananau Causeway road (3.9
km) will be reconstructed or rehabilitated with safety improvements. 11 km of water main adjacent to
the road will be replaced.
-Rehabilitation of Paved Roads in Betio & Bairiki. Repairs to localized pavement failures and
drainage improvements in Betio.
-Sealing of Feeder Roads. 8 km of unsealed urban feeder roads with high traffic volumes will be
sealed and provided with improved drainage. The roads were identified in consultation with the New
Zealand Aid Programme (NZAP) financed South Tarawa Plan (STP).
-Road Safety Improvements. Improvements including solar street lighting, road signage and
pavement markings to address road safet issues on paved roads not included in the main civil works
packages.
-Consulting Services. For the design and supervision of civil works.
Component B: Road Sector Reform - Activities to strengthen the road sector and ultimately lead to
more sustainable main road infrastructure in South Tarawa:
-Microenterprises for Routine Road Maintenance. Provision of assistance in the form of (i) training,
(ii) procurement of basic plant and equipment, and (iii) operational support for the management and
monitoring of contracts, in order to promote the establishment of micro-enterprises to undertake
routine maintenance on the GOK's paved road network, using performance-based contracting
methodology, and under supervision by MPWU.
-Road Safety Action Plan. Development and implementation of a multi-sectoral road safety action
plan in consultation with the Kiribati's National Road Safety Task Force Committee, including
provision of breath testing equipment and radar guns for the traffic police to improve enforcement.
-Drafting of Legislation. Updating the Kiribati road law as well as legislation dealing with speed and
driving under the influence of alcohol.
Page 2 of 9


﻿Component C: Project Support. Specialist support to the GOK for implementation of the Project.
This includes:
-Establishment of the Kiribati Fiduciary Services Unit (KFSU) to ensure the smooth operation of the
project. The KFSU will handle procurement and financial management, as well as assisting in the
preparation of work-plans, budgets, progress and impact reports, and coordination of the overall
implementation of the project.
-Establishing the Project Support Team (PST). A PST Manager/Technical Auditor will support the
MPWU with implementation of the civil works activities.
-Project associated incremental operating costs (e.g. telecommunications, local workshops for
stakeholders, procurement-associate activities, etc.);
-A valuation specialist to identify the appropriate compensation rates for trees and other assets
affected by the Project; and,
-An NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project activities will be located in Tarawa. The investments are on the main road running east-west
along South Tarawa, north towards the airport, north of the airport at Buota and at Temaiku.
Improvements will also be made to feeder roads road in Bairiki, Betio and Bikenibeu. All
investments are on the existing road right-of-way.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Beverley Ann McLean (GSURR)
Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GWADR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes           The project will impact the environment, primarily
OP/BP 4.01                            through temporary impacts associated with road
construction.
The project has been being designed to import road
construction materials from existing commercially
operated land based sources in the Fiji Islandsso as to
avoid the potentially negative environmental impact of
coastal mining of reefs and beaches.
The earlier construction of over 3 km of causeways has
significantly restricted the tidal flows from the lagoon
which is having an impact on water quality and p
otentially health. The project will also seek to improve
the tidal flow from the atoll by installing some new
culverts into these causeways.
The project will undertake an HIV/AIDS education
campaign for workers and affected local residents.
Page 3 of 9


﻿The improved road will result in higher speeds. To
ensure that there is proper safety to road users and local
residents, the project will undertake a road safet
y audit of the design and implement a multi-sectoral
road safety action plan.
The environmental management plan has been prepared
and disclosed prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP    No            The project will not impact on any protected areas,
4.04                                   known natural habitats, or established or proposed
critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36        No            The project will not affect the health, quality or
management of forests, forested areas or tree
plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09   No            The project will not lead to any activities aimed at
managing pests.
Physical Cultural Resources No          There are no activities outside of the existing right-of-
OP/BP 4.11                             way, except for temporary easements for installing
drainage pipes, so the project will not impact on any
physical or cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No            The population of South Tarawa is from a single ethnic
4.10                                    group so no indigenous people issues are expected.
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes           The project will rehabilitate/upgrade roads entirely
OP/BP 4.12                             within the existing road corridor. There will be no
realignment and acquisition of land. Some drainage
easements will be required, with locations determined
during detailed design. A resettlement framework was
prepared to address potential              impacts
associated with drainage easements and to ensure that
proper compensation is paid if necessary. It will also
provide for any unforeseen impacts during project
implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No           No dams are involved.
Projects on International  No           The project does not involve international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas  No          The project does not involve disputed areas.
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment: The Project is rated as a Category B project because the
Page 4 of 9


﻿environmental impacts are considered small scale, reversible and / or temporary. The main
potential environmental impacts identified include: (i) disturbance including noise and dust arising
from loading and unloading, and transportation of construction materials (aggregates and bitumen)
by dump trucks; (ii) noise and dust arising during scarifying the existing road base, construction of
the new road base and construction of the new surface; (iii) erosion and sedimentation from
exposed surfaces that may affect the lagoon environment during the construction processes; (iv)
risks from the use and disposal of hazardous materials such as used fuel and lubricants; and, (v)
increased risk of accidents from increased vehicle movements. A new Coastal Protection EMP has
been prepared to address potential impacts associated with coastal protection works including
seawalls and revetments.
A key consideration during project preparation was where the materials for the road construction
would be sourced. The bulk of the road construction materials is being imported from offshore,
mainly Fiji. This will minimize the demand on the limited local resources.
The improved road will result in higher speeds. To ensure that there is proper safety to road users
and local residents, the project undertook a road safety audit of the design. This identified a range
of actions to be taken to improve road safety. In a beneficiary survey undertaken for the project,
98.5 percent of respondents expressed concern over safety on the road. Women's safety was of
particular concern, with requests for more frequent bus stops and improved street lighting. The
project addressed these concerns by significantly increasing both the number of bus stops and
solar street lights. Much higher road safety standards including speed humps, kerbs, footpaths and
street lighting (through all speed control zones as identified by the local Councils) are being
implemented by the project. The project will also implement a multi-sectoral road safety action
plan.
The original environmental license for the civil works was issued by the GoK on November 26,
2012 and additional licenses have subsequently been issued for variations and changes in scope.
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was prepared and disclosed during project
preparation. This was updated to reflect the final design and included in the bidding document for
the civil works. The Contractor prepared a Contractor's EMP, which provided further details as to
how the provisions of the EMP will be implemented. This CEMP has been amended through the
course of the project to reflect minor changes to methodology and associated impacts. These
amendments have been reviewed by WB and disclosed.
The Bill of Quantity includes costs for environmental management and the contract allowed the
contractor to have payments adjusted as necessary should there be non-compliance. This has not
yet proven necessary as overall compliance has been satisfactory. The government, through
Ministry of Environment, Land and Agricultural Development (MELAD), is monitoring the
design and supervision consultant and Contractor. The World Bank and Asian Development Bank
field join missions to monitor environmental compliance. The current safeguard rating is
Satisfactory.
As noted in the original PAD, road construction materials are being imported from offshore
destinations such as Fiji, thereby minimizing the demand on the limited local resources. The
European Union (EU) is financing an 'Environmentally Safe Aggregates Tarawa' (ESAT) project
with support from the Secretariat of the Pacific Community Applied Geosciences and Technology
Division (SOPAC). The EU financing includes the construction of a dredging barge which is
Page 5 of 9


﻿expected to be operational early 2015. The Bank undertook a detailed assessment of the proposed
approach towards aggregate supply on the ESAT project and agreed, subject to the GoK issuing an
environmental license, that the Contractor could use this material for road construction. The
license was granted by GoK in September 2012.
Involuntary Resettlement Assessment: A draft Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was submitted in
October 2012, and updated in January 2013 to reflect comments from the World Bank and ADB.
The RAP is based on the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) disclosed during project
preparation and was disclosed in country and at InfoShop on May 2, 2013. The RAP reports that
the rehabilitation activities remain mainly within the existing right-of-way. The feeder roads do
not require land acquisition. The Additional Financing will not increase the nature of resettlement
impacts beyond those already addressed by approved documentation.
The rehabilitation works for the completed project will result in:
(i)   Loss of residential land of estimated 8,246 m2 for: (a) providing the roads with an
engineered alignment; (b) drainage easements; and (c) stopping areas. The individual portions to
be acquired from compounds are minimal and have no impact on the concerned households'
income sources and livelihood according to surveys of the affected households.
(ii)  Loss of trees has been estimated with 131 affected coconut palm, pandanus and breadfruit
trees. There are between one and four trees per affected owner who confirmed that their families'
incomes were not dependent on these trees.
(iii)  No loss of primary and secondary structures and no relocation of households.
(iv)  No loss of agricultural land.
(v)   No loss of common property.
(vi)  No Project cases of economic resettlement and vulnerable people.
The loss of land and trees affects was originally estimated to involve 348 landowners including 21
organizations (mainly churches) and 28 owners with two or three plots potentially affected. This
has now been reduced to 339 as result of improved design work. 94% of these have been fully
compensated in accordance with the RAP. Funds for the remaining 6% are held in an escrow
account. In the concerned 11 villages, the estimated 2,319 household members of the affected
households represent about 5% of Tarawa's total population. Taking into account that several
landowners are sometimes affected by the same strip of land to be acquired, this leads to about 193
cases where land is lost only, 31 cases where both land and tress are affected, and 55 cases where
trees are lost only. The resettlement cost is being fully financed by the GoK.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project is not envisaged to have long term negative impact on the environment and people.
Positive impacts though are expected from improved roads, safety and traffic.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
This is the only east-west corridor through South Tarawa so there is no alternative to ensuring that
it meets the basic access needs to the community and remains passable.
The main alternatives considered were with regard to road design options and, importantly,
material selection. The normal practice for materials supply is the use of beach mined coral. The
project will only use a limited amount of these materials, importing high quality material from
sustainably sourced suppliers in Fiji. Any locally supplied material will come from licensed,
Page 6 of 9


﻿sustainable sources acceptable to the Bank. This will minimize the negative environmental impact
of the project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For resettlement, the Borrower has existing institutional capacity for implementing the project.
They are able to identify affected people and pay compensation payments. If needed the project
will provide additional support to the Government's existing grievance system. The project has
supplied a valuation specialist to update compensation for assets such as trees. It will also finance
an NGO to monitor implementation of the RPF.
As noted above, the EMP was prepared by the MPWU with assistance from a consultant procured
by the ADB. It was reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory. The draft EMP was
updated to reflect the final design and was included in the tender document and has been subject to
a number of revisions during implementation, with the most recent version disclosed on October 1,
2014 (Infoshop) and October 20, 2014 (in country).
The RAP has been completed and disclosed incorporating the Bank's comments. As outlined
above, this is being effectively implemented and no outstanding grievances exist.
In accordance with the original design the project is undertaking an HIV/AIDS education
campaign for workers and affected local residents. This work is being executed by a local NGO
(Kiribati Family Health Association).
During implementation, the foreign consultant responsible for construction supervision will be
employed to ensure that the project is implemented in accordance with the EMP and resettlement
framework. An NGO has been hired to provide independent monitoring of the RAP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The road affects virtually the entire South Tarawa population.
As required by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank Safeguards Policies, public
consultations were undertaken during the preparation of EMP. Preliminary consultations were
undertaken on July 10-11, 2010 during the environmental mission to Tarawa, and August 12-26,
2010 during the pre-appraisal mission. Additional public consultations and information disclosure
took place in Tarawa September 20-21, 2010. Upon completion of the design work and tendering,
additional consultations were undertaken on the RAP during December 7 - 18, 2012.
The EMP and RPF/RAP are available locally to the communities at the MPWU office and
Community centers, along with a Public Information Booklet on the project.
The most recent version of the project EMP was disclosed in country and on October 20, 2014,
while the Contractor's EMP and Coastal Protection EMP were disclosed in country on December
12, 2014.
An NGO has been recruited by the project to monitor the RAP implementation and to ensure that
any grievances that arise are properly addressed. Progress to date is satisfactory and there are no
outstanding grievances.
Page 7 of 9


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               01-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                            01-Oct-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kiribati                                                  20-Oct-2014
Comments: Disclosed online on MFED's website http://www.mfed.gov.ki/donar-project
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               02-May-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                            02-May-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Kiribati                                                  02-May-2013
Comments: Disclosed online on MFED's website http://www.mfed.gov.ki/donar-project
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pierre Graftieaux,Christopher R. Bennett
Approved By
Regional Safeguards    Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                    Date: 17-Dec-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez (PMGR)            Date: 21-Jan-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


