                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA6998
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Haiti                               Project ID:    P144614
                            Project Name:      Cultural Heritage Preservation and Tourism Sector Support Project (P144614)
                            Task Team          Sylvie Debomy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-Jan-2014                         Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (50%), Other domestic and international
                                              trade (35%), General water, sanitation and flood protec tion sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Cultural Heritage (60%), Urban services and housing for the poor (15%), Other
                                              urban development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enter prise support (10%),
                                              Other public sector governance (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      45.00           Total Bank Financing:                     40.00
                            Financing Gap:            5.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                             0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                     40.00
                              Total                                                                                         40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objectives of the Project is to contribute to inclusive development around key
                           cultural heritage sites in the North of Haiti by upgrading selected heritage assets, strengthening local
                           community infrastructures and promoting tourism sector development.

                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1 – Cultural Heritage sites and touristic circuits in the National Historic Park (PNH-
                         CSSR) and Cap-Haitien Historic City Center (US$24 million). Investments supported by this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component would focus on the PNH and the historic center of Cap-Haitien. In the PNH, the Project
                         would support conservation and management of cultural and natural sites that can drive and service
                         potential tourist demand, enhancing the attractiveness of the destination and increasing the carrying
                         capacity of the region, while reducing pressure on fragile assets such as the Citadelle Laferriere. In
                         the first phase, the Project would support emergency works to deal with the imminent risks to the
                         integrity of the Citadelle and the Palais Sans Souci, as determined by UNESCO in April 2012. These
                         emergency works would include strengthening foundations, walls, and protecting assets against
                         water infiltration. In parallel, the Project would finance strengthening the capacity of the ISPAN to
                         manage cultural assets, establish a financially sustainable Park Authority, and develop a site master
                         plan and management plan which would be financed under the Project. The management plan will
                         assess best management practices to ensure financial sustainability but will also include spatial
                         management aspects. In Cap-Haitien, the Project would finance targeted investment to upgrade the
                         city’s historic core, with a blend of financing and technical assistance instruments to promote a
                         network-oriented approach, focusing on some classified buildings, squares and streetscapes. The
                         Project would also support the updating of building codes for the city center and the identification of
                         restoration pilot zones where owners of buildings registered as heritage sites would be encouraged to
                         conserve and adaptively reuse them for tourism. Other locations in the North may be added during
                         the Project second phase. Moreover, activities to assess disaster risk would be financed and
                         implemented in coordination with the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) for Disaster
                         Risk Management.

                         Component 2 - Local investments in Dondon, Milot and Cap Haitien (US$6 million). This
                         component would fund investments to improve local urban infrastructure in localities and
                         neighborhoods adjacent to the historical sites being upgraded under the project, to support inclusive
                         growth out of tourism development. The eligible investments would be physical investment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         service sub-projects of a public good nature, implemented at communal and inter-communal level in
                         Milot and Dondon, the adjacent communes of the PNH-CSSR and gateways to the Park, and in the
                         Cap Haitian ne ighborhoods around the historic city core. The project would also fund sanitation
                         studies and the required support to assist in sub-project prioritization, and follow-up, as well as basic
                         means for the municipalities to strengthen their capacity to support the participatory process.

                         The participatory decision-making frameworks and mechanisms developed under the Transport and
                         Territorial Development Project (PTDT, P095523), including the “Communal Consultation Table”,
                         would be used to prioritize and approve the eligible local investment sub-projects. These sub-projects
                         would be “structuring” socio-economic investments relating to the tourism value chain directly or
                         indirectly. They would have to be vetted by the Communal Consultation Table and included in the
                         communal development plan. Municipalities would be allocated an indicative financial envelope.
                         The approval of sub-project proposals, and release of funds would, be predicated on the preparation
                         of a management and maintenance plan and a cost-benefit analysis. Potentially eligible investments
                         include: street lighting and paving, upgrading of sidewalks, drainage and sanitation improvement,
                         upgrade of public squares, façade embellishment, tree planting, and water network extension.
                         Detailed eligibility and selection criteria for the local/communal investments would be described in
                         the Operational Manual. These investments would complement community driven development
                         activities in the framework of the Urban Community Driven Development Project (PRODEPUR,
                         P106699).


                                                                       Page 2 of 14
                         Component 3 – Inclusive Tourism Sector Development (US$4 million). The objective of this
                         component is to support tourism sector development for the North of Haiti that leverages the cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         heritage assets in the region through tourism planning, product development, support to tourism
                         enterprises, community engagement and institutional capacity building. The component aims to
                         support and mobilize the public and private sector actors in the North Haiti tourism sector by
                         financing, inter alia, technical assistance to the Destination Management Organization (DMO) and
                         the Ministry of Tourism. Technical assistance would include: support for tourism planning,
                         development of tourism products (e.g. activities, excursions), marketing and promotion and
                         community engagement in the development of these products. This support would enable the primary
                         public and private actors in the North Haiti tourism sector to commercialize and position touristic
                         products and services in domestic, regional and international markets. It would also provide support
                         to enterprises in the tourism sector, with support ranging from enabling basic business establishment
                         to product development and marketing. The component would also develop and implement a
                         community tourism fund designed to, inter alia, develop and manage local festivals and cultural
                         events in order to engage local populations in cultural heritage tourism. Finally, the Project would
                         finance the upgrading and implementation of the Ministry tourist sector statistics system to orient all
                         actors in the North Haiti tourism sector towards a more strategic and evidence-based approach to the
                         development of the region’s touristic products, markets and support services.

                         Component 4 - Contingent Emergency Response Component (US$1 million). Due to the high risk of
                         a catastrophic event in Haiti (particularly geotechnical (earthquakes, tsunamis, soil liquefaction, and
                         landslides), hydro-meteorological (wind/hurricanes, cyclone, and tsunami), and climate-change-
                         related (sea level rise and coastal erosion), the proposed project would include a provisional
                         component, designed as a mechanism that would allow for rapid response in the event of an eligible
                         emergency. Such components, which include triggers and conditions for the use of funds, are
                         included in most investment projects in Haiti in keeping with the recommendations of the 2011
                         WDR on Fragility and with the operational experience acquired in Haiti since the 2010 earthquake.
                         Subject to the request of the Government and prior approval of an Operational Manual, this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component would support the execution of emergency recovery and rehabilitation sub-projects or the
                         implementation of a subsidy scheme for eligible beneficiaries affected by the emergency. If this
                         component is triggered, all expenditures would be in accordance with OP/BP 10.00 and would be
                         appraised, reviewed, and found to be acceptable to the Bank before any disbursement is made. If not
                         disbursed 24 months before the closing date, the currently allocated amount of US$1 million can be
                         made available to finance activities under the other Project components.

                         Component 5 - Project Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5 million). The Project
                         would be implemented by the existing Technical Implementation Unit (Unité Technique
                         d’Exécution) at the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). The Project would also finance a
                         dedicated ISPAN team in charge of technical oversight of Component one. Under this component 5,
                         the project would finance goods, operating costs, and services needed to ensure effective project
                         implementation, supervision, safeguards and financial management, as well as needed expenses to
                         ensure proper monitoring and evaluation. This component would strengthen management capacity in
                         the areas of management, procurement, and financial management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities and investments would take place in the North of the country, mainly in the
                         National Historic Park and the adjacent communes and in Cap Haitien. These investments would be


                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         coordinated with the Haiti Business Development and Investment project which includes a
                         component on Business Development Services for MSME in the North, with the Infrastructure &
                         Institutions Emergency Recovery which includes local road rehabilitation to touristic areas and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments in the Cap Haitien airport, the Urban Community Driven Development Project
                         (PRODEPUR) which finances local and community drive investments and initiatives, and the
                         Rebuilding Energy Infrastructure and Access Project, which could finance lightning and
                         electrification of the PNH-CSSR buildings, Milot, Dondon and the center of Cap Haitien.

                         The area around the Citadelle and the Citadelle itself is known to be one of the few natural habitats
                         left in Haiti, and the National Historic Park qualifies as a critical natural habitat under OP 4.04. At
                         least 15 species of plants and animals listed as critically endangered, endangered, or vulnerable on
                         the IUCN Red List have been recorded in the area. Birdlife International formally recognizes the site
                         as an Important Bird Area (Citadelle-Sans Souci-Ramiers). This area is surrounded by largely
                         secondary forest with some primary forest, but people have settled along the roads through the park
                         as well as within the forest itself. Direct negative impacts from the project to the forest are unlikely
                         since the proposed Project does not intend to cut any trees in this vicinity and the works would occur
                         on isolated buildings in the park that have few to no trees around them. Indirect negative impacts
                         could occur if tourist development in the area attracts crowds to the area and without protection of
                         the vicinity; people may attempt to build structures in this vicinity which may then lead to further
                         development such as roads, pavements, etc. The development of a Park Business Plan and the
                         establishment of a Park Authority include provisions to avoid or mitigate these indirect negative
                         impacts and contribute to the sustainable protection of the forest. These mitigation measures may
                         include restrictions on the access to and use of the NHP’s natural resources and result in direct
                         negative social impacts such as loss of assets, temporary or permanent income generation and
                         economic displacement

                         Citadel Laferriere and the Palais du Sans Souci are World Cultural Heritage Sites and may be
                         impacted by the upgrading investments in the zone, increasing visitation to the site, an influx of new
                         residents to the area, negative aesthetic impacts, more residential construction close the areas, and a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential increase in vandalism and erosion of the sites.

                         The socially inclusive investments in Milot and Dondon, two communities at the entrances to the
                         National Historic Park may result in limited involuntary resettlement and potential temporary loss of
                         income.

                         The historic core of Cap Haitien is occupied by a vibrant community of different social and
                         economic backgrounds and can be heavily congested in terms of traffic. No direct negative impacts
                         are expected from the project, but indirect negative impacts may include social tension with potential
                         former inmates of the prison, often victims of the Duvalier regime, if the reuse of the site is not
                         openly discussed between the stakeholders, increased congestion on the roads from increased tourist
                         numbers, buses etc. with reduced air quality, increase in crime, violence and negative social
                         behavior.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (LCSEN)
                         Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
                         BP 4.01                                     policy is triggered due to the potential for adverse
                                                                     social and environmental impacts under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     project's main components. Based on the
                                                                     proposed scope of the project activities, the
                                                                     project is proposed as an environmental risk
                                                                     Category B. Investments which would normally
                                                                     be considered as A-type investments would not be
                                                                     eligible for financing.

                                                                     Under Component 1, different types of negative
                                                                     environmental impacts are possible relating to
                                                                     infrastructure investments that would be
                                                                     supported by this project:(i) impacts from civil
                                                                     works associated with restoration and excavation
                                                                     of historical monuments in Cap Haitian (ii)
                                                                     impacts from new construction; (iii)impacts
                                                                     associated with occupational health and safety (e.
                                                                     g., noise, changes in traffic patterns, dust,
                                                                     possible contaminants in the dust, etc (iv)
                                                                     assessment of other social impacts not associated
                                                                     with resettlement or land acquisition. The
                                                                     environmental impacts associated with
                                                                     construction works are likely to be limited in time
                                                                     and space, and actions to minimize and mitigate
                                                                     have been included in the project's ESMF and
                                                                     EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Under component 2, there would be a number of
                                                                     local level investments. These are locally driven
                                                                     investments and currently their location and exact
                                                                     nature are not yet known. The ESMF would be
                                                                     applied to those works or activities not yet agreed
                                                                     to be financed under the project. These may
                                                                     include under investments to promote tourist
                                                                     value chains (artisan market, water and sanitation,
                                                                     lighting, handicrafts, food products, street
                                                                     lighting, river cleaning, etc).

                                                                       Component 3 would focus on tourism related
                                                                       activities and investments may include grant
                                                                       activities for public and private actors in the
                                                                       tourism sector to commercialize and position
                                                                       touristic products and services. The ESMF would
                                                                       screen each of these activities, and an EMP would
                                                                       be developed for them where necessary. In
                                                                       addition, a manual of procedures would be
                                                                       developed for screening grant applications similar
                                                                       to those developed for small grant programs in
                                                                       Haiti. This is to ensure that the environmental
                                                              Page 5 of 14
                                                                       and social screening process is a key part of the
                                                                       grant selection process.

                                                                     Component 4 and 5 are not likely to trigger
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy is
                                                                     triggered because the area around the PNH is
                                                                     known to be one of the few remaining natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     habitats left in Haiti. The area surrounding the
                                                                     PNH qualifies as a critical natural habitat under
                                                                     OP 4.04. At least 15 species of plants and
                                                                     animals listed as critically endangered,
                                                                     endangered, or vulnerable on the IUCN Red List
                                                                     have been recorded in the area. Birdlife
                                                                     International formally recognizes the site as an
                                                                     Important Bird Area (Citadelle-Sans Souci-
                                                                     Ramiers). However, despite this, the project
                                                                     would finance works specific to historical
                                                                     buildings in the PNH and does not intervene
                                                                     directly in the natural habitat areas around the
                                                                     historic buildings. In fact, the work sites have
                                                                     few or no trees. It is therefore expected that the
                                                                     project impact on the natural habitat would be
                                                                     limited. Any negative impacts would be greatly
                                                                     reduced by mitigation measures proposed in the
                                                                     ESMF and subsequent EMPs. The main impact
                                                                     on the Natural Habitat, therefore, would be
                                                                     indirect. The project hopes to increase tourism to
                                                                     the area. This increased tourism would impact the
                                                                     natural surroundings if vendors and others either
                                                                     relocate closer to the PHN to gain access to
                                                                     tourists or if they begin to unsustainably use
                                                                     natural resources and forest products for crafts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     To ensure that these possible impacts do not
                                                                     happen, the Project would work to ensure that the
                                                                     business/management planning for the parks takes
                                                                     into account these possible impacts. As a first
                                                                     step, to be completed by CNGIS by the end of
                                                                     first quarter 2014 is an environmental and social
                                                                     baseline study of the park. As a second step, the
                                                                     Bank would review this document and any gaps
                                                                     in the document would be financed by the Project.
                                                                     The baseline study would help guide and green
                                                                     the business planning (and later, implementation
                                                                     of the plan) for the National Historic Park.
                                                                     Essentially, the baseline study would guide where
                                                                     development under the project can occur, and
                                                                     where it cannot.
                                                                     As a third step, the approved study will serve as
                                                                     an input into the business/management plan for
                                                                     the PHN. Finally, the project will ensure that this
                                                                     is carried through into implementation of the plan.



                                                             Page 6 of 14
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The Forests (OP/BP 4.36) policy is triggered
                                                                         because of the baseline study which would
                                                                         influence the manner in which forests are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         managed around the PNH but also because forests
                                                                         could directly be negatively impacted by an
                                                                         increase in tourists to the area (see section on OP
                                                                         4.04). As mentioned previously, the baseline
                                                                         study would serve as an input into the park
                                                                         business/management plan and would impact
                                                                         where and how development occurs in these
                                                                         touristic sites. Any potential negative impact on
                                                                         Forest would be reduced by implementing the
                                                                         mitigation measures proposed within the ESMF
                                                                         and the subsequent EMPs.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           It is possible that herbicides and biocides would
                                                                         be used to clean the walls of the Citadelle. A Pest
                                                                         Management Plan (PMP) is not required at this
                                                                         stage because the work would largely be done
                                                                         manually, with only small quantities of herbicides
                                                                         and biocides, if needed. While a PMP is not
                                                                         needed, the ESMF (Annex 4) contains a pesticide
                                                                         screening tool that, as per Bank guidance, would
                                                                         "screen pest control products to establish a list of
                                                                         pesticides authorized for procurement under the
                                                                         project." According to Bank guidelines,
                                                                         screening is appropriate when expected quantities
                                                                         are not significant from a health or environmental
                                                                         standpoint, there are not significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         environmental or health concerns, no hazardous
                                                                         products would be introduced and the project
                                                                         would not introduce pesticide use into an area
                                                                         where there has been no use or significantly
                                                                         increase the level of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
                         BP 4.11                                         policy is triggered because of the planned
                                                                         catalytic investments in the Northern Zone to
                                                                         upgrade the Cultural Heritage infrastructure at the
                                                                         National History Park, a UNESCO World
                                                                         Heritage Site which includes the Citadelle
                                                                         Laferriere and the Palais du Sans Souci. The
                                                                         ESMF screens out activities that may negatively
                                                                         impact the site, as well as details criteria for
                                                                         identifying and managing all other social and
                                                                         environmental impacts to the site, including those
                                                                         arising from increasing visitation to the site, an
                                                                         influx of new residents to the area, negative
                                                                         aesthetic impacts, and a potential increase in


                                                                 Page 7 of 14
                                                                        crime and violence.

                                                                        A Physical and Cultural Resources Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        has been prepared, consulted and disclosed to
                                                                        ensure that there is adequate assessment of
                                                                        physical and cultural resources and that any
                                                                        residual impacts are appropriately mitigated. In
                                                                        addition, the Physical and Cultural Resources
                                                                        Framework elaborates on the type of consultation
                                                                        necessary to ensure that there is sufficient
                                                                        consultation with international (including
                                                                        UNESCO), national and local stakeholders
                                                                        regarding these Historic sites. Finally, chance
                                                                        finds procedures will be described in the Plan to
                                                                        safeguard any cultural resources that may be
                                                                        discovered during works or services performed
                                                                        under the project under any of its components.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No            The policy is not triggered since there are no
                                                                        indigenous people in this area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           This policy is triggered because (i) the inclusive
                         4.12                                           local investments of Component 2 may require
                                                                        limited temporary or permanent involuntary
                                                                        resettlement or land acquisition, and (ii) the Park
                                                                        Management Plan for the National Historic Park
                                                                        may include restrictions on the access and use of
                                                                        natural resources within the boundaries of the
                                                                        Park.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        The socially inclusive investments in Milot and
                                                                        Dondon, the two communities at the entrances of
                                                                        the National Historic Park, may result in limited
                                                                        involuntary resettlement and potential temporary
                                                                        loss of income . It is unlikely that the investments
                                                                        in Cap Haitien would result in involuntary
                                                                        resettlement, but indirect negative impacts may
                                                                        include temporary loss of income for the market
                                                                        sellers and traders around the historic sites.
                                                                        Mitigation measures for involuntary resettlement
                                                                        would be identified in consultation with the
                                                                        affected people, and would include the possibility
                                                                        of in-kind compensation based on experiences
                                                                        with urban rehabilitation works in Port-Au-
                                                                        Prince.

                                                                        Because the activities to support inclusive local
                                                                        investments will only be identified using a
                                                                        participatory approach during project


                                                                Page 8 of 14
                                 implementation, a Resettlement Policy
                                 Framework (RPF) has been prepared in
                                 accordance with OP4.12 to assess and mitigate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 the involuntary resettlement impacts in Milot,
                                 Dondon and Cap Haitien, such as economic
                                 displacement and impacts on assets. The RPF
                                 would reflect the following principles:
                                  - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the client
                                 will need to ensure that the sites, boundaries and
                                 ownerships of the relevant land plots are clearly
                                 identified and confirmed using a community-
                                 based mapping exercise that goes beyond simply
                                 checking for legal title.
                                  - In case there is resettlement, agreement on the
                                 compensation scheme and its payment or
                                 realization would be settled prior to the
                                 commencement of that particular sub-project.
                                  - In cases where there are disputed claims to
                                 eligibility to compensation or to land ownership
                                 or use, conflict resolution would be facilitated by
                                 the client, and though works may begin, proper
                                 compensation would be kept in escrow until the
                                 conflicts are resolved. In cases where this does
                                 happen, the client would remain in constant
                                 contact with the affected people and apply the
                                 best available dispute resolution mechanisms in
                                 the country.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Given the objective to spur regional development,
                                 all upstream support that may spur downstream
                                 impacts on resettlement, as defined by the policy
                                 (e.g. through the preparation of bidding
                                 documents, etc.) would include reference to the
                                 principles of OP 4.12 in terms of, among other
                                 things, eligibility for compensation, asset
                                 valuation methodologies, and consultation and
                                 participation.


                                 A Process Framework (PF) was developed to
                                 safeguard potentially affected populations from
                                 restrictions to access and use of natural resources
                                 in the park The PF describes the process by
                                 which potentially affected populations can
                                 participate in the design and implementation of
                                 potentially necessary restrictions to the access and
                                 use of natural resources. It establishes criteria to



                         Page 9 of 14
                                                                                 identify affected persons and the measures to
                                                                                 assist them in improving or restoring their
                                                                                 livelihoods while maintaining the sustainability of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 the Park. The implementation of the PF will
                                                                                 inform the development of the Park Management
                                                                                 Plan and its recommendations will be included in
                                                                                 it.

                                                                                 A Social Assessment will further identify key
                                                                                 stakeholders and eligible groups who live in and
                                                                                 around the park and/or who depend on the park
                                                                                 resources, how these people will potentially be
                                                                                 affected positively and/or negatively, and what
                                                                                 measures need to be in place to ensure that their
                                                                                 wellbeing is given utmost priority.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The policy is not triggered since the proposed
                                                                                 Project would not invest in dams nor would any
                                                                                 project activities rely on the operations of existing
                                                                                 dams.
                            Projects on International            No              The policy is not triggered since Project activities
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 would not affect any known International
                                                                                 Waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The policy is not triggered since Project activities
                            7.60                                                 would not affect any known disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project would invest in the National History Park World Heritage Site which is one of the few
                              natural habitats remaining in Haiti and which qualifies as a critical natural habitat under OP 4.04.
                              However, the actual works on the buildings, a key focus of the project, would be far from the
                              natural habitat. Therefore, there is little potential for any large scale, significant or irreversible
                              impacts on the species or the plant life. In 1985 (last siting) there were a few frogs found in and
                              around the grounds of the Citadelle that belonged to a species of critically endangered frog
                              (Eleutherodactylus poolei). While it is unlikely that the frog still exists in the building almost 30
                              years later, a baseline study of the park and its habitat is almost complete that focuses on
                              describing and quantifying to the extent possible, the natural habitat of the area. The study would
                              serve as an input into the business/management plan for the Citadelle and its surrounding historic
                              sites.

                              The Citadel Laferriere, Ramiers and the Souci Palace are the main historic buildings in the
                              National History Park World Heritage Site and qualify as Physical Cultural Resources under OP
                              4.11. Structural strengthening and conservation works are undertaken precisely to avoid further
                              degradation of the site and avoid large scale, significant or irreversible damage to them as a result
                              of natural disasters. Close cooperation with UNESCO would ensure that there are no negative


                                                                        Page 10 of 14
                          impacts on the cultural value of the sites. The Physical and Cultural Resources framework has
                          been prepared as a measure to mitigate potential significant adverse impacts on Physical Cultural
                          Resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Park Management Plan may include restrictions to the access and use of natural resources
                           within the perimeter of the Park to ensure the biodiversity and environmental sustainability of the
                           Park. The need for such restrictions will be identified in the baseline environmental study and a
                           gender-sensitive social assessment will identify the groups that may be impacted by these
                           restrictions. The Process Framework was developed to ensure that the inclusion of restrictions in
                           the Park Management Plan will be done in participation and in consultation with the affected
                           population and that appropriate mitigation measures for the social impacts of these restrictions are
                           put in place.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Component 1 focuses on works that would be done on the Citadel Laferriere, Ramiers, Sans Souci
                           Palace, and other historic sites. These works would primarly focus on structural strengthening to
                           enhance building resilience against disasters, restoration of gardens and archaeological
                           excavations requested by UNESCO. In addition, the component would finance small investments
                           to facilitate access of visiting tourists such as protection railing, public latrines, sanitation
                           facilities. Possible negative impacts include debris and waste management, erosion, worker and
                           public safety and noise. Social impacts may include temporary disruption to vendors who sell
                           outside the historic sites or who transport visitors to the sites. However, every effort would be
                           made to minimize disruption to worker livelihoods. The ESMF, EMP (for the known
                           renovations), RPF and Process Framework have developed screening tools and mitigation
                           measures to ensure that all the possible risks are mitigated. Environmental requirements would
                           also be included in contractor contracts to ensure adherence to worker and public safety and to
                           ensure that mitigation measures are carried out where necessary.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Additional activities would focus on the rural communities bordering the park, particularly Milot
                          and Dondon. The list of possible infrastructure investments in these communities may include
                          some rehabilitation of existing infrastructure (e.g., artisan market, access, water and sanitation).
                          Excluded from this list are are dams and landfills. Since these activities are demand driven, it is
                          not possible to know ahead of time which impacts may be encountered. The use of a screening
                          tool and frameworks will be important during the roll out of these activities. All the frameworks,
                          as well as the screening tools have already been developed.

                          One unintended longer term negative impact of the project may result from an increase of tourism
                          to the sites. An increase in tourists may cause additional people to move into the park, to access
                          the park resources (trees etc) to make handicrafts, and erect temporary structures from which to
                          sell their wares. While this is unlikely to occur within the time frame of our project, it would be
                          important to plan for it. The Government has already put in place some park guards to reduce
                          pressure on the natural habitat surrounding the park as a first step. In addition, through the
                          Project's financing, there would be a business management plan for the park which, although
                          focused on increasing park revenues, would also engage in spatial planning for the park. This
                          would serve to regulate any temporary or illegal structures. The Project team would also discuss
                          with Government the need to put in place longer term planning for protection of the natural habitat
                          in the park beyond park guards (e.g., educational programs on conservation, etc). In the event that
                          these discussions would engender the need to restrict access to natural resources within the


                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                           perimeters of the park, a Process Framework was developed to ensure that these discussions
                           include the full participation and consultation of the affected groups. As the same time a detailed
                           gender –sensitive social assessment is being carried out as a measure to mitigate potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                           significant social impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           To minimize large scale adverse impacts, some investments were considered and discarded such
                           as dam renovations, landfills and the designation of market areas. These were considered to be too
                           large-scale and with too many possible adverse impacts that could not be mitigated on a small
                           scale development program for communities. Any option that would remove the people from the
                           Park has been discarded to avoid social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The MEF’s UTE would be responsible for the implementation of the Project. However, given the
                           number of projects they are already responsible for, another environmental and social specialist
                           will be recruited. The social specialist would have an expertise in cultural heritage and experience
                           with Process Frameworks in addition to involuntary resettlement experience. The specialists
                           would be located in the UTE head office, but would be required to spend a certain percentage of
                           their time in the North.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholder consultation is a very important aspect of this project because the project intervenes in
                           a World Heritage site area that is a national and international treasure. Local populations and the
                           international community (IUCN, UN, NGOs, UNESCO etc.) have been consulted as part of this
                           process. Given the higher risk associated with restoring a national treasure and World Heritage
                           Site, a mechanism would be set up to ensure full two-way communication with all stakeholders.
                           The project would therefore finance a communications and outreach plan that allows for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monitoring and follow-up of stakeholder feedback. The development of the RPF, Process
                           Framework, ESMF, EMPs and PCRF was also a consultative process.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      17-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                               18-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      17-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                               18-Dec-2013
                           Comments:

                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                            18-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?



                                                                   Page 13 of 14
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Sylvie Debomy
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 09-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                             Date: 15-Jan-2014




                                                                       Page 14 of 14
