                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE

o              a                                                         Report No.: ISDSC5418

    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-May-2014
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2014
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
      A. Basic Project Data

       Country:           Uzbekistan                       Project ID:      P146328
       Project Name:      Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)
       Task Team          Jacques Bure
       Leader:
       Estimated       14-Oct-2014                         Estimated        27-Jan-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GTIDR                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                           Instrument:
       Sector(s):         Railways (90%), Other domestic and international trade (10%)
       Theme(s):          Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:        1633.75                Total Bank Financing:         195.00
       Financing Gap:                0.00
          Financing Source                                                            Amount
          Borrower                                                                    1088.75
          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        195.00
          China Export Import Bank                                                     350.00
          Total                                                                       1633.75
       Environmental A - Full Assessment
       Category:
       Is this a          No
       Repeater
       project?

      B. Project Objectives
      The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce costs and provide connectivity
      between the Uzbek part of the Ferghana Valley and the rest of Uzbekistan thereby improving access
      and closing economic gap with the rest of Uzbekistan and international markets.
      C. Project Description
      The proposed Project will support Uzbekistan Railways to build a single 124 km track rail link
    between Angren and Pap with a 19.6 km rail tunnel through the Kamchik Pass. The proposed Project
    will be an Investment Project Financing of about $200 million that would be made to the Ministry of
    Finance and on-lent to UTY. It would support such components as signaling, electrification, track
    maintenance equipment for the Angren - Pap railway line, technical assistance to UTY, technical
O
    assistance and small infrastructure investment for regional development. The disbursement profile
    for the Project will be back-end loaded with technical assistance and regional development activities
    to be completed in the first half of the Project and the rail related investments to be completed in the
    second half.

    Component 1: Rail Investments
    *        Signaling and Communications (US$ 50 million). The proposed loan would finance a
    microprocessor based train control system with fiber optic-based communications. The system would
    be controlled from UTY's existing dispatching center in Tashkent. UTY will carry out the related
    civil works (buildings, cable ducts and cable laying).
    *        Track Maintenance Equipment (US$ 70 million). The proposed loan would finance
    equipment such as tamping machines used for maintaining the track.
    *        Electrification (US$ 54 million). The proposed loan would finance (a) turnkey construction
    of three traction substations including the SCADA system for optimizing energy use, and (b)
    materials such as cables for the catenary. UTY will construct the catenary structure and install the
    cabling.
    *        Track Materials (US$ 23 million). The proposed loan would finance rails, sleepers, turnouts,
    switches and fastenings for construction of the track. The installation of the materials would be
    carried out by UTY.

    Component 2 (US$ 1 million): Technical Assistance for UTY including technical assistance for
    design, tunnel safety, technology on signaling and communication, study to explore private
    participation options.

    Component 3 (US$1 million): Technical assistance for Uzbek Ferghana Valley regional government
    to develop a Valley Transport Logistics Platform which would enhance the linkages of road and rail,
    with a clear aim of providing improved logistics with a special focus to assist agricultural producers
    and small businesses in the Valley to improve their export potential.

    Component 4 (US$ 1 million): Implementation Support.
    D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    The railway start/end points are cities of Angren and Pap. Angren is located in Tashkent oblast and
    has population of 127 thousand people. The city used to be a center of Uzbek coal industry. Pap is a
    rayon center with population of 25 thousand people, located inthe North-West of Fergana Valley.

    The proposed alignment of the railway goes through diverse plain and mountainous terrain and both
    environmental (Environmental Assessment, OP 4.01) and social (Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12)
    safeguard policies will be triggered. Scale of potential environmental and social (resettlement)
    impacts is significant and this project should be classified as Environmental Category A. Four
    alternative alignments were considered at initial stage of alignment identification and two alignments
    were considered at pre-feasibility stage. Option A (preferred option) is 123 km long and has two
    tunnels (19.1 km and 0.2 km) with the range of tunnel altitudes between 1320 m and 1485 m. Option
    B is 146 km long, has 14 tunnels with total length of 19.5 km with the range of tunnel altitudes
  between 1799 m and 1895 m. The tunnel fall/decline in both options is 20/1000.

  Within Angren the ROW of the existing railroad will be used and starting from the coal mining area
  to the East of Angren the "greenfield" part will go. The Northern section of the railway (i.e. section
  between Angren and tunnel portal at km 36) will go along Akhangaran water reservoir and will
  cross/overpass (bridge or embankment) at least one of the reservoir's small bays. Also, the alignment
  runs through Akhangara river canyon/ravine with very diverse and rough topographic profile. At
  several points the ravine is very narrow and will require carefully crafted environmental mitigation
  plans to prevent significant negative impact on the river Akhangara. This will require full-scale EIA
  and preparation of detailed EMP (Environmental Category A). The tunnel will start at km 36 and end
  at km 57 nearby the river Sansalak-Sai. Between km 63 and km 85 the road will go along Gulistan,
  Altynkan and Chadak villages and the territory of Almalyk ore mining works (non-ferrous metals).
  Within the Southern section (i.e. section between the tunnel portal at km 57 and Pap) the railroad will
  go through agricultural land. Starting km 95 the road will enter agricultural non-arable (according to
  UTY - pastures). The last 20 km of the railroad before entering Pap will go through agricultural
  arable land. The preliminary assessment of the scope of land acquisition and resettlement done by
  Design and Surveying Institute of Uzbekistan is not fully disclosed to the team at the moment. The
  identification mission and preliminary discussion on the ground suggest that at least 329 households
  including farms and small number of commercial entities (local bazars) could be affected. The full
  social baseline survey will need to be conducted to determine exact estimates. The Resettlement
  Action Plan is expected to be developed to clearly identifying existing gaps between proposed social
  impact mitigation measures, including ongoing resettlement and land acquisition and the gap with
  the Bank's safeguards policies.

  As a separate environmental concern it should be noted that the area of the tunnel is considered to be
  a prospective uranium mining field. At nearby locations the radioactivity at anomalous points reaches
  1000 microrentgen/hour. Detailed radiological surveying of the area is needed as part of the
  upcoming detailed design preparation phase.
  No public consultations on Draft EIA were held.
  E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
  Uzbekistan Railways (state company) has assigned a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to work on
  this project. Mr. Navruz Erkinov was appointed as Head of the PIU. Implementation arrangements
  have to be discussed with UTY.
  F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
  Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
  Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)

II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
  Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
  Environmental Assessment         Yes            The draft EIA (Statement on Environmental Impacts
  OP/BP 4.01                                      in Uzbekistan) for railway and tunnel was prepared
                                                  by the Design institute Boshtransloiha. Following the
                                                  recommendations of the State Expert Review and the
                                                  Bank, the EIA is being updated and advanced draft
                                                  of the EIA (with EMP) acceptable to the Government
                                        of Uzbekistan and the World Bank will be publicly
                                        disclosed and consulted upon with interested
                                        stakeholders. The EIA (with EMP) will includes
o
                                        action plans for: (a) management of radioactivity
                                        risk, (b) mitigation of negative environmental
                                        impacts in sensitive areas (i.e. pollution of rivers and
                                        streams, water protection zones), (c) management of
                                        borrow pits and sites for waste material, (d)
                                        management of geological risks and emergency
                                        situations, and (e) Physical Cultural Resources.
                                        Social Assessment has not been part of the EIA,
                                        although land acquisition and involuntary
                                        resettlement impacts have been partially identified.
                                        The project requires EIA. The pre-feasibility study
                                        was prepared by Design and Surveying Institute of
                                        Uzbekistan. Draft EIA prepared in 2012 as part of
                                        pre-feasibility study highlights key environmental
                                        impacts and proposed mitigation measures with good
                                        level of detail. Next stages of the EIA - Final EIA
                                        and Statement on Environmental Impacts (document
                                        required by legislation of Uzbekistan) will be
                                        undertaken upon completion of preparation of
                                        feasibility study and project commissioning
                                        respectively. Social Assessment has not been part of
                                        the EIA, although land acquisition and involuntary
                                        resettlement impacts have been partially identified.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Draft EIA indicates potential impacts on a number of
                                        Red Book species and important natural habitats
                                        (though these areas do not have "protected area"
                                        status). The team will review the report prepared by
                                        the institute of flora and fauna genetic of the
                                        Academy of Science of the Republic of Uzbekistan
                                        and determine whether OP 4.04 will be triggered.
    Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   Draft EIA indicates potential impacts on forested
                                        areas along the alignment. The team will review the
                                        EIA documentation and the report prepared by the
                                        institute of flora and fauna genetic of the Academy
                                        of Science of the Republic of Uzbekistan and
                                        determine whether OP 4.36 will be triggered.
    Pest Management OP 4.09       No    Not applicable.

    Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   Draft EIA highlights potential impact of railway
    OP/BP 4.11                          construction on historical and cultural monuments of
                                        Uzbekistan and recommends to undertake detailed
                                        archeological survey of the railway line route.
                                  TBD   Will be assessed during project preparation
          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP
          4.10
          Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                 Yes                        The project will require land acquisition (both
          BP 4.12                                                                                 residential and agricultural land) and resettlement.
                                                                                                  Currently, civil works are ongoing. UTY together
                                                                                                  with a working group under the Ministry of
                                                                                                  Economy committed to prepare a Resettlement
                                                                                                  Policy Framework for the project, and a Resettlement
                                                                                                  Action Plan for any areas where the design of the
                                                                                                  railway line and structures is sufficiently advanced
                                                                                                  that the affected people can be identified. The Audit
                                                                                                  of the resettlement, which was already completed to
                                                                                                  date, will specify any remedial measures that would
                                                                                                  be needed to bring that resettlement into compliance
                                                                                                  with OP 4.12. The client is expected to implement
                                                                                                  remedial measures, including provision of any
                                                                                                  compensation retroactively.
          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                    TBD                        Part of the proposed railway alignment is near a
                                                                                                  reservoir, so it must be determined whether it would
                                                                                                  be vulnerable to breakage of a dam associated with
                                                                                                  that reservoir.
          Projects on International                                    TBD                        During project preparation it will be determined
          Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                    whether the Akhangara river qualifies under WB
                                                                                                  criteria as an international water body and whether
                                                                                                  the policy should be triggered.
          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                       Not applicable
          BP 7.60
0

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-May-2014
         B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
            The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




    Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoSihop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
    The pre-feasibility study was prepared by Design and Surveying Institute of Uzbekistan. Draft
    EIA prepared in 2012 as part of pre-feasibility study highlights key environmental impacts and
    proposed mitigation measures with good level of detail. Preparation of the Draft Statement on EIA
    was a collaborative effort of experts from 18 organizations, including various state agencies,
    specialized design institutes and companies. Next stages of the EIA - Final EIA and Statement on
    Environmental Impacts (document required by legislation of Uzbekistan) will be undertaken upon
    completion of preparation of feasibility study and project commissioning respectively.
    Draft EIA made following recommendations for additional studies/surveys:

     1.       Detailed engineering-geological surveys and avalanche researches per approved scenario
    of the railway route for development of protection measures in the landslide-landfall areas.
    2.        For the selected scenario of the route, undertake seismic risk micro-zoning of the route
    territory.
    3.        Radiation/environmental researches of the surface and depth of the railway line route and
    the mountain pass tunnel.
    4.        Detailed archeological survey of the railway line route.
    5.        Design of phytomeliorative works, aimed as prevention of erosive processes and
    degradation of plant cover along the route of the new railway line for the purposes of
    compensation of the damage caused by the construction to the biological resources.

    It should be noted that preparation of detailed design goes in parallel with on-going construction.
    This is being done due to extreme urgency of works on this project (Resolution of the President of
    Uzbekistan # 1985).

    There remains the issue that the Draft EIA appears not to have been prepared by an independent
    party as required by WB for Category A projects. The Environmental Specialist on the Project
    Team is in the process of reviewing this document, and the RSA will also review it. Depending
    on the quality of the Draft EIA, it may be decided that an independent new or supplementary EIA
    should be prepared, or the Team might propose to seek Board approval to commission an external
    independent review of the document in lieu of requiring the Borrower to have a new document
    prepared independently. The options for addressing the WB requirement for 2 consultations will
    be discussed based on the decision on how to proceed with obtaining an EIA acceptable to the
    WB.
IV. APPROVALS
  Task Team Leader:       Name: Jacques Bure


  Approved By:
  Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                 Date: 18-Dec-2014
  Coordinator:
  Practice Manager/       Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                             Date: 18-Dec-2014
  Manager:
