                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA6879
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pacific Islands                     Project ID:    P130592
                            Project Name:      Pacific Regional Connectivity Program 2:Palau-FSM Connectivity Project
                                               (P130592)
                            Task Team          Natasha Beschorner
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       20-Oct-2014                            Estimated   22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTIDR                                   Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Telecommunications (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (85%), Regulation and
                                              competition policy (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      72.50           Total Bank Financing:                   47.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  47.50
                              Asian Development Bank                                                                       25.00
                              Total                                                                                        72.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the Project is to reduce the cost and increase the availability of ICT
                           services needed to support social and economic development.


                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                          3. Project Description
                         The Project will finance the following components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. International connectivity infrastructure. ($44.5 million).

                         (a)      Subcomponent 1A: Palau-Yap-Guam Cable System (US$22.5 million). To participate in a
                         joint venture with Palau for the construction of the Palau-Yap-Guam cable system, comprising a half
                         share in the international cable system assets and an undivided right to own and manage the onshore
                         FSM cable system assets in Yap including the Yap landing station and the point of interconnection
                         for domestic operators to interconnect with the cable system;

                         (b)     Subcomponent 1B: Chuuk-Pohnpei Cable System (US$18.5 million). For an undivided right
                         to own and manage a new cable system which will be constructed between Weno and either at the
                         Pohnpei landing station or the branching unit on the Pohnpei spur to the HANTRU-1 cable system
                         (whichever is financially and technically most advantageous); and

                         (c)    Subcomponent 1C: Kosrae Connectivity (US$3.5 million). This will finance a one-time
                         purchase of international bandwidth for Kosrae on terms which promote equitable access to
                         broadband access across FSM.

                         Component 2. Technical Assistance ($2.25 million) will finance advisory services and training for:

                         (a)     Design and ownership structure of existing and new infrastructure.

                         (b)      Reform and development of FSM Telecommunications Corporation. Options for
                         restructuring FSMTC and resulting actions to strengthen FSMTC’s capacity to operate in a
                         competitive market.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (c)      Sector regulation and regulatory capacity development. Complementing the TA Project
                         (P132686), financing for medium-term technical assistance to develop key capacities within the new
                         sector regulator.

                         Component 3. Project management support ($0.75 million) will finance Project management and
                         coordination, financial management, audit, general Project reporting, monitoring and evaluation, and
                         administrative costs associated with project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will finance an optical fiber submarine cable between Palau and Guam with a spur to
                         Yap (FSM). It involves the placement of a submarine fibre optic cable from Guam to Palau with a
                         spur to Yap and a long link connecting Chuuk to the existing Guam Pohnpei cable (HANTRU-1), for
                         a total of over 2,000 km, much of it in deep ocean waters and the preparation of the landing facility
                         and structure (about 40m2) at both locations. For Yap, the cable will likely be placed in the center of
                         the shipping channel to the bridge, by Colonia harbor and then into Chamorro Bay, outside of the
                         marine conservation areas, to the state-owned landing area and facility site. For Chuuk, it will likely
                         be the corridor from the Guam-Pohnpei cable junction skirting a number of atolls, also outside of the
                         marine conservation zones, to the North East end of the airport runway and then either to the existing
                         FSMTC office or to the governor’s complex via an existing easement.


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         At the Palau and Guam ends, the cable will be connected to existing landing stations. The Initial
                         Environmental Examination safeguards documentation prepared by the Recipient has indicated that
                         in Yap, the inland location for both the landing sites, and the site for the cable station are on vacant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government land and that the sites are not being used by other parties. No structures, crops or
                         productive trees will be used will be affected. No land acquisition will be required and no
                         involuntary resettlement has been identified. The cable landing site in Chuuk is located adjacent to
                         the airport and is currently being purchased by the State Government. The key issue here is to ensure
                         that the compensation for this land is paid in full, that appropriate consultation has been carried out,
                         that the compensation reflects the full replacement cost of this land and that no outstanding
                         grievances exist in relation to this purchase. Both options for the actual cable station are located on
                         Government owned land (one option is an FSM Telecom compound and the other is in the State
                         Government headquarters of Michitiw. Existing overnment easements are proposed to be used to
                         bring the fibre optic cable to the cable station.

                         The population of FSM is comprised of many ethnicities; and all are descended from, and belong to,
                         the Micronesian culture. These different ethnicities are Chuukese 48.8 percent, Pohnpeian 24.2
                         percent, Kosraean 6.2 percent, Yapese 5.2 percent, Yap outer islands 4.5 percent, Asian 1.8 percent,
                         Polynesian 1.5 percent, other 6.4 percent, unknown 1.4 percent (2000 census). Based on recent
                         analytical work completed by the World Bank the communities within FSM are not considered to
                         have the four characteristics required to trigger OP 4.10 (self-identification as distinct indigenous
                         cultural group and recognition of this identity by others; collective attachment to geographically
                         distinct habitats or ancestral territories in project area and the natural resources in these habitats or
                         territories; Customary cultural, economic, social or political institutions separate from those of the
                         dominant society and culture; and Indigenous language, often different from official language of the
                         country or region).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             The Project involves the laying of submarine
                         BP 4.01                                               cables and the construction of landing stations in
                                                                               Palau and FSM. An existing landing station will
                                                                               be used in Guam. Accordingly no construction
                                                                               activities will be required in Guam and no social
                                                                               or environmental impactsare anticipated.

                                                                               Potential negative environmental impacts related
                                                                               to the laying of the submarine cables, operations
                                                                               and maintenance phase of the cable operation and
                                                                               in the eventual removal of the cable are small-
                                                                               scale and temporary. The anticipated impacts
                                                                               include clouded water due to the temporary
                                                                               suspension of sand along the sections of the
                                                                               alignment due to cable laying and trenching; air
                                                                               and water pollutants as well as noise and
                                                                               vibration from survey and cable placement


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                                                     vessels; minor disturbance to coral reefs,
                                                                     mangroves, other marine habitats and
                                                                     hydrothermal vents; foreign, biologically-harmful
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     or chemically-reactive cable materials or release
                                                                     of harmful substances during cable laying
                                                                     operations.

                                                                     The Recipient has completed environmental and
                                                                     social assessments in the form of an Initial
                                                                     Environmental Examination (IEE). Two IEEs
                                                                     have been prepared, one for FSM and one for the
                                                                     Guam to Palau cable, both of which include an
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                     (ESMP) for mitigation, monitoring and reporting
                                                                     of all identified impacts including institutional
                                                                     responsibilities, policy, legal, and administrative
                                                                     framework, cost and financing, and monitoring.
                                                                     Embedded in the ESMPs are an Environmental
                                                                     Code of Practice (ECOP) which lists the items
                                                                     defined in the ESMP and adds further detail on
                                                                     boundaries and restriction to be adhered to by
                                                                     contractors conducting work in the marine
                                                                     environment and on shore. The IEE also contains
                                                                     procedures to establish a Grievance Redress
                                                                     Mechanism. The IEE includes assessment of all
                                                                     project-related development sites and general
                                                                     layout and extent of facilities at project-related
                                                                     development sites, analysis of alternatives for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     determination of the best location and technology
                                                                     of the cable alignment, cable laying, landing sites
                                                                     and cable stations; flow diagrams of facilities/
                                                                     operations, design basis, size, capacity; pre-
                                                                     construction, construction and operational
                                                                     activities; construction, schedule, facilities and
                                                                     services; operation and maintenance activities.
                                                                     Community consultations were undertaken, and
                                                                     this has been documented in the IEE and ESMP
                                                                     and has been disclosed by the government.

                                                                     Unexploded ammunition from WWII poses risks
                                                                     that will be mitigated through careful
                                                                     management and due diligence; this issue is (also)
                                                                     addressed in the ESMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           This policy is triggered since the cable alignments
                                                                     for Yap and Chuuk will run through natural
                                                                     habitats but will not enter any conservation area,
                                                                     nor degrade or convert any critical natural habitat.



                                                             Page 4 of 10
                                                                         Although the alignment runs close to 2
                                                                         conservation areas in Yap, no impacts are
                                                                         expected given the small scale of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         infrastructure being installed. The IEE has
                                                                         assessed the impacts on the marine life and the
                                                                         coastal ecosystems and has proposed mitigating
                                                                         measures in the ESMP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This policy is not triggered. It has been confirmed
                                                                         the landing stations in FSM, Palau or Guam will
                                                                         not be in mangroves or any forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            This policy is not triggered as there will be no use
                                                                         of pesticides in this project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered. Chuuk branch line will
                         BP 4.11                                         run directly from junction to Weno, entering the
                                                                         Chuuk Lagoon through the northeast channel.
                                                                         Draft Chuuk Historic Preservation Act declares
                                                                         there is a significant number of sunken World
                                                                         War 2 (WW2) relics (including 80 wrecks) in
                                                                         Chuuk Lagoon protected under law and these
                                                                         shipwrecks for nomination to UNESCO’s World
                                                                         Heritage listing. The ESMP has identified
                                                                         potential impacts to the PCR and mitigating
                                                                         measures and chance find provisions are
                                                                         contained therein. A separate PCR management
                                                                         plan will be prepared and disclosed after detailed
                                                                         information on the relics is gathered during the
                                                                         oceanographic and bathymetric survey. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ESMP also establishes a chance-find procedure
                                                                         by requiring that if the alignment is found to
                                                                         affect any cultural heritage once the work has
                                                                         begun, mitigative actions will be discussed with
                                                                         local officials and an optional plan implemented
                                                                         and monitored.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            This policy is not triggered as there are no IPs
                                                                         identified in the project sites. This is consistent
                                                                         with the PIC guidelines.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            No land acquisition is required for any of the
                         4.12                                            landing sites and all cable routes are along
                                                                         existing government owned roads. Construction
                                                                         related impacts are managed via the ESMP to
                                                                         ensure these are mitigated and inconvenience to
                                                                         local communities minimized.

                                                                         Due diligence documentation has been prepared
                                                                         for the Palau and FSM landing sites. The project
                                                                         sites (cable landing site and site for cable station)



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                  in Yap will be located on a government land in
                                                                  Nimar Village in Weloy Municipality, Colonia
                                                                  (Parcel No. 002 F 01 title) thus will not require
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  land acquisition. Both cable landing site and site
                                                                  for cable station are on a vacant government land
                                                                  in a government precinct including staff quarters,
                                                                  government offices, the Post Office and Office of
                                                                  Lands in the capital.

                                                                           The cable landing station for Chuuk will
                                                                  be on land which has already been acquired by
                                                                  the State Government prior to the project and not
                                                                  for the direct purpose of the project. The land on
                                                                  which the cable landing site will be located is
                                                                  fully owned by the Government. This is
                                                                  confirmed in a letter from the Governor of Chuuk
                                                                  State to the Chairperson of the FSM Fiber Optic
                                                                  Cable Taskforce. Ongoing monitoring will be
                                                                  undertaken by the PMU to confirm there are no
                                                                  outstanding issues for this land.

                                                                           The landing site and cable station in
                                                                  Palau are also covered by a due diligence report.
                                                                  The fiber optic cable landing site in Meyuns
                                                                  Hamlet in Koror does not require acquisition of
                                                                  private land nor entail displacement of people,
                                                                  food gardens and physical structures. The
                                                                  landing site has an existing beach manhole to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  connect the cable once it reaches land from the
                                                                  marine channel. The landing site is on
                                                                  government-owned land, near the Office of the
                                                                  President’s extension office and existing earth
                                                                  station complex of Palau National
                                                                  Communications Corporation (PNCC) compound.

                                                                  The cable station located inside the PNCC
                                                                  compound, is approximately 150 meters from the
                                                                  cable landing site and has an existing
                                                                  underground conduit connecting the station with
                                                                  the landing site which has the space required to
                                                                  receive the cable.

                                                                  In Guam, one of the existing landing sites and
                                                                  stations will be used. No new sites/facilities or
                                                                  construction activities are required.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           This policy is not triggered as there are no dams
                                                                  involved the project.



                                                          Page 6 of 10
                            Projects on International           No              This policy is not triggered as submarine cable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                systems will be deployed in the open ocean, not
                                                                                in shared waterways (rivers, lakes).
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              An IEE has identified key social and environmental impacts and benefits for the FSM (Yap-
                              Chuuk) component to date. Another IEE was prepared for the Palau component.

                              The IEE include social assessments which confirm that the project is expected to have an
                              overwhelmingly positive social impact by improving the accessibility and quality of ICT services
                              which will benefit the people of FSM and Palau.

                              No land acquisition is required for the project however some localized disturbance may be created
                              during construction. These have been assessed and management provisions established in the
                              Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP).

                              Some negative environmental impacts may occur due to physical works including construction of
                              cable landing sites and laying and/or burial of the submarine cables on seabed floor. 1km buffer
                              zones for sensitive environments (e.g. seamounts and hydrothermal vents) and selection of
                              appropriate technologies and cable placement methods have been established to minimize
                              environmental disturbance and are included in the ESMP. Maximizing placement of the cable in
                              shipping channels will avoid harm to coral reefs, mangroves, other sensitive marine environments
Public Disclosure Copy




                              as well as sunken cultural relics. Although two Conservation Areas (CAs) in Yap are located
                              adjacent to the project area, these areas can be avoided and the ESMP requires that contract
                              specifications establish a cable route that provides ≥ 75m distance from CA boundaries, and
                              requires all survey and cable laying vessels to maintain this distance at all times (limited by the
                              proximity of CAs to the shipping channel).

                              UXO Safety Risks have also been identified in the ESMP and additional detailed work will be
                              required during implementation to ensure UXO does not represent a risk to workers, the
                              community or the environment.

                              An Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) is embedded in the ESMP and will be used during
                              ongoing consultation processes in guiding the effective delivery of the project

                              The ESMP requires that a PCR management plan be prepared after detailed information on the
                              sunken relics are obtained after the oceanographic and bathymetric survey. The ESMP also
                              establishes a chance-find procedure by requiring that if the alignment is found to affect any
                              cultural heritage once the work has begun, mitigative actions will be discussed with local officials
                              and an optional plan implemented and monitored.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                          in the project area:
                          Construction of support infrastructure may have small-scale and localized temporary impacts. No
                          long term impacts are expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultation highlighted concerns about increased vulnerability to human trafficking and
                           increased accessibility of undesirable websites due to improved technology.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternative technologies, cable alignments and methods were considered in the IEE, as outlined in
                           the report. Six options for the land site in Yap and three alternative landing sites in Chuuk were
                           considered.

                           Subsequent to the IEE, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (including an ECOP) were
                           developed to address the safeguards issues and satisfy the requirements of the World Bank
                           Safeguard Policies. The ESMP provides guidance on avoidance and mitigation strategies in
                           relation to potential social and environmental impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The cable laying operations will avoid infringing on any live coral reefs or areas where coral is
                           recovering from past degradation. To that end the oceanographic survey team will receive
                           instructions to align the cable around living reefs (based on the 2014 surveys to date no such
                           interaction is anticipated, so long the cable is placed in the shipping channel).

                          If not placed with care and in the shipping channel the cable could impact local seagrass meadows
                          in both sites (albeit minimally, given that the cable is 3-7 cm in diameter). To avoid this, the cable
                          s placement will be confined to a narrow path (less than 0.4m (15”) wide and 0.75m (29.5”) deep,
                          and these specifications will be included in contract documents, and avoiding seagrass meadows
Public Disclosure Copy




                          wherever possible. Seagrass meadow locations were identified and none found to be in the
                          recommended cable-placement corridor, or anywhere near it.

                           The IEE established the limited technical capacity of the project implementing entity, the Project
                           Coordinator or the PMU, to credibly implement the ESMP. Nevertheless, this capacity will be
                           reinforced by the recruitment of a Safeguards monitor who will oversee the monitoring the
                           Project’s safeguards performance. Capacity building activities will be conducted to strengthen the
                           PMUs capacity to supervise compliance with the ESMP and ECOP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key institutional stakeholders include:
                           Department of Transport, Communications and Infrastructure (DTCI), FSM Cable Company (once
                           established), Department of Finance and Administration (DoFA), MicroPal Committee (Palau-
                           FSM joint steering committee).

                          The ESMP establishes the need, and outlines a process for stakeholder consultation including the
                          requirement to conduct a series of consultations before, during and after construction activities
                          with government, private sector and non-government organizations including women and youth to
                          address a number of issues including progress of work and cable alignment. These consultations
                          have the objective of informing, and seeking feedback from all interested people on the work and


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           general alignment location and methods to used. Coastal resource users will be consulted and
                           cable laying activities kept to as short a period as possible, preferably outside any fishing seasons
                           which will be defined during the consultation with Marine Resources authorities and the above
Public Disclosure Copy




                           community consultation activities.

                           The ESMP requires that a safeguards monitor-technician be retained by the project coordinator’s
                           office or the national government to provide on-the-job assistance with information distribution,
                           community consultation and compliance monitoring tasks. Cost of community awareness
                           activities such as community meetings/public consultations and information materials prior to
                           construction, during and after construction have been budgeted for and are expected to be
                           approximately $20,000, or about $10,000 in each of Yap and Chuuk.

                           Similar consultation provisions are included in the IEE for the Guam-Palau components to be
                           funded by ADB. Key information materials and reports used in any of the consultation processes
                           shall be translated into local languages and disclosed locally.

                           The ESMP outlines a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          22-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       24-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                      23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: The Government of FSM has disclosed the documents on the websites of the office
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         of the President, and the Department of Transport, Communications and
                                         Infrastructure. Copies will also be available from the Yap and Chuuk state
                                         governments.
                           Palau                                                                24-Oct-2014
                           Comments: The Government of Palau has advised disclosure on its website/portal and that copies
                                         will be obtainable from Ministry of Finance, Koror Branch Office and the Office of
                                         the President, Koror Satellite Office
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Natasha Beschorner
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                              Date: 27-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Carlo Maria Rossotto (PMGR)                     Date: 27-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
