INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 107
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tanzania                   Project ID:  P123134
Project Name: Dar es Salaam Metropolitan Development Project (P123134)
Task Team       Andre A. Bald
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Dec-2014                Estimated    02-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (60%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(3 0%), Sub-national government administration (10%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (40%), Urban services and
housing for the poor (30%), Municipal governance and institu tion building
(20%), Urban planning and housing policy (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     330.30            Total Bank Financing:  300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         25.30
International Development Association (IDA)                               300.00
Nordic Development Fund (NDF)                                               5.00
Total                                                                     330.30
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to improve urban services and institutional capacity in the Dar es
Page 1 of 11


﻿Salaam Metropolitan Area and to facilitate potential emergency response.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Priority Infrastructure. This component will finance improvements and constructions
of: (i) priority roads - local and feeder roads in the urban core to alleviate congestion hotspots, and
support public transit, mobility and connectivity to low-income communities, especially improving
accessibility to the BRT system; and (ii) primary and secondary drainage systems - including bank
stabilization, detention ponds, connection to the secondary network etc. around five river basins of
a        Dar es Salaam. In addition, a zero-sum sub-component will support, at GoTs request and the Bank's
concurrence, activities (assessments, technical assistance, works, and purchase of equipment)
resulting from natural or man-made disasters, including public health crisis.
Component 2: Upgrading in Low-Income Communities. This component will finance the upgrading
of low-income communities in all three municipal councils, by improving basic services including:
(i) roads and road related infrastructure (roads, bridges/culverts, footpaths, traffic lights etc.); (ii)
environmental related works (storm water drainage, sanitation, tertiary solid waste collection, street
lights); and (iii) community related amenities (parks, markets and bus stands); as well as
strengthening community-level initiatives and capacities related to the upgrading.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building, and Urban Analytics. This component
will support: (i) development of metropolitan governance arrangements and systems; (ii) municipal
finances and technical capacity through own source revenue collection and development and
integration of GIS; (iii) integrated transport and land-use planning; (iv) operations and maintenance
systems; (v) urban analytics; and (vi) strengthening of urban planning systems.
Component 4: Implementation Support and Monitoring & Evaluation. This component will enable
the key implementing agencies (PMO-RALG, DLAs and DART Agency) to execute the project. It
will include operational costs for the direct project management and supervision functions, including
procurement, accounting, financial management, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
audit of project accounts, meetings and workshops, and impact assessments. Resources for further
project preparation are included. In addition, funds are allocated for critical maintenance equipment
required for long term sustainability of priority infrastructure as well as for the organizing and
implementing of IEC initiatives at ward, sub-ward and community level.
Safeguards instruments focused on Component 1 a, lb and Component 2, with identified institutional
strengthening and capacity building activities for environmental and social management included
under Component 3.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented only within the Dar es Salaam region of Tanzania. The three
municipal councils which form the region are Ilala Municipal Council, Kinondoni Municipal
Council, and Temeke Municipal Council, which will be responsible for project implementation. The
Dar es Salaam City Council will have a central role on metropolitan institutional issues, and the
Prime Minister's Office - Regional Administration and Local Government (PMO-RALG) will have
an overall project coordination and oversight role through a Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
Dar es Salaam's growth has been shaped by informality - and this has resulted in sprawl, the
proliferation of unplanned areas, and the loss of valuable right of ways. An estimated 80 percent of
land in Dar is 'informal' - meaning it is not planned, and residents lack title. Much of the city is in
Page 2 of 11


﻿low-lying areas, and the undulating topography makes it difficult to move water between the flat
areas to the (undeveloped) major drainage canals. Thus most of Dar is highly vulnerable to flooding
even from minor storm events: combined with the growing population, encroachment in hazardous
areas, and more frequent and intensive storm events, the city's physical form is driving social
O
U         vulnerability to environmental hazards.
Environmental screening during the ESIA process found conditions in the project areas of the three
municipalities included significant environmental issues including poor sanitation (e.g. open
dumping and mismanagement of refuse), degraded surface water drainage areas (e.g. river and
stream basins, drainage canals), frequent flooding and standing polluted water during rain events
(facilitating the spread of water-borne illnesses and vector diseases), air pollution due to vehicle
emissions and dust from poor road conditions, and substandard infrastructure. No sensitive sites of
ecological or cultural significance in the project area were found in the environmental screening.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Amy Faust (GSURR)
Helen Z. Shahriari (GSURR)
Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes           Overall, the project's infrastructure works described
OP/BP 4.01                             above in Section 1.3 are expected to improve
environmental quality in Dar es Salaam, including
relieving traffic congestion and air quality as well as
reducing flooding and improving sanitation and public
safety. OP 4.01 is triggered given potential negative
impacts on the environment and communities, which are
outlined in more detail in Section II.A. 1. An overall
ESMF has been prepared, as well as six ESIAs for the
drainage and road works. The ESIAs have found that
impacts are site-specific and largely able to be addressed
through design, good engineering practices, and proper
supervision, and investments would pose no large-scale
or irreversible negative environmental and social
impacts. The negative impacts of roads, drainage, and
upgrading were found to be consistent with a Category
B safeguards classification. The ESMF and ESIAs have
been consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP    No           The ESIAs found that no natural habitats would be
4.04                                   degraded or converted.
Forests OP/BP 4.36        No           The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09   No           The Project does not involve pest management
Physical Cultural Resources Yes        It is possible that sites of architectural or spiritual
OP/BP 4.11                             significance (e.g. graveyards, religious facilities) could
be impacted by the project and/or that there could be
Page 3 of 11


﻿chance finds during excavations. While the ESIAs have
not found direct impacts on sensitive Physical Cultural
Resources, the ESMPs include chance find procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No        There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
 Involuntary Resettlement  Yes      OP 4.12 is triggered since some infrastructure works
OP/BP 4.12                           will require involuntary resettlement, including partial
impacts on properties (residences and businesses), full
relocation of households, and livelihoods impacts (e.g.
mobile street vendors and hawkers).
The following instruments have been prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed before appraisal: (i.) a
Resettlement Policy Framework and (ii.) five
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for the drainage
packages that have advanced designs.
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide
any future investments, given DMDP is taking a phased
approach. Moreover, there are a number of subprojects
for which the final designs are not fully ready (e.g.
upgrading works that will be selected by communities at
a later stage).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No         The drainage works in Component lb would involve
stormwater detention ponds, which were assessed for
potential triggering of OP/BP 4.37 if they could be
defined as small dams. It was determined that while
these could be considered as small dams, they are small
enough in size that no dam safety issues as defined in
the policy would be caused if there were to be a breach.
The drainage component ESMPs include safety
measures and management procedures for detention
ponds, including both design elements such as fencing
and site control as well as awareness raising through
signage and community outreach.
Projects on International  No        NA
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas No        NA
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The investments to be carried out under Components 1 a, lb and 2 will involve small- to medium-
scale municipal works. Environmental and social due diligence has found that investments would
Page 4 of 11


﻿pose no large-scale or irreversible negative environmental and social impacts, and are consistent
with a Category B safeguards classification including when resettlement and cumulative impacts
of the project as a whole are considered.
O
DMDP will be implemented in two phases: Phase I will consist of drainage works, which have
final detailed designs, and three road sections having advanced designs with minor environmental
impacts and no resettlement (Component 1 a and 1 b). During this phase a design review on the
remaining roads and upgrading works (currently at a preliminary design stage) will also be
undertaken, in part to amend designs in order to minimize resettlement. Phase II will include the
remaining road segments and upgrading activities (Component 1 a and 2).
Environmental impacts
DMDP infrastructure works are expected to improve key aspects of environmental quality in Dar
es Salaam, including relieving traffic congestion which will result in improved air quality, as well
as reducing flooding and improving sanitation and public safety. The project road works will
contribute to lowering greenhouse gas emissions through reduced vehicle idling and planning such
as building capacity for Transit Oriented Development. DMDP drainage works and upgrading in
low income communities will improve urban resilience to current and future climate variability
through both traditional drainage infrastructure as well as piloting green infrastructure investments
such as storm water detention ponds that can be preserved and utilized as green space during dry
spells.
The ESIAs identified the positive and negative impacts of road, drainage, and upgrading activities
during the mobilization, construction and operational phases of sub-projects, and included
mitigation measures for the most significant impacts in the ESMPs.
In the mobilization phase stakeholder consultations found resettlement and compensation would
be the most significant impact. Stakeholders were concerned that compensation would be fair and
done in advance of works. These impacts and how to mitigate them are covered through the RAPs
and RPF, which are cross-referenced in the ESIAs and ESMF. These safeguards instruments are
described in more detail in Section 4 below, and consultation and disclosure outlined in Section 5.
The most significant environmental and social risks identified during the construction phase are
impacts typical of construction works in urban areas, namely nuisances due to dust, noise and
vibration, interruption of public utilities that require relocation from work sites (electricity, water,
telecommunications), occupational and community health and safety, flooding from poor drainage,
soil erosion due to vegetation removal, and increased waste. Drainage works in particular will
need to ensure that contaminated dredged sediments and existing solid waste in existing drains and
canals will require treatment and safe transport and disposal at the Pugu dumpsite. It has been
agreed that contractors will need to plan to treat and transport waste safely and avoid negative
impacts on communities.
Negative impacts during the operational phase are largely issues of public safety. For roads under
the local roads and upgrading components, this includes the likelihood of increased accidents
resulting from higher speeds and more traffic on paved roads, which was highlighted in
stakeholder consultations. Road designs include good practices for pedestrian facilities and traffic
calming, especially near schools. For upgrading, works are small scale in nature and no major
impacts have been noted aside from typical construction impacts. For drainage, there are risks of
flooding if drains and retentions ponds are not properly maintained, and DMDP has a strong focus
Page 5 of 11


﻿on building capacity for operations and maintenance. Additionally, efforts of community
engagement around sanitation, including drain maintenance and solid waste management, are
included at the DLA and ward level in those areas with DMDP subprojects. Community
sensitization was pointed out as key for mitigating the most significant safety and health risks for
O
all subprojects.
The ESIAs have found that impacts can be mitigated through (i) the application of good
engineering and construction management practices, (ii) close supervision and monitoring of
contractors' performance, and (iii) close consultation with, and monitoring by, local communities.
Subproject-specific ESMPs have been prepared for each bidding package, which include both
general and site-specific mitigation measures for the mobilization, construction and operation
phases.
Involuntary Resettlement
Overall resettlement impacts are largely due to road widening in order to provide wider
carriageways, install roadside drains, and provide pedestrian walkways. Some resettlement will
also be required for drainage works, for example to enlarge existing drainage channels.
Infrastructure designs considered elements to minimize impacts on resettlement for all types of
works. For example, the drainage component assessed several design alternatives, which resulted
in the selection of storm water detention ponds that both reduced resettlement impacts as well as
overall project costs. Additionally, a preliminary design review was held during the appraisal
mission to examine the road works under Component 1 a and Component 2, which originally had
significant resettlement impacts given high design standards (i.e. wide road rights of way). This
design review resulted in a reduction of total resettlement costs by nearly 50%.
Between the three components, approximately 1,497 households would have partial impacts by the
civil works (verandas, septic tanks, partial demolition). The number of fully affected households
that would require permanent relocation is approximately 535, with the majority of resettled
households resulting from the priority roads component. The total amount of compensation is
estimated at approximately US $25 million.
Road works under Component 1 a and Component 2 that involve resettlement will not start
construction for more than one year after DMDP is effective. This will allow time for a thorough
a           design review with the potential to further reduce resettlement impacts, as well as provide capacity
building for updating and carrying out the RAPs and identifying funding sources for compensation
payments.
Drainage works under Component lb are the only works that will initiate the bidding process after
project effectiveness, therefore the drainage RAPs have been finalized for appraisal and reviewed
and cleared by the Bank. The total number of affected properties for Component Ib, where
advanced designs have been prepared, has been estimated at approximately 1,041. Drainage works
would involve permanent relocation of a total of 107 households in the five drainage basins
combined, with approximately US$5 million in compensation costs. The three municipal councils
have already set aside these funds in their budgets, as committed during the appraisal mission.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The long term impacts of the project activities are expected to be positive and result in
improvements to environmental quality in Dar es Salaam including relieving traffic congestion
Page 6 of 11


﻿and air quality, job creation and increased incomes, improved drainage resulting in reduced health
risks and infrastructure sustainability, and improved access to community facilities. The ESIAs
found that most impacts would result from the construction phase, however the mitigation
measures during the operation phase will be particularly critical in terms of public safety for
O
U           drainage infrastructure, to avoid negative impacts of improper management including management
of detention ponds and ensuring that drainage infrastructure is maintained to avoid future flooding.
Future encroachment by informal settlements on road and drainage infrastructure is a particular
risk for both public safety and resettlement costs in the case of future investments.
*          3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Each municipal ESIA included an alternatives analysis that assessed the no-project alternative,
alternative sites, and alternative designs. In each case the no-project alternative was rejected, given
the risks of a business-as-usual situation for the condition ofexisting road and drainage
infrastructure would outweigh the temporary costs of construction. Site alternatives were assessed
through using criteria such as environmental impact and number of negatively affected
households. Lastly, design alternatives were evaluated such as storm water detention ponds vs.
larger drainage channels. The preferred options from the alternatives analysis were in part based
on minimizing resettlement, public safety, and maximizing environmental benefits (e.g. using
retention pond sites for public use while dry).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Resettlement Action Plans
For resettlement instruments the following instruments have been prepared: (i.) a Resettlement
Policy Framework (ii.) five Resettlement Action Plans for the drainage packages that have
advanced designs, and (iii) preliminary RAPs for the roads and upgrading works that are in the
design phase, which have been prepared for each municipality (i.e. six preliminary RAPs). These
works will be subject to a design review, which will inform an update of the RAPs for Component
1 a and Component 2 as needed. The final RAPs will then be sent to the Bank for review and
clearance prior to compensation payments.
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the RAP update and any future investments,
given DMDP is taking a phased approach. Moreover, there are a number of subprojects for which
the final designs are not fully ready (e.g. upgrading works that will be selected by communities at
a later stage). The RPF was the guiding framework for the RAPs already prepared, and will be
applied to all future DMDP investments, to ensure that all PAPs will be compensated for their
losses at replacement cost and provided with rehabilitation measures to assist them to improve or
at least maintain their pre-project standards of living. The RPF gives special attention to women
and vulnerable groups to ensure that they benefit from the investments and that their special needs
are addressed.
Cash compensation was the method preferred by project affected people during RAP
consultations, as the PAPs believe they can rent or purchase residences and businesses in Dar es
Salaam without difficulty in terms of local market pricing; in other cases, land and asset losses are
minor to moderate, and manageable. The three municipalities are responsible for ensuring budget
for all resettlement and associated compensation costs in the RAPs, with assistance from PMO-
RALG to secure funds. Securing sufficient funds has been cited as a significant challenge by the
municipalities, which is in part why lower impact projects were selected for the first round of
tendering. Together the municipalities have committed US $5.8 million for compensation costs in
Page 7 of 11


﻿their current budgets, which is sufficient to cover the resettlement costs of the drainage works
which will be tendered in first phase of DMDP civil works. This budget allocation was confirmed
with the municipalities and PMO-RALG during appraisal.
O
C.         In order to ensure that adequate and timely funds are available for compensation, local
governments plan to secure loans from commercial banks for resettlement costs. These loans
would be backed by the central government, which has a firm commitment outlined in a letter
describing these arrangements. This will be signed by the Permanent Secretary of PMO-RALG,
and submitted to the Bank prior to Negotiations. PMO-RALG will also assist the municipalities to
explore other sources of funds from central government sources, and the municipalities would also
explore own source revenues as a supplement to loans. DMDP includes activities to increase local
government revenue collection, an approach that has been piloted and shown to be successful in
the Tanzania Strategic Cities Project. After 2-3 years of implementation DMDP will seek ways to
ring-fence some of these gains for resettlement compensation, or payback of the commercial loans.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESIAs were carried out for each of the three components in each DLA including mitigation
measures in Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), therefore six ESIAs have
been prepared and consulted upon by the client. This approach was taken given the DLAs are
responsible for safeguards oversight for projects in their jurisdiction, and the three components
will be separate bidding packages. The ESIAs for the drainage and roads components are ready for
implementation, and the ESIAs for the upgrading component are at a preliminary stage and may
be updated during the design review of the works packages.
An overall Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was also prepared to
account for future works and guide any updates to the ESIAs, which includes standard
Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) that apply to typical impacts of road, drainage and
upgrading works. The ESMF adapts the institutional framework and grievance mechanisms
designed under other urban projects under implementation in Tanzania, which have been shown to
function well in other municipalities. These have been consulted with the DLAs and their inputs
taken into account in the design as a first step toward sensitization for safeguards implementation.
Funds for institutional strengthening and capacity building for environmental and social
management will be included under Component 3.
Capacity
The ESIA process found that capacity for safeguards implementation is generally low, though
preparation of DMDP has included focal points for safeguards, including environmental focal
points and municipal valuers who were fully involved in preparation of the RAPs. The study on
Institutional Strengthening of Dar es Salaam Local Authorities conducted during project
preparation found that councils do have an Urban Development, Natural Resources and
Environment department, which as a whole oversee the environmental issues in the Municipality.
For resettlement, each DLA does have municipal valuers and community development officers,
however there is a lack of experience in carrying out and monitoring ESMPs and RAPs, posing an
implementation risk.
Recognizing that the municipalities have limited experience with infrastructure projects of this
size and scale, significant resources have been built into DMDP to address environmental and
social impacts and resettlement issues.
Page 8 of 11


﻿PMO-RALG will have a top-level quality assurance and project monitoring role, including budget
for a full time international resettlement specialist and international environmental specialist,
dedicated to supporting the 3 municipalities for the first 3 years.
o
Each municipality will have a dedicated Project Implementation Unit, including focal points for
environment, land, and community development issues. The PIU will be responsible for setting up
Municipal Resettlement Committees and Municipal Grievance Committees in each municipality,
which will include technical specialists as well as ward- and community-level representatives.
Each PIU will have a package of project management support (from an international firm) that will
include expertise on resettlement and environmental issues, mapped directly to the municipal
PIUs. These firms will include a community liaison/communications specialist, who will in part be
responsible for addressing issues before they would escalate to the level of the grievance handling
committees.
Within the PIU, the environmental specialist will review contract bids, coordinate on regulatory
compliance issues, conduct monitoring field visits, and consult with local authorities and
communities. The social specialist will ensure implementation of the RAPs (including that
compensation is paid before works begin), liaise with project affected people, and ensure the RPF
is applied to works in later phases, and monitor grievances. These specialists will prepare quarterly
monitoring reports to be submitted to PMO-RALG, NEMC and the Bank.
A Construction Supervision Consultant (CSC) will be responsible for day-to-day monitoring of
construction activities, and reporting to the PIU and PMO-RALG on a quarterly basis. The CSC
includes an environmental engineer and land specialist that will monitor adherence to the ESMPs
and RAPs, and may choose to contract an independent environmental and social monitoring
consultant.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
Preparation of the RAPs, ESIAs and ESMPs has undergone an extensive consultation process with
relevant stakeholders, including communities, local authorities, public utilities, the National
Environmental Management Council (NEMC), and water basin authorities. Consultations with
relevant authorities and communities have been ongoing throughout project preparation, and
*           summarized in the ESIAs and RAPs. These have been both to obtain views on the potential
impacts of the three works components, as well as consult with Project Affected People as part of
the resettlement exercise. The RPF includes procedures for the local authorities to carry out public
consultations, information disclosure, and grievance redress as projects are implemented.
The following safeguards documents have been cleared by the Bank and were disclosed in the
InfoShop on December 15, 2014 and made available in Tanzania in hard copy in the three
municipal offices and PMO-RALG, and soft copies on PMO-RALG's website on December 15,
2014: ESIAs for Component la (Priority Roads - no resettlement is involved in the first three
roads to be tendered), ESIAs and RAPs for Component lb (storm water drainage). The overall
ESMF and RPF were disclosed on December 16, 2014. The remaining safeguards documents will
be reviewed, cleared, and disclosed by the Bank when they are finalized during project
implementation, which will be required prior to tendering any sub-project bidding packages.
Workshops with local authorities to review and agree on the mitigation measures, institutional
Page 9 of 11


﻿framework, capacity building plan, and grievance procedures were held on October 9, 2014 and
November 28, 2014.
B. Disclosure Requirements
O
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                 17-Dec-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              10-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Tanzania                                                 17-Dec-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X]  No[     NA
report?
O
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes[X]  No[    NA
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 10 of I1


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andre A. Bald
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)         Date: 25-Dec-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (PMGR)      Date: 26-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


