                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1111
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bangladesh                        Project ID:    P149553
                            Project Name:     Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II
                                              Project (P149553)
                            Task Team         Patrick Verissimo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       12-Dec-2014                         Estimated   17-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFADR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), Crops
                                              (20%), Information technology (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), Rural
                                              markets (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     214.01           Total Bank Financing:               160.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.01
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       6.42
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            160.00
                              US Agency for International Development (USAID)                                         23.72
                              Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                                                       0.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                          23.86
                              Total                                                                                  214.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                     Page 1 of 11
                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         To increase the agricultural productivity of smallholder farms and improve smallholders' access to
                         markets in selected districts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The project development objective (PDO) of the NATP-2 is to ‘increase agricultural productivity on
                         smallholder farms and improve smallholders’ access to markets in selected districts’. NATP-2 will
                         contribute directly to the Ministry of Agriculture’s (MoA) and the Ministry of Fisheries and
                         Livestock’s (MoFL) priority of increasing farm yields and diversifying agricultural production by
                         improving agricultural research and extension. Given the sector’s high vulnerability to climate
                         shocks and the diversity of agro-climatic zones, improving the agricultural technology system of
                         Bangladesh will need to: (i) be embedded in the country’s adaptation to climate change agenda with
                         a focus on generating and diffusing climate-smart agricultural technologies and good agricultural
                         practices adapted to the different agro ecological systems across the country, and (ii) take into
                         account the social fabric and gender dimension in rural areas.

                         NATP-2 will cover a total of 56 districts and span over a broad range of agro ecological zones across
                         Bangladesh. NATP-2’s dual field-level strategy will deepen the interventions initiated by the
                         previous project in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) and expand the geographic coverage to
                         include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up). To contribute to the project objectives and
                         scaling up previous achievements, NATP-2 implementation will rely on a comprehensive program of
                         training activities; this will be implemented at various levels and cover skills development,
                         knowledge sharing and learning. To scale up NATP achievements, the project design includes –
                         embedded in the different project components – an Agricultural Innovation Fund (AIF).
                         The project design for NATP-2 takes into account some of the shortcomings identified under NATP
                         and reflects the integrated approach required to achieve the PDO. Agricultural extension and
                         advisory services will be supported across all three sub- sector components for crops, livestock and
                         fisheries farmers. Activities geared towards facilitating market access for smallholder farmers will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supported by NATP-2 across all 3 sub-sector components. Producer Organizations (POs) are key
                         elements in facilitating a sustainable access to markets for smallholders and POs will be established
                         across all 3 subsector components.

                         Component 1: Enhancing Agricultural Technology Generation (USD52 million)
                         This component will contribute to achieving the PDO by helping improve the performance of the
                         national agricultural research system (NARS) through the support to agricultural technologies
                         development, and the strengthening of agricultural research institutions. Improving the performance
                         of the agricultural research system is an essential ingredient for achieving higher farm yields and thus
                         directly contributes to the PDO. NATP-2 will support a demand-driven and market-oriented
                         approach to agricultural research that takes into account: (i) the multiplicity of actors involved in
                         agricultural technology generation; (ii) the need for increasing agricultural output per unit of
                         shrinking arable land while adapting to climate variability and longer-term climate change; (iii) the
                         evolving domestic demand for diversified, safer and more nutritious food; and (iv) opportunities for
                         supplying international markets with selected agricultural and food products. Component 1will
                         support this research agenda by enhancing the institutional capacity of BARC and the National
                         Agricultural Research Institutes (NARIs), by funding research through competitive grants, and by
                         helping to build human capital for agricultural research. The component will also finance a number
                         of activities (including specific studies, policy notes, training, research-extension linkages, and
                         others) in support of the implementation of the 2012 BARC Act approved under NATP.


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         Component 2: Supporting Crop Development (USD66 million)
                         This component will contribute to achieving the PDO by increasing farm yields, diversifying
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agricultural production, and improving market linkages for smallholder farmers. To that effect, a
                         comprehensive program of activities will be implemented under this component that will be geared
                         at:
                         (a)      improving the outreach and quality of crop extension and advisory services by investing in
                         public extension workers from DAE, promoting ICT in agricultural extension services and
                         supporting farmer-to-farmer extension;
                         (b)      developing farmers’ skills to scale-up the dissemin ation of Good Agricultural Practices
                         (GAPs) including those developed under NATP, as well as identifying technologies for a sustainable
                         production of safer food;
                         (c)      promoting farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm output and
                         diversification, as well as to increase efficiency in crop handling, reduce post-harvest losses and
                         support processing;
                         (d)      facilitating stronger collaboration with the private sector for agro-business development on
                         agro-processing, market access for smallholders, as well as for the establishment of machinery hire-
                         services; and strengthening institutions involved in the crop sector, through capacity development
                         and selected investments in infrastructure (e.g., improving DAE’s horticultural centers, developing a
                         national seed testing laboratory with MoA’s Seed Wing, establishing agro-meteorological stations in
                         collaboration with the Bangladesh Meteorology Department).

                         Component 3: Supporting Fisheries Development (USD37 million)
                         This component will contribute to achieving the PDO by promoting an integrated approach to
                         achieve productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer, as well as a better
                         access to market opportunities for fish farmers. To achieve the PDO, NATP-2 will provide support
                         for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small scale aquaculture ponds) and inland
                         capture fisheries (open water fisheries in beel and haor). To achieve the component objective, the
                         project will scale-up NATP Good Aquaculture Practices for the production systems prevailing in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project area, promote community-based fisheries management, support the participation of fisheries
                         CIGs and POs in value chains, reinforce research-extension-farmers linkages and strengthen the
                         capacity of fisheries institutions. NATP-2 will further explore linkages with fishery activities under
                         the on-going IFAD and USAID supported operations. The high degree of economic opportunities
                         and benefits offered by the currently available and underutilised aquatic areas for aquaculture
                         development, as well as the gender and nutrition dimension of fisheries, will be a major
                         consideration for NATP-2. In addition to capacity enhancement and institutional strengthening, this
                         component will support a number of investments in support of further developing fish farming in the
                         project area.

                         Component 4: Supporting Livestock Development (USD47 million)
                         This component will contribute to achieving the PDO by promoting an integrated approach to
                         achieve productivity and output increases through enhanced technology transfer, service delivery, as
                         well as a better access for livestock farmers to markets. To that effect, NATP-2 will focus on: (i)
                         strengthening livestock institutions (including food and feed safety and quality, animal health),
                         improving livestock extension services, and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and
                         livestock farmers; (ii) scaling up outreach programs to reach out to a larger number of farmers; and
                         (iii) facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in selected livestock markets. To achieve
                         significant and lasting productivity development in the dairy and beef sector, NATP-2 will focus on
                         improving farm management (including animal nutrition, fodder production, animal health, improved

                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                         animal husbandry practices, as well as marketing) and work towards strengthening the artificial
                         insemination system in accordance with the national breeding programs. This component will also
                         support better interaction between the Bangladesh Livestock Research Institute and the Central Cattle
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Breeding Station and Dairy Farm; particular attention will be given to the need for synergies between
                         BLRI’s dairy program and the herd improvement program of the Breeding Station.Under this
                         component, NATP-2 will cover dairy farming, goat rearing, beef fattening, and poultry farming.

                         Component 5: Project Management (USD12 million)
                         This component will: (i) ensure that the project is carried out in line with the provisions in the official
                         project documents, in particular all fiduciary and governance aspects; (ii) establish liaison
                         mechanisms between the Bank and the project, as well as between the project and the GoB, and (iii)
                         coordinate the implementation of selected overarching project activities with the support of external
                         technical assistance.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         NATP-2 will cover a total of 56 districts and span over a broad range of agro ecological zones across
                         Bangladesh. The project will be implemented over a six year period in 270 upazilas; this includes
                         150 upazilas already covered under NATP-1, plus 120 new upazilas. New upazilas have been
                         selected following the multi-criteria approach successfully applied under NATP-1 (among others:
                         high prevalence of small and marginal farmers, agro ecologically stressed areas); a high potential for
                         establishing a production and marketing cluster for one or more designated value chain commodities
                         was added as a selection criteria for new upazilas.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
                         Farhat Jahan Chowdhury (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The NATP-2 will support a range of sub-projects
                          BP 4.01                                              involving research, technology demonstration,
                                                                               agricultural extension and value-chain
                                                                               development in crops, livestock and fisheries
                                                                               sectors. While many of these sub-projects are
                                                                               likely to be environmentally benign, some have
                                                                               the potential to cause negative environmental
                                                                               impacts (relating to agro-chemical use, agro-
                                                                               processing waste management, etc.). The project
                                                                               is classified as a “Category B” under OP/BP 4.01
                                                                               with a partial assessment as the impacts are likely
                                                                               to be small-scale, site specific with no irreversible
                                                                               impacts and mitigation measures can be designed
                                                                               more readily. In order to identify and mitigate
                                                                               such impacts, an Environmental Management
                                                                               Framework (EMF) has been developed, building
                                                                               upon the EMFs of the preceding projects,
                                                                               NATP-1 and NATP-Additional Financing.




                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            Project activities will not be implemented in areas
                                                                         of natural habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Project activities will not be implemented in
                                                                         forest areas
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The sub-projects supported by the NATP-2 are
                                                                         likely to involve the use of chemical pesticides
                                                                         for pest management. While the NATP-2 includes
                                                                         interventions on Integrated Pest Management, a
                                                                         Pest Management Plan has been developed in
                                                                         order to systematically address, build capacity
                                                                         and monitor the pest management issues in the
                                                                         project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Project implementation will not affect cultural
                         BP 4.11                                         resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The project will work in areas where indigenous
                                                                         people (IPs) live. The project does not anticipate
                                                                         any adverse impacts on IPs. Since the upazillas
                                                                         where interventions will take place have not been
                                                                         determined at this stage, a Social Management
                                                                         Framework has been prepared after conducting a
                                                                         Social Impact Assessment (SIA) in sample areas
                                                                         to include a development framework for Small
                                                                         Ethic Communities and other Vulnerable
                                                                         communities (SECVCF). The SMF also includes
                                                                         a gender framework and will focus on enhancing
                                                                         community participation and inclusion through
                                                                         information dissemination, and an on-going
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         strategy for consultation and communication. A
                                                                         comprehensive SIA was undertaken and detailed
                                                                         SMF was prepared for NATP-I which has served
                                                                         as a basis for the preparation for the new SMF
                                                                         and will incorporate the lessons learned from
                                                                         NATP-I. The current SMF has been prepared on
                                                                         the basis of field visits to existing NATP sites and
                                                                         sites planned for inclusion in the future and local
                                                                         consultations with a range of stakeholders. The
                                                                         SMF includes a screening format (to be
                                                                         implemented at the time of sub-project
                                                                         submission) to determine if project areas include
                                                                         IPs. If so, the sub-project will be required to
                                                                         prepare and implement a Small Ethnic
                                                                         Communities and other vulnerable communities
                                                                         Development Plan in compliance with the
                                                                         Framework included in the SMF. The gender and
                                                                         inclusion elements should be incorporated and
                                                                         implemented project wide.



                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The project will not require acquisition of private
                         4.12                                          land. The construction of mini laboratories under
                                                                       Component 4 will be undertaken on public lands
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       only which are free of encumbrances, including
                                                                       squatters and/or people leasing or using lands for
                                                                       livelihood purposes. No displacement (physical or
                                                                       economic) of people (with or without title) will be
                                                                       permissible (or required) under the project; no
                                                                       adverse impact son livelihoods are anticipated.
                                                                       The rehabilitation of ponds is not expected to
                                                                       require additional lands as the activity focuses on
                                                                       deepening the ponds only. Buried pipes for
                                                                       irrigation enhancement and improvement will be
                                                                       installed on the basis of community consultation
                                                                       and mutual agreement with farmers. The
                                                                       experience of NATP I shows that farmers view
                                                                       this as a largely beneficial activity and are more
                                                                       than willing to allow the installation works on a
                                                                       voluntary basis. This is clearly documented in the
                                                                       SMF as is the process for consultation with
                                                                       farmers and appropriate documentation. Based on
                                                                       the assessment GoB carried out in the context of
                                                                       the SMF elaboration, it was finally concluded that
                                                                       OP4.12 did not need to be triggered.

                                                                        The project activities may have special impacts
                                                                       on women or can enhance benefits to them and
                                                                       other vulnerable groups. The SMF which will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       contain a Gender and Inclusion Framework
                                                                       focused on participatory processes, social
                                                                       inclusion and accountability. The SMF will
                                                                       include a screening format to be applied in case
                                                                       public land use is required to check whether
                                                                       squatters are impacted or livelihoods are
                                                                       adversely impacted due to the project; and these
                                                                       sub-projects will be duly rejected. All sub-
                                                                       projects will follow the guidelines provided in the
                                                                       Gender and Inclusion Framework and maintain
                                                                       the requisite consultation processes and
                                                                       documentation. All social safeguards documents
                                                                       will be duly disclosed following Bank guidelines.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No           The project will not construct or rehabilitate dams
                                                                       larger than 10 meters in height.
                         Projects on International        No           The project does not involve in any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          waterways. The project does not plan to carry out
                                                                       any interventions that affect the use or pollute
                                                                       international waterways, particularly river or


                                                               Page 6 of 11
                                                                                body of surface water that flows through two or
                                                                                more states.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 No project activity will be implemented in
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60                                                disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The NATP-2 supports a range of activities including research, training, ICT, infrastructure support
                              (lab renovation and upgrading), agricultural equipment, agro-processing units, cold storage units,
                              market yards, kitchen gardens, dairy and goat rearing units, milk chilling and processing centres,
                              small scale slaughter houses, feed manufacturing units, bio-gas units, fish rearing (mono and poly
                              culture), fish processing units, etc. While many of these sub-projects are likely to be
                              environmentally benign, some have the potential to cause negative environmental impacts
                              (relating to agro-chemical use, agro-processing waste management, etc.) which are likely to be
                              small-scale, site specific with no irreversible impacts and mitigation measures can be designed
                              more readily. The key issues and impacts associated with these activities include:
                              •        Overuse, unsafe use and use of hazardous pesticides and chemicals such as feed additives
                              impacting human, livestock and environmental health
                              •        Imbalanced used of chemical fertilizers impacting environmental health
                              •        Over-extraction and inefficient use of water for irrigation leading to groundwater depletion
                              •        Use of water with poor quality (arsenic contamination, microbial contamination, etc.)
                              leading to impact on human health
                              •        Pollution from agro-processing units due to improper management of solid and liquid
                              wastes
                              •        Health risk from agro-processing units due to unhygienic practices
Public Disclosure Copy




                              •        Loss of native crop and livestock diversity due to introduction and promotion of new and
                              improved species/varieties

                              All the above activities will be carried out on public lands which are free of all encumbrances or
                              on lands belonging to private individuals who own the above mentioned businesses and participate
                              in the project on a voluntary basis. No land acquisition, displacement or adverse impacts on
                              existing livelihood activities will be permitted under the project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No long-term or indirect impacts are envisaged from the project interventions. However, to
                              manage against unforeseen risks, the project has prepared a negative list of attributes or exclusion
                              criteria for potential sub-projects, as part of the environmental and social management framework
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The sub-projects will be identified during the project implementation phase. The environmental
                              and social screening along with the Environmental Mitigation Measures and Code of Practices
                              (ECoPs) will help to consider the alternative options to avoid or minimize adverse impacts at the
                              grassroots-level planning stage.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                         assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                         In tune with the requirements of the OP 4.01 and the OP 4.09, an Environmental Management
                         Framework (EMF) and a Pest Management Plan (PMP) have been prepared by the Government of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bangladesh.

                         The EMF incorporates the following principles for the environmental management of sub-projects
                         to be implemented under the NATP-2 project:
                         •       Activities with severe negative environmental impacts will not be supported by NATP-2.
                         •       Activities involving financing of CIGs, POs, SMEs and research proposals will go through
                         environmental screening and assessment and will have sub-project specific Environmental
                         Management Plans (EMPs).
                         •       All supported activities will ensure compliance with the relevant ‘Environmental Code of
                         Practice’.
                         •       ‘Environmental Enhancement Measures’ will be recommended specifically to address
                         adaptation needs in the context of climate change.

                         The EMF describes procedures for screening and categorization of sub-projects. The sub-projects
                         in the NATP-2 have been categorized into 3 groups: those that require Limited Environment
                         Assessment (LEA), those that required Detailed Environment Assessment (DEA) and those that do
                         not need any assessment. Following the assessment, a sub-project EMP will be prepared that will
                         spell out the required mitigation measures, the implementation schedule, the technical and
                         financial support required for implementation and the monitoring arrangements. The EMF
                         provides tools/formats for environmental screening, assessment and EMPs.

                         The EMF also describes the institutional arrangements at the union, upazila, district, Project
                         Implementing Unit (PIU) and Project Management and Coordination Unit (PMU) levels for
                         environmental screening, assessment, monitoring of EMP implementation and capacity building. It
                         also describes a plan for capacity building of the key stakeholders including Common Interest
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Groups (CIGs) of farmers, Producer Organizations (POs), department staff at various levels, etc.
                         Monitoring to identify and suitably address any issues in implementation of the EMF will be at
                         two levels: i) sub-project environmental effect monitoring and ii) environmental impact
                         monitoring. An independent external environmental audit of the project will also be undertaken
                         prior to the mid-term review.

                         A Social Management Framework (SMF) has also been prepared by the Government of
                         Bangladesh to address possible impacts on indigenous people and issues of gender and social
                         inclusion and participation. Social screening formats have been incorporated to ensure that no
                         displacement or disruption/adverse impacts on livelihoods occur.
                         The SMF clearly states that the following activities will not be permitted under the project:

                         •       The sub projects requiring land acquisition and involuntary resettlement ( physical or
                         economic, pertaining to people with or without title) are excluded.
                         •       Activities likely to adversely affect wildlife, fish habitat, common property resources like
                         pasture land and livelihoods of marginalized groups etc. will be excluded.
                         •       The sub projects involving large scale water management particularly requiring canal
                         excavation will be avoided as it may involve land acquisition and involuntary resettlement.
                         •       Sub projects requiring constructing permanent structures on private land will be excluded



                                                                   Page 8 of 11
                           All sub-projects will follow the gender and inclusion guidelines provided in the SMF.

                           Both the NATP-1 and the NATP-Additional Financing projects have developed and implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                           EMF and SMFs before. The borrower is thus familiar with the Bank’s requirements and has
                           demonstrated capacity to implement EMFs and adequately address/mitigate the identified
                           environmental issues/impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders include the local farming communities (including women, marginal and
                           small farmers, indigenous people); project functionaries at different levels, associated line
                           department staff (agriculture, livestock and fisheries); elected representatives, particularly at the
                           Union level; NGOs, academia and consulting community; input suppliers and producers (traders,
                           fertilizer associations); external donors; and consumers of agricultural, horticultural, milk and fish
                           products associated with project activities. There have been consultations throughout the project
                           preparation both by the Bank Missions as well as by the GOB’s environmental and social
                           assessment consultant’s team.

                           Disclosure. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF), Social Management Framework
                           (SMF), and Pest Management Plan (PMP) reports have been prepared by the Ministry of
                           Agriculture (MoA) and Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock (MoFL). The executive Summary of
                           the EMF, SMF, and PMP have been translated into Bangla and the same will be disseminated
                           widely across the country through the Departments of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Livestock,
                           Research Institutions as well as other agencies. In accordance with the Bank’s disclosure policy
                           the advanced draft EMF, SMF, and PMP have been disclosed on the Ministry website on
                           November 13 and 28, 2014, with hard copies provided in the implementing agency's office, for
                           comments from the public before finalization. They will also be disclosed in the World Bank
                           Office InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 13-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              10-Dec-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                  13-Nov-2014
                           Comments: Draft EMF and PMP disclosed on the website of the MoA/NATP-1 with summary
                                         translated in local language
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 28-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              10-Dec-2014




                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       28-Nov-2014
                           Comments: The SMF published in country on November 28, 2014 includes a development
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         framework for Small Ethic Communities and other Vulnerable communities
                                         (SECVCF).
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                       13-Nov-2014
                           Comments: Draft PMP disclosed with draft EMF (see above)
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Patrick Verissimo
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                    Date: 04-Dec-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
