                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA10575
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jun-2014, 15-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P133117
                            Project Name:      Chongqing Small Towns Water Environment Management Project (P133117)
                            Task Team          Ji You
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Apr-2014                       Estimated   23-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (85%), Wastewater
                                              Collection and Transportation (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (85%), Pollution management and environmental
                                              health (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     218.62           Total Bank Financing:                100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 118.62
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                                    218.62
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to reduce flood risks and improve wastewater infrastructure
                           services in selected counties of Chongqing Municipality.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         The proposed project will include the following five components:

                         Component 1: Flood management in Tongnan County. This component includes the construction of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6.84 km river embankment with associated dike-top roads to raise the flood protection level for the
                         new urban expansion area of Dafuba along the Fujiang River to 1 in 20 year floods.
                         Component 2: Flood and wastewater management in Rongchang County. Structural measures under
                         this component include the construction of a river embankment of 13.89 km along the Laixihe River
                         upstream, along with associated dike-top roads, sewage/drainage pipe works (19 km), and
                         improvement of one existing overflow dam in the project river. Construction of the river
                         embankment would connect with flood protection works in the same county seat that was built under
                         a previous Bank loan project (Chongqing Small Cities Infrastructure Improvement Project, CSCP).
                         Component 3: Flood and wastewater management in Shizhu County. This component would include
                         the construction of a 4.84 km long river embankment along the Longhe River, upstream and
                         downstream of a flood protection project for the county seat funded by a previous Bank loan project
                         (CSCP), along with associated 1.9 km of dike-top roads, 16.1 km of sewage/drainage pipes
                         (including wastewater collection pipes in the old urban area), 5.74 ha of landscaping and
                         improvement of four existing overflow dams in the project river.
                         Component 4: Flood and wastewater management in Pengshui County. Structural measures under
                         this component include construction of a river embankment of 4.69 km on the left side of the
                         Wujiang River with associated dike-top road (4.76 km), which will raise the flood protection level of
                         the county seat’s new urban area to 1 in 20 year floods. This component would also include civil
                         works for sewage collection and drainage pipes (4.69 km).
                         Each of the abovementioned components also includes non-structural measures tailored to the needs
                         of each project county, including: (i) improvement of hydro-meteorological monitoring and
                         information management system through establishing local computer networks with the required
                         hardware and software, GIS database and basic supporting facilities (Rongchang, Shizhu and
                         Pengshui); (ii) strengthening of flood warning, emergency response and management systems
                         through provision of flood emergency response plans, management capacity-building and basic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilities at local levels of county, township and villages (Rongchang, Shizhu, Tongnan and
                         Pengshui); (iii) flood risk mapping and dissemination, safety zoning, and public awareness raising
                         (Rongchang, Shizhu, Tongnan and Pengshui); (iv) improved land use management planning for flood
                         affected area (Tongnan); and (v) development of a GIS/MIS system for monitoring and O&M of
                         drainage and wastewater network facilities (Shizhu).
                         Component 5: Project Management and Project Implementation Support. Provision of project
                         management and implementation support activities aimed at: (i) enhancing the design, supervision,
                         and certification of works carried out under the Project; (ii) strengthening the capacity of the Project
                         Implementing Entity at the municipal and county levels in the areas of Project management,
                         procurement and contract management, accounting and financial management, and compliance with
                         safeguards policies; and (iii) strengthening the capacity for operation and maintenance of urban flood
                         and water environment management facilities at the county level through training and development
                         of asset management plans. This component will also fund the incremental operation costs for
                         Chongqing PMO.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Chongqing Municipality (CQM), with an area of 82,400 km2 and a total population of 33.3 million,
                         has over 45% of its population living in rural areas (this rural population percentage is higher than
                         those of the other three provincial level cities of Beijing, Shanghai, and Tianjin with rural population
                         levels of 14%, 11% and 38% respectively). CQM has a total surplus rural labor estimated at over


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         8.45 million people. The strategic challenges of urban-rural disparity, regional disparity, and income
                         disparity at the national level are mirrored in Chongqing. As a result, Chongqing was selected by the
                         central government in 2007 as one of two pilot municipalities (the other being Chengdu
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Municipality) to promote urban-rural integration as part of the national strategies of Western Region
                         Development, Urban-Rural Integration and Development prioritized in the country’s 11th and 12th
                         Five-Year Plans (FYP).

                         Chongqing municipality has an average annual rainfall of 1,025 mm, mostly concentrated in the
                         flood season from June to September, and significant rivers such as the Wujiang and Fujiang flowing
                         through the project counties. River flooding is a common challenge with a 1/10 flood protection level
                         (10% annual occurrence/exceedance probability) at most county seats. Associated with economic and
                         population growth, flood damage is increasing as exposure to river flooding rises. The response from
                         CQM represented by the water resources bureaus at the municipal and county levels is to invest
                         heavily into the flood management structures and introduce critical non-structural measures such as
                         flood forecasting and early warning systems. Considering the expected impacts of climate change,
                         the risk exists that the magnitude of extreme events will increase and further increase flood damage.
                         Implementing non-structural measures will be important to enable populations to live with the
                         increasing potential flood risk associated with climate change.

                         Water pollution from increasing urban populations and intensifying industrial activities is also
                         becoming a very important issue in many parts of the municipality including several of the project
                         counties. The municipality as a whole, located upstream of the Three-Gorges reservoir, lacks sewage
                         collection and treatment infrastructure and capacity. The government is currently working to narrow
                         such gaps as priority investments with funding from different sources.

                         Typically located in deep river valleys and built on scattered small pockets of scarce land available
                         for urban construction, the growth and development of these county seats has been severely
                         constrained by Chongqing’s disadvantageous mountainous topography, in particular in the two sub-
                         regions of the northeast wing and southeast wing. Given their topographic and geological conditions,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         county seats in Chongqing are exposed to relatively high risks of events such as river flooding, land
                         slides and soil erosion, and water pollution.

                         Good progress has been made in recent years to reduce flooding risks, in particular in the existing
                         built-up areas of these counties seats, through structural measures. However, flooding risks in the
                         new residential and industrial areas or those currently under development in the county seats need to
                         be fully managed before these county seats can perform their roles in Chongqing’s urbanization
                         process in a safe and sustainable manner. While the current population has experience with previous
                         flood events, the new residents will be unaware of the urban flood risk. Awareness raising and
                         emergency preparedness will need to be reinforced.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
                         Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                         BP 4.01
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguards:

                             Environmental Assessment: The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project has been classified as Category A, mainly because the location of some proposed sub-
                             components could be environmentally sensitive (e.g., flood control and embankment in Pengshui
                             County’s Wujiang River section, Tongnan County’s Fujiang River section and Shizhu County’s
                             Longhe River section), though some impacts may be site-specific and few would be irreversible.
                             An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an environmental management plan (EMP) were
                             carried out to determine the key environmental impacts, the mitigation measures and
                             environmental monitoring program and necessary institutional arrangement as well as capacity
                             building development. The documents have been prepared on the basis of Chinese legal and policy
                             framework for environmental protection, master plans and environmental plans as well as
                             applicable Bank safeguard policies and Bank group’s Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines.

                             Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale,
                             significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. There would be some negative
                             impacts during project construction, such as air-borne dust; noise from equipment and construction
                             during nighttime; wastewater generated from the foundation pits, grouting and washing
                             equipment; soil erosion during construction stage, and social impacts, such as traffic blocking and
                             interruption, business impact to small shops along the streets, permanent and temporary land
                             occupation during construction, etc. As a project activity, sediment dredging would be carried out
                             in Shizhu County. The sampling and test were conducted and the results indicated that the quality
                             of the sediments is within the applicable standard, and thus can be classified as non-toxic material.


                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         The mitigation measures were proposed in the EIA and specifically detailed in the EMP to tackle
                         and reduce the environmental issues. And the relevant clauses would be included in the bidding
                         documents and the contracts to ensure implementation and enforcement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         From proposed components, following environmental and social benefits are expected: improve
                         key infrastructure, including river dyke/embankment and associated road, flood control facilities,
                         wastewater collection and treatment and drainage systems in the selected project areas. The four
                         project counties are located in mountainous region and listed into the poverty counties in
                         Chongqing. Through the project the four counties will be benefited from improved capacity
                         against the high risk of river flooding, thus reduced loss of assets and farmland due to flooding;
                         improved opportunity for employment and increase of income; increased value of land; promoted
                         development of women; and improved environment and aesthetics which may stimulate the
                         tourism sector. In addition, the project will help improve the attraction of the project area that is
                         expected to induce the immigration of people and investment to the project area. As a result the
                         demand for environmental service such as wastewater collection and treatment will be created.
                         This proposed project fits well into with the development plan for small towns and will help
                         satisfy the growing demand for environmental service.

                         As an important element, cumulative impact assessment was considered along with EA
                         preparation. Based on the information collected and assessment made, the proposed project
                         activities made small contribution in terms of pollutant discharge (through increased wastewater
                         collection and treatment), but obvious positive impacts and benefits from environmental and social
                         perspectives, as stated in above paragraph.

                         In the PCN stage ISDS, safeguard policy of OP4.04 Natural Habitats was indicated as TBD.
                         Through the EA process, screening and survey was conducted and it was noted that there are no
                         significant natural habitats in the proposed project areas. However, the survey confirmed that
                         Fujiang Naitonal Wetland Park is located in Tongnan County within the catchment area of Fujiang
                         River. This park is established for demonstration of the construction of Wetland Park oriented for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         scientific research and education, and ecological tourism. Part of the proposed embankment in
                         Tongnan will occupy the land in the Class II Area zoned for rational land use of the park.
                         Therefore, the policy is triggered. The survey also indicated that there were no endangered species
                         in the project areas. As part of the EA, the impacts were assessed and the mitigation measures are
                         designed in the EMP.

                         Based on detailed screenings and the survey conducted during EA process and consultation with
                         local culture authorities, it is confirmed that this project will involve the Darong Bridge and
                         Wanling Ancient Town in Rongchang County, which was listed into the Cultural Heritage
                         Inventory protected at national level and municipal level respectively for their historic,
                         architectural and aesthetical values; Xujiaba Site - a tribe site in the Shang and Zhou Dynasty and
                         was classified into the Cultural Heritage Inventory protected at municipal level for its
                         archaeological value and 4 family tombs in Pengshui County; and Dafo Temple that was classified
                         into the Cultural Heritage Inventory protected at national level and 32 family tombs in Tongnan
                         County. The proposed project will not be located in the core and control areas of above identified
                         relics, and some proposed works of embankment would partially located in the buffer areas. As
                         part of the EMP, mitigation measures were developed and included, including chance-find
                         procedures.

                         Dam Safety (OP 4.37). The project triggers the Safeguards Policy on Safety of Dams (OP4.37).

                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                         Although the project does not finance construction of new dams or rehabilitation of existing dams,
                         some of the project financed infrastructures would rely on the proper operation of four existing
                         upstream dams—Sankuaishi Dam in Tongnan County, Yutan Dam in Rongchang County,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Wujiangpenshui Dam in Pengshui County and Tengziguo Dam in Shizhu County. Failure of those
                         dams could cause extensive damage to or failure of the new Bank-funded structures. Those dams
                         are from 7.8m to 116.5m by height, 20 million cubic meters to 1,460 cubic meters by reservoir
                         capacities, they were built from 1976 to 2011. The PMO has hired one independent dam safety
                         expert (DSE) to (a) inspect a nd evaluate the safety status of existing dams, their appurtenance,
                         and performance history; (b) review and evaluate the owner’s operation and maintenance
                         procedures; and (c) provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any remedial
                         work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable standard
                         of safety. The DSE has prepared a Dam Safety Review Report and sent to the Bank. The PMO
                         would also assign special staff to assist the Bank team to ensure the project is implemented in line
                         with the OP4.37. Dam safety plans and emergency preparedness plans have been prepared for the
                         existing dams. During the implementation, the Borrower will prepare an Annual Dam Safety
                         Action Plan and provide relevant dam safety information to the DSE the Bank and arrange field
                         trips when necessary to review the safety status the relevant dams, and take dam safety measures
                         recommended by the DSE to improve the safety status when necessary to ensure the safety of
                         dams.


                         Social safeguards:

                         Involuntary resettlement: The Bank policy OP4.12 is triggered because the project needs to
                         acquire land and demolish houses for construction of civil works under components 1 to 4 in each
                         of the 4 project counties. Main civil works of the project consist of river embankment
                         rehabilitation and improvement and associated dike-top roads, sewer and drainage pipes. Hence
                         the project has significant land acquisition and resettlement impacts associated with related land
                         acquisition and resettlement activities in 14 villages/communities in 5 townships/sub-districts of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         four project counties. In total, there will be 1,997.2mu mu of land will be acquired permanently for
                         the Project, including 1,288.73 mu of rural collective land (including 703.42 mu of cultivated
                         land), and 708.47 mu of state-owned riverbank flat land. Besides, there will be 584.95mu of land
                         will be occupied temporarily, including 371.28 mu of cultivated land temporarily occupied for a
                         couple of months up to two years for the construction period of project civil works. In addition, the
                         project will cause demolition of about 23,352 m² houses and other types of ground structures
                         which will affect 76 households, 3 enterprises, 2 shops and 10 breeding households in planting or
                         husbandry business. Totally there will be 1493 households and 6258 people affected by such
                         involuntary resettlement, which will include 46 vulnerable people from 15 households, and 244
                         persons from 59 households affected by both land acquisition and house demolition. To address
                         involuntary resettlement issues and minimize negative impacts, a social assessment with wide
                         consultation was carried out in project sites and a consolidated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                         and a separate RAP for each county subproject were prepared. Although most of the project
                         involuntary resettlement impacts can be clearly scoped and investigated by appraisal, some
                         impacts related to the installation of sewer pipe networks still cannot be determined prior to
                         project appraisal. To address future possible and most likely temporary land acquisition, a
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared. There was no linkage project identified in
                         this project. The RAPs has set comprehensive mitigation measures, grievance redress mechanism,
                         monitoring and evaluation, institutional arrangements, and capacity building. These documents
                         were prepared in compliance with the Chinese legal and policy framework for land acquisition and

                                                                   Page 6 of 12
                          house demolition as well as the Bank safeguard OP 4.12 policy requirements.
                          During PCN stage, the TT undertook screening for IPs based on the 4 criteria as indicated in OP
                          4.10 and confirmed that there were no IPs in the project area. During the project preparation, a
Public Disclosure Copy




                          social assessment was undertaken, including a social survey and analysis, broad consultation in
                          project sites, and confirmed the absence of the IP in the project area. The task team came to a
                          conclusion that the Bank Indigenous People policy (OP4.10) is not triggered. Specifically, there
                          are only two groups of ethnic minorities-Tujia people in Shizhu County and Miao people in
                          Pengshui County. It has been confirmed that these ethnic minorities do not have the characteristics
                          of IP under the terms of the Bank OP4.10. Since most of the project areas in these two counties are
                          in urban or peri-urban areas without distinct ethnic minority communities, and the Tujia and Miao
                          people are fully integrated, both socially and economically, living scattered with the Han
                          population in the area. The majority of these ethnic people have already been urbanized with
                          urban-based livelihoods and well integrated with the surrounding communities in the past few
                          decades. No distinctive Tujia or Miao customs or ethnic cultural characteristics exist anymore, and
                          as a whole these two ethnic groups are not disadvantaged in comparison with local Han people.
                          Nevertheless, based on the social assessment results, the needs and interest of the local people,
                          including ethnic minorities, will be reflected in the project design and implementation.

                               Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale, or
                           significantly irreversible social impacts to be found. Possible negative impacts during project
                           construction might result from land acquisition and house demolition, temporary traffic blocking
                           and interruption, business impacts to small shops along the streets, etc. The mitigation measures
                           were proposed in the SA and specifically detailed in the RAPs as well as the RPF to minimize
                           such impacts and address other related social issues. They include different types of compensation
                           of cash or property, social security schemes and livelihood restoration through skill training,
                           employment assistance and provision of new business opportunities and facilities. And the
                           relevant clauses of the social documents will be included in project operational manual, bidding
                           documents and relevant contracts where applicable to ensure implementation and enforcement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           As designed, the proposed project will improve key infrastructure for flood control and wastewater
                           management in the project areas, including dyke/embankment, and increased/improved
                           wastewater collection as well as drainage systems.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives were considered during the project feasibility study and EIA preparation from major
                           five aspects: 1) with and without project scenario; 2) options for alignment and type of
                           embankment; 3) options for wastewater collection and treatment plan; 4) dredging method to be
                           used in construction; and 5) options for disposal of dredged sediment materials; 6) options for the
                           width and slope of dike-top roads, height and slope of river embankment, specific locations of
                           paths and accessing roads to minimize land demand for project civil works, in total the project
                           reduced the need for about 1,000 mu (i.e. 70 ha) land through optimizing technical design; 7)
                           options of technical designs and specific civil work location and route to avoid demolishing large
                           office buildings and concentrated residential houses in project sites, such as avoiding residential
                           buildings in a site with 14 households in Rongchang component. The project design avoided the
                           need for demolishing a few thousand square meters houses. Based on those, comprehensive
                           comparisons were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental
                           and social factors, which helped to minimize the needs for additional house demolition and land

                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                           acquisition.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental:

                          The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly addressed the potential
                          environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate measures in
                          the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts. As a
                          Category A Project, an EA Summary has been prepared for distribution to Bank’s Board for
                          review. The preparation of environmental safeguards documents followed the relevant national
                          laws/regulations and guidelines, as well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health
                          and safety (EHS) guidelines.

                          The major negative environmental impacts are expected short term mainly during project
                          construction phase, including dust, noise, traffic interruption, etc. A stand-alone EMP has been
                          prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP summarized the key environmental
                          impacts and detailed the environmental management and supervision organizations/institutional
                          arrangement and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan, and budget
                          estimates of EMP implementation. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs)
                          for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure
                          effective implementation. The EMP also included the mitigation measures to reduce and eliminate
                          the impacts to natural habitats, e.g., wetland in Tongnan and to the relics in Tongnan and
                          Rongchang. In addition, chance-find procedures have been included in the EMP.

                          There were two ECOPs included in the EMP covering the design, construction and operational
                          phases, i.e., generic environmental management in the construction phase and special
                          environmental management during construction phase (related to the sensitive points). Please see
                          the details in the EMP that was disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop. The contractors are requested
Public Disclosure Copy




                          to send the dredged sediments to the designated sites, such as landfill, for disposal. The PMO will
                          carry out supervision and monitoring in implementation. The contractor is also requested to
                          rehabilitate the land that is temporarily occupied for construction activities.

                          The EMP also includes environmental monitoring programs for both construction and operation
                          phases. The parameters to be monitored include noise, dust, and water quality. To ensure the strict
                          and efficient implementation of the mitigation measures proposed, including environmental
                          obligations during construction, a program of monitoring activities has been developed as part of
                          the EMP. The project progress reports furnished by the PMO will include a section for EMP
                          implementation and related environmental monitoring reports.

                          Institutional arrangement also was determined in the EIA and EMP. Chongqing PMO will take
                          overall responsibility to coordinate and oversee the EMP implementation, including management
                          and supervision, training, and preparation of project progress report based on the reports and
                          monitoring information from each project county, etc. Each county PMO will take respective
                          responsibility for EMP implementation, including hiring qualified environmental expertise for
                          environmental monitoring, supervising contractor to implement the mitigation measures,
                          promoting good practice of environmental protection measures and technologies. With related
                          mitigation measures and clauses to be incorporated in the bidding documents and contracts,
                          contractors will have obligation and mandates to implement the EMP.


                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                          Social:
                          The PMO has hired a professional consulting institute to conduct social assessment which
Public Disclosure Copy




                          included extensive survey and consultations through questionnaires, interviews and group
                          discussions. A consolidated overall RAP with an RPF and separate subcomponent RAP were
                          prepared to address involuntary resettlement issues through avoiding, minimizing, and
                          compensating adverse impacts. The RAPs set comprehensive mitigation measures, compensation
                          for affected people and enterprise, livelihood restoration for affected people, grievance redress
                          mechanism, monitoring and evaluation, institutional arrangements, and capacity building. The
                          social documents were prepared in compliance with the Chinese legal and policy framework for
                          land acquisition and house demolition as well as the Bank safeguard OP 4.12 policy requirements.

                          The project negative impacts could mainly result from land acquisition and house demolition,
                          temporary traffic blocking and interruption, business impacts to small shops along the streets in
                          project sites, and so on. The SA summarized the main positive and negative impacts of the project,
                          analyzed major project stakeholders, embracing women, ethnic minority and other vulnerable
                          groups, and came up with specific recommendations of mitigation measures for project
                          implementation. The RAPs focused on mitigating negative impacts and development opportunities
                          of project affected people and organizations due to land acquisition and house demolition.
                          Detailed measures for compensation, livelihood restoration, grievance redress, monitoring and
                          evaluation, procedures and budgets were all described in these documents.

                          Institutional arrangements and capacity building: these were reflected in the project preparation
                          process and set in the RAPs. The task team will continue to provide training and consultancy
                          services for the project as required. Chongqing PMO is very much experienced in implementing
                          the Bank financed projects. It has implemented many similar projects that have involved
                          significant resettlement impacts, and Chongqing county level PMOs have good experiences in
                          coordinating domestic project resettlement implementation and some have also implemented
                          previous Bank supported projects with good records.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Chongqing PMO will take overall responsibility to coordinate and oversee the RAPs
                          implementation, including management and supervision, training and capacity building, and
                          preparation of project progress report based on the reports and monitoring information from each
                          project county, etc. Each county PMO will take respective responsibility for their own component
                          RAP implementation, including hiring qualified social/resettlement experts for social and
                          resettlement monitoring, supervising implementation of the mitigation measures together with
                          related local authorizes and stakeholders, promoting good practice of resettlement and social
                          development.

                           Each PMO at Chongqing municipal and project county level will assign a dedicated social staff to
                           coordinate social safeguards work, together with related local government departments in charge
                           of local land requisition and house demotion.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Two rounds of public consultations were carried out during the EA process. The technique used
                           for the public consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused group
                           discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some project affected
                           persons. The issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in the EIA and EMP.


                                                                    Page 9 of 12
                           Furthermore, feedbacks to the concerns and issues collected in public consultation have been
                           provided to the concerned groups and documented in the EA. The EIA and EMP documents and
                           other project related documents have been fully disclosed locally through websites (http://www.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           eiafans.com/forum.php) since March 8, 2014 and a notice was made on Chongqing Daily on
                           March 9, 2014, the most popular local newspaper, as required by national and Bank's policies. The
                           English language EIA and EMP have been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on March 29, 2014.

                           During the project RAPs and social assessment preparation, intensive public consultations were
                           carried out with local people in project areas through project information dissemination campaign
                           and rounds of communication. Extensive surveys, interviews and meetings were conducted with
                           about 20% of the affected people and all affected organizations and enterprises in each of the
                           project counties by the PMOs with technical support of professional consulting institute.
                           Information and alternative options about the project, plan of civil works and their initially
                           proposed locations in selected project sites, main project sites were shared with the public and key
                           stakeholders during consultation. Social issues identified by social assessment and public
                           consultation were reflected in RAPs and SA report. These included where and how to optimize
                           locations of project civil works so as to avoid or minimize needs for land acquisition and house
                           demolition; issues of people’s safety in construction sites, and improvement of flood control
                           emergency response system. Measures were incorporated in project design and the RAPs for
                           project implementation. In particular, the social assessment exercise was intensively conducted by
                           the SA team (consultants and PMOs) among the ethnic minority groups in Shizhu and Pengshui
                           counties of the project. The SA found mainly two groups of ethnic minorities-Tujia people in
                           Shizhu County and Miao people in Pengshui County. Since most of the project areas within the
                           counties are in urban or peri-urban areas without distinct ethnic minority communities, and the
                           Tujia and Miao people in the project areas are fully urbanized and integrated, both socially and
                           economically, with the Han population in the area. These ethnic people are mostly urbanized and
                           have urbanized livelihoods. Project information, impacts, determined locations were all shared
                           with the ethnic people. Their needs and interest are reflected in the project design and will be
                           incorporated in project implementation although no separate ethnic minority development plan is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           required.

                           The SA report and RAPs were fully disclosed locally on 28 March, 2014 and the English versions
                           of them were disclosed through the Bank Infoshop on April 3, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        26-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        03-Jun-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              08-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        25-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Apr-2014



                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            27-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Ji You
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 14-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                             Date: 15-Oct-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
