                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA1017
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                     P147555
                                                                             Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     Health System Strengthening for Better Maternal and Child Health Results
                                              Project (PDSS) (P147555)
                            Task Team         Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       08-Oct-2014                         Estimated   18-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GHNDR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Population and reproductive health (30%), Child health (25%), Health system
                                              performance (25%), Nutrition and food security (10%), In juries and non-
                                              communicable diseases (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     230.00           Total Bank Financing:              220.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            110.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                              110.00
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                          10.00
                              Total                                                                                  230.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The proposed project development objective is to improve utilization and quality of maternal and
                         child health services in targeted areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be implemented in 132 health zones (HZ) reaching 16.55 million people or 23.5
                         percent of the population. The project will target 4 provinces: Equateur (58 HZ), Bandundu (52 HZ),
                         Maniema (14 HZ) and Katanga (8 HZ). The direct beneficiaries include women and children under 5.

                         The project will have three components. i) Component 1: Improve utilization and quality of health
                         services through Performance-Based Financing; ii) Component 2: Improve Governance of the Health
                         System; and iii) Component 3: Strengthen Health Financing and Health Policy Capacities.

                         Component 1: Improve utilization and quality of health services through Performance-Based
                         Financing. Total costs including contingencies US$132 million of which IDA = US$117 million and
                         HRITF = US$15 million.

                         This component would be supported by IDA and the HRITF as well as through parallel funding from
                         UNICEF, Global Fund and GAVI. PBF will be financed through separate fund holding
                         arrangements, while the purchasing, verification, community mobilization and coaching will be
                         organized through provincial purchasing agencies (EUP’s: Etablissement d’utilité publique). The
                         institutional framework for implementing PBF will build on extending the EUP model, which has
                         been designed and implemented for PBF operations in the North Kivu, Province Oriental and the two
                         Kasai since 2009. The model has shown to be an effective and efficient model for successful PBF
                         which strengthens national capacity for service delivery in even the most challenging contexts.
                         This component aims to increase the volume and quality of health services, with a specific focus on
                         maternal and child health interventions, through PBF in selected health zones. Specifically,
                         performance-based incentives will be used to support: (a) increased utilization of targeted services
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related largely to MNCH (PMA and PCA – see annex 2); (b) improved clinical practice and health
                         worker motivation (both intrinsic and extrinsic); and (c) structural improvements (e.g. availability of
                         drugs and commodities, equipment, etc.). Performance payments can be used for: (i) health facility
                         operational and capital costs (e.g. including maintenance and repair, drugs and consumables,
                         outreach activities (e.g., for transport, performance payment to community workers, and demand-side
                         incentives); and, (ii) financial and non-financial incentives for health workers according to defined
                         criteria. Notably, performance based incentives will be additional to existing financing at target
                         facilities. .
                         The PMA and PCA respond to the burden of disease in DRC. According to the Global Burden of
                         Disease study 2010, the burden of disease in DRC is predominantly related to communicable,
                         maternal, neonatal and nutritional conditions: the first ten conditions with the highest Years of Life
                         Lost (YLL) lead to 70 percent of all YLL in DRC. Among the top nine of conditions causing the
                         highest burden of disease in DRC in order of magnitude are malaria; diarrhea; lower respiratory tract
                         infections, protein energy malnutrition, measles, preterm birth complications, HIV/AIDS, TB and
                         neonatal encephalopathy.
                         Further work on the detailed design and initial implementation will be done during project
                         preparation; this will be supported through a Project Preparation Advance (PPA), which has already
                         been discussed with the Government. An important element of this component, as well as the PPA,
                         will be both capacity building and communication, including training on PBF concepts and
                         procedures, behavior change education, information, education and communications related to


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         demand generation and other strategic communication related to the PBF program.
                         Component 2: Governance, purchasing, coaching and strengthening health administration units
                         through Performance-Based Financing. Total costs including contingencies US$69.7 million of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which US$64.7 million from IDA and US$5 million from the HRITF.
                         Contract management and verification: an innovative purchasing arrangement will be created
                         covering each of the four provinces. The project will aim at cov ering two provinces in its entirety
                         (Equateur and Bandundu), as well as supporting the health zones covered by the PARSS in Maniema
                         and Katanga. An innovative strategy will be followed to build local capacity in PBF contract
                         management and verification functions through the EUPs. These local organizations will be created
                         bottom-up drawing from existing local human resources and experts that have worked on PBF over
                         the past 14 years. The EUPs will be under a performance contract with the MOPH in which the
                         timely and correct execution of their tasks will be measured and rewarded through a quarterly
                         performance framework applied by a third party.

                         Performance frameworks will also be introduced at all levels of the health system. These contracting
                         mechanism will hold Provincial Health Directorate (DPS – division provincial de santé)) and Health
                         Zone Teams (ECZS- équipe cadre de zone de santé) and regional drug distribution outlets (CDR –
                         central de distribution régional) accountable for their results through strong incentive mechanisms.
                         Internal performance frameworks contracts will clearly outline the expected performance of the
                         different DPSs and ECZSs vis-à-vis their roles in the health system and lead to successfully scaled up
                         PBF approaches. Results from the organizational performance will be benchmarked on a publicly
                         visible website (http://www.fbrsanterdc.cd/).

                         The Planning Unity (DEP - Département d’Etude et de Plannification) will coordinate key aspects of
                         the project in close collaboration with the various technical units with the MOPH most notably with
                         the PBF technical unit Cellule-Technique –Results Based Financing (CT-FBR). The DEP and the
                         CT-FBR will be strengthened by a mix of government staff and consultants recruited through a
                         merit-based process. The DEP, apart from managing the project related components, will also be the
                         fund-holder for PBF output-payments. The health management information department (HMIS) will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have the responsibility to maintain the PBF web-enabled application database. The DEP, CT-FBR
                         and HMIS unit will all be under performance contracts.

                         This component in addition to financing PBF grants for strengthening the health administration units
                         at all levels will also finance the provision of goods, consultant services, training and operating costs
                         to support project monitoring, evaluation and management, with an aim to ensure efficient, effective,
                         transparent and accountable delivery of this project. Internal performance contracts will be
                         established between the DEP Unit and the technical units in the Ministry of Public Health to
                         incentivize timely and quality delivery of project activities. The component will also finance the
                         project communications strategy.

                         Local Health Committees will be involved in the performance based approach through their
                         participation and oversight in: (i) health facility committees (COSA) and health area development
                         committees (CODESA); (ii) fund utilization at the health facility to achieve business plan targets;
                         (iii) discussions and negotiations with the heads of health centers regarding user fee levels; and (iv)
                         community verification of existence of users and assessment of patient satisfaction.

                         In addition to ensure greater community engagement in order to achieve behavior change in the
                         target population and improve the levels of citizen participation in the management of health, the
                         project will: i) develop and implement an information, education and communication strategy; ii) put

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         in place the household visit (see Annex 2 for further details) to increase demand of health services
                         and improve healthy behaviors at the household level; and iii) engage the community in the planning
                         and management of health activities including those aimed at enhancing transparency and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accountability in the delivery of services.

                         Component 3: Strengthen Health Financing and Health Policy Capacities. Total costs including
                         contingencies US$18.3 million

                         Component 3 is supporting components 1 and 2 as it will put the focus on institutional capacity
                         building and technical support in various dimensions of health system strengthening that will directly
                         reinforce and echo the investments of components 1 and 2. This component will reinforce the reform
                         process with specific focus on policy dialogue on health policies and health financing which will
                         support the sustainability of the investments and approaches covered in components 1 and 2. It will
                         also provide opportunities to improve data collection and hence reinforcing the ability of policy
                         development to be based on reliable data. Finally, the technical work and various interventions will
                         strengthen the capacity of the Government to respond and better define more equitable policies and
                         interventions hence addressing the inequities across the system. The project aims at having a
                         catalytic role on health system reform through the complementarities of the components.

                         This component would be supported by IDA resources. Its aim is to support the development of a
                         medium term strategic vision that would lead to more sound policy making, effective harmonization,
                         and better allocation of resources in the sector. This strategic vision would include clearer
                         orientations in terms of the decentralization, on Universal Health Coverage (UHC) agenda, the health
                         financing reform and the human resource management reform.

                         Accordingly, component 3 includes different complementary interventions. The project will provide
                         institutional, financial, and technical support to the various entities at the national level that are
                         leading major reform processes (i.e. DEP), the Primary Health Services Direction, the Health
                         Management Information System (HMIS) Unit, the Results Based Financing Technical Unit (CT-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         FBR), the Human Resources Direction, the future directions of resource management (Direction des
                         affaires financières -DAF), and the monitoring and evaluation unit that is linked to the secretary
                         general. Support will also be provided at the provincial level through the support to the DPS.

                         Sub-component 3.1: Support to improve health financing reform and system decentralization - Total
                         costs including contingencies US$4.4 million.

                         This component will support the Government’s reform process to strengthen the health system
                         focusing on: (i) better planning and budgeting process at national and decentralized level through the
                         use of Mid Term Expenditure Framework (MTEFs), (ii) policy dialogue and design of the national
                         health financing and Universal Health Coverage (UHC) strategy, (iii) strengthening of the MOH
                         leadership on health sector investments both financed by national, provincial or external sources, and
                         (iv) institutional support to key entities of the MOHP

                         In 2013, the government initiated the development of both a new health financing strategy and a
                         Universal Health Coverage Law (UHC). This project will support the national dialogue on the health
                         financing strategy and on UHC. Activities will include (i) technical consultations and discussions
                         with other ministries such as budget, finance, and social protection, (ii) technical and financial
                         support to the teams in charge of the health financing strategy, the health financing reform and the
                         UHC roadmap, (iii) high level consultations with government and parliament members as well as

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         external partners, and (iv) specific studies that will support the policy dialogue.

                         Given the decentralization reforms underway, this sub-component will support the provincial health
Public Disclosure Copy




                         directorate (DPS- Division Provinciale de la Santé), the decentralized entities in charge of the health
                         system management and stewardship at provincial level. The government has recently increased the
                         number of DPS from 11 to 26. The managers of the 26 DPS have been recruited through a
                         competitive and transparent process. The reforms include alignment by all partners to fund these
                         DPS through contrat unique’ (single contract), which embodies one contract type with the provincial
                         health directorate, one unique performance framework (with some room for provincial adjustments)
                         and one unique monitoring and evaluation mechanism. The DPS contracts will serve to provide
                         institutional funding to the DPS by the various partners. This is an innovation as it would be the first
                         time all partners would provide institutional funding through a common contract to the DPS, hence
                         addressing the fragmentation of funding the DPS.

                         There is a lack of clarity of how and when the government is willing to initiate the decentralization of
                         the health workforce management and payment. In case decentralization reform is initiated, the
                         project will support the policy dialogue on Human Resources management reform at national and
                         provincial level. This sub-component will also re-enforce the quality of health service delivery by
                         improving the quality of care provided by health workers.

                         Potential quality of care activities (QoC) to be supported under this sub-component could include: (i)
                         development of National QoC Improvement Strategy and operational plan development; (ii)
                         dissemination of clinical practice guidelines and protocols; (iii) development and scaling up of
                         quality assurance/ continuous qual ity improvement modalities; (iv) establishing and strengthening
                         professional associations (doctors, nurses, lab technicians) to self-regulate and help improve QoC
                         among its members. Such QoC activities will complement the pay-for-quality approach in the PBF
                         grant under Component 1. These activities will be done in collaboration with other key partners.

                         Finally, this sub-component would build capacity in health policy and management. The pervasive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lack of knowledge regarding health policy concepts, management skills, and regional and global best
                         practices limits government’s ability to strengthen its health system. Along with the appropriate
                         counterpart endorsements, partnerships, and the use of national training institutions, this sub-
                         component will finance: (i) a five-year training program for policymakers, and health managers,
                         from the central and provincial levels. The training materials in health policy and management will
                         be adapted from those currently available from the World Bank Institute’s Flagship Program for
                         Health System Strengthening; and (ii) strengthen existing capacity for research, analytical work,
                         institutional strengthening of national institutions such as the statistic bureau, the planning
                         department and other government entities which will be developed and executed during the project
                         period.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Health Sector Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Strengthening and Project
                         Monitoring- Total cost including contingencies US$13.9 million.

                         The weaknesses of the DRC health information system results in inadequate monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E) of health sector performance and therefore an inability to use data for decision
                         making. Since 2013, the government with the support of external partners decided to migrate its
                         access based HMIS system to a web based DHIS2 platform. A new web based Human Resources
                         Management software is being piloted in two provinces. Web-based Performance Based Financing
                         and Open Data software have been implemented to manage performance based financing and

                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         enhance accountability and transparency in five provinces.

                         The project will support the HMIS Unit and CT-FBR in the rollout of the DHIS2 and the PBF IT
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system. It will support the interoperability of web based IT systems and strengthen the HMIS unit in
                         the development of an integrated e-health architecture. This sub-component is fully aligned with and
                         will build upon the work that will be achieved in this field through the HD Systems Strengthening
                         Project (P145965).

                         The combination of DHIS2, PBF IT systems and an Open Data layer is part of the efforts for setting
                         up data driven health systems supported by performance based financing. Verified and purchased
                         results including the results for the health administration will be visible on the public website
                         whereas the raw data will be downloadable from the website. Benchmarking both the quantity and
                         quality of health facilities and the public health administration will lead to a powerful tool to employ
                         results monitoring and better governance. Introducing an ICT sub-component to the project to build
                         the capacity of the MOPH will allow the health facilities to systematically keep track of funding and
                         payments, record data, and use this data at both the facility and central level to make informed
                         management and policy decisions to improve the health system of DRC. Performance contracting
                         with the health administration at health zone and province levels will include tasks related to
                         epidemic disease surveillance.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The geographical areas where the new project will be implemented will cover 132 Health Zones
                         reaching 16.55 million people or 23.5 percent of the population. The project will target 4 provinces:
                         Bandundu, (52 HZ) Maniema, (14 HZ), Equateur, (58 HZ) and Katanga (8HZ) The direct
                         beneficiaries include women and children under 5.

                         Institutional capacity building at national level is the focus of the project. Particular attention is given
                         to some of the most “foundational” system building blocks in each sector. No civil works will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The project does not
                         require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                         resources and livelihood. The project is expected to have a positive impact for all beneficiaries
                         including vulnerable groups such as children, women and the poor who are the main target
                         beneficiaries of the project.

                         This project will cover 4 provinces and hence part of the population targeted will include Indigenous
                         Peoples (IPs). The expected impacts are positive as the IPs do not have access to quality care and
                         hence the project will ensure that quality free care is provided to them to ensure a better health
                         outcome. An Indigenous Peoples Health Needs Assessment has been conducted as part of the current
                         PARSS (P088751) project; this will be used as a starting point in developing the Indigenous Peoples
                         Plan for the project.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The environmental impacts of the project are



                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                            BP 4.01                                              expected to be minimal. The project will finance
                                                                                 the updating of the existing Health Care Waste
                                                                                 Management Plan (HCWMP) currently used by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 the health PARSS project. It will be updated,
                                                                                 reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed publicly
                                                                                 both within the DRC and at Bank’s Infoshop by
                                                                                 project effectiveness.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The project will not affect natural habitats.

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No              The project does not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No              The project does not involve physical cultural
                            BP 4.11                                              resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes             An Indigenous Peoples Plan will be prepared,
                                                                                 consulted upon and disclosed in country and at
                                                                                 the Infoshop. It aims to ensure that Indigenous
                                                                                 Peoples will benefit from social outputs of the
                                                                                 project as it will cover indigenous areas.
                                                                                 Disclosure is planned by effectiveness.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No              The project does not involve land acquisition
                            4.12                                                 leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project does not involve dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                  N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is not expected to have large scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social
                              impacts. Project activities are focused on delivery of an integrated package of health services both
                              at the community and health facility level, as well as providing high impact maternal and
                              reproductive health services.

                              Project activities that could potentially cause an adverse impact that will need to be minimized,
                              mitigated and managed include: (i) During the operation of the health facilities the generation of
                              additional quantities of medical waste will increase slightly over the current baseline. (ii) In
                              addition, the health facilities will receive an investment bonus at the beginning of each year, which
                              they can use to do some minor rehabilitation such as painting, opening a window, fixing the rood


                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                           etc. These activities may cause noise, vibrations and emissions from vehicles and machinery,
                           generate construction waste and involve potential risks regarding workplace and community health
                           and safety. However, these activities’ anticipated impacts will be temporary, site specific and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           localized, and limited in scope.

                           The presence of indigenous people (Batwa) in the targeted Provinces was identified and confirmed
                           during project preparation. Batwa constitute a vulnerable and marginalized group in the project
                           area. The risk of social exclusion of Batwa in the context of the project cannot be ignored, to
                           ensure that Batwa will benefit from the project, OP/BP 4.10 has been triggered, and an Indigenous
                           Peoples Plan (IPP) focusing on outreach and inclusion will be prepared.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The planned project activities are not anticipated to have long-term or indirect negative social or
                           environmental impacts. The project is expected to increase social cohesion at the family and
                           community level as well as activities to promote gender equality and change negative attitudes and
                           norms towards women and girls. In addition, the project support will provide targeted
                           communities with better access to basic health service. Project investments may strengthen sound
                           environmental and social practices in the construction sector and around health facilities. In
                           addition, the expected impacts on the indigenous people are positive as the Batwa do not have
                           access to quality care and hence the project will ensure that quality free care is provided to them to
                           ensure a better health outcome.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           At national level, the DRC has legislative and regulatory frameworks which are conducive to good
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental management. In addition, they have signed a number of international treaties and
                           conventions to ensure good environmental governance. At sector level, the DRC has already
                           implement Bank safeguards policies in various sectors. At project level, the beneficiary has agreed
                           to prepare and implement the safeguards policies triggered by the project. In accordance with
                           World Bank policy guidelines, the borrowers will prepare: (i) Medical Waste Management Plans
                           (MWMPs) as well as (ii) an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be developed which will focus on
                           outreach and inclusion.

                           The MWMPs will cover (a) anticipated waste composition and quantity; (b) existing medical
                           waste management system, including free capacity, deviations from, and gaps to BAT, (c) existing
                           regulatory framework and supervision / monitoring arrangements; (d) plan for using the existing
                           medical waste management system, including any measures to upgrade or remedy identified gaps
                           and deviations; and (e) additional arrangements for supervision and monitoring of medical waste
                           management. In DRC, where indigenous people (Batwa) have been identified in the project area,
                           the borrower will prepare IPP and put in place mitigation mechanisms to ensure indigenous people
                           benefit from the project.

                           As DRC is considered a conflict country the safeguard instruments are prepared under the special
                           policy exceptions and considerations described in paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 (namely, a Category
                           B operation in a fragile and conflict-affected state), which defers their preparation from the project


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           preparation phase into the implementation phase. The MWMPs and the IPP will not be prepared
                           before appraisal as would be mandated under normal procedures, but will be finalized before
                           actual physical works / footprints occur during the project implementation phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The preparation of the project has relied on consultations with government officials at relevant
                           levels, provincial officials, donors’ community, implementation partners, community and civil
                           society groups, and direct beneficiaries of the project. The implementation of the project will
                           likewise rest on various consultations. The preparation of safeguards instruments (MWMPs, and
                           IPP) will include additional consultations, at local, provincial and national level. Upon review and
                           approval by the government, the MWMPs and IPP will be disclosed by governments in local
                           languages to project-affected groups and NGOs in publicly accessible places for consultations, and
                           by the World Bank, in the Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Feb-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    20-Mar-2015
                           Comments: Document will be disclosed in country by effectiveness .
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Feb-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    20-Mar-2015
                           Comments: Document will be disclosed in country by effectiveness .
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Name: Hadia Nazem Samaha
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 26-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                             Date: 26-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
