                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA7159

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Feb-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Nigeria                           Project ID:    P148215
                                                       Parent         P090644
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Community and Social Development AF (P148215)
   Parent Project    Community and Social Development Project (P090644)
   Name:
   Task Team         Foluso Okunmadewa
   Leader:
   Estimated         20-Feb-2014                       Estimated   26-Mar-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTSW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (35%), Primary education (20%),
                     Other social services (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Road s and Highways (15%),
                     General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
   Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (50%), Participation and civic
                     engagement (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%) , Decentralization
                     (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     176.00           Total Bank Financing:               140.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    36.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                          140.00
     Total                                                                                176.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                            Page 1 of 11
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   Development objectives. The project development objective is to sustainably increase access of
   poor people to social and natural resource infrastructure services. The key performance indicators
   are: - Increased number of poor people (of which 70% are women) with access to social
   services. - Increased number of poor people with access to natural resources infrastructure
   services. - Increased percentage of participating Local Governments that are incorporating
   Community development plans in their budget.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The project development objective remains the same, i.e. to increase access by the poor to
   improved social and natural resource infrastructure services in a sustainable manner throughout
   Nigeria.
3. Project Description
Project Component 1 - Overall Project Support and Coordination

At the Federal level, this component will be supervised by the Federal Ministry of Finance, while the
direct responsibility for implementation will rest with the existing Federal Project Support Unit
(FPSU). A multi-sectoral Program Advisory Committee chaired by the Federal Ministry of Finance
and serviced by the FPSU, will support the FPSU to implement the following subcomponents:

(i) Technical Support to State Agencies and Activities: The FPSU will be responsible for providing
technical backstopping to State Agencies on Procurement, Financial Management, Gender,
Environment, and Local Government Capacity issues. The Unit will organize the appropriate
technical assistance based on requests from State Agencies or needs identified by the monitoring and
evaluation system.

(ii) CSDP Monitoring and Evaluation: The Unit will support an overall result-based monitoring and
evaluation framework for the CSDP in all project states and across all levels of activities. A
participatory M&E scheme currently used in both CPRP and LEEMP will be adopted and
strengthened. A more functional MIS will be established in partnership with the State Agencies.
Periodic project performance reviews coordinated by the FPSU and with active participation of the
State Agencies will be carried out to feed into the M&E and MIS.

(iii) Poverty and CDD Policy Design and Dissemination: Resources will be committed, under this
subcomponent to develop poverty reduction, social protection and CDD related policies and
programs as well as dialogue and dissemination of best practices. This subcomponent will also
support focused analytical studies, reviews of current practices, international experience sharing,
stakeholder dialogue and dissemination and promotion of poverty reduction related initiatives.



                                             Page 2 of 11
Project Component 2 - Capacity Building and Partnerships Development in State Ministries and
LGAs

This component will be implemented by the State Agency in all participating States and will provide
funding for capacity building, skills training and hardware types of investments. The objective of this
component is to establish and strengthen a partnership between LGAs and communities.

The State Agencies will fund and support the process of strengthening the capacity of sectoral
ministries and local government in program administration and accountability vis-à-vis local
communities. Specifically, this component will support capacity building, skills training, as well as
essential facilities for specific local government officials, such as community development workers –
to facilitate their activities with community groups. The training at LGA and State Sectoral Agency
level will be broad based and linked to existing public service training programs –such that trained
staff can be certified.

Project Component 3 - Community-Driven Investments Facility

State Agencies will manage this component. Funding will be provided for Community Development
Plans (CDPs) based on specific selection criteria including broad-based community participation in
plans formulation, micro-project identification and preparation, and a matching contribution from
communities. Major activities in this component to be carried out by the State Agencies include:

•       information campaigns on community development plans, agency goals and funding
procedures;
•       support for community identification of needs and priorities and development of CDPs in
collaboration with LGAs;
•       appraising, approving, and financing CDPs developed and implemented by community-
based groups; and
•       Monitor and evaluate the implementation of the CDPs and achievement of set objectives.

Possible micro-projects that may be contained in eligible CDPs include rehabilitation, extension or
construction of primary schools, health centres, rural electrification, water points, water reservoirs;
rehabilitation or construction of feeder road, small bridges, culverts, drifts and stock routes,
boreholes, other basic transport infrastructures; and small socio-economic infrastructure for
community use (public goods) such as markets and storage; vocational training centers (skill
development centers); and natural resource management facilities such as community reforestation,
woodlots or community-managed measures for firewood utilization or planting of windbreaks,
physical and biological measures for lowering soil erosion and environmental degradation,
community sanitation, including treatment of human and livestock waste, agro-forestry, water
catchments systems, drainage systems or local management of solid wastes; and community energy
efficiency, including promotion of equitable access to energy-efficient stoves or biogas pits.

Project Component 4 - Vulnerable Groups Investments Facility

State agencies will manage this component. Grants will be provided to vulnerable and very poor
groups of individuals for public and private goods and services including training centers and
equipment, school feeding arrangement, and scholarship program. All activities identified under the
component will be demand driven and managed by the groups themselves. This will be a grant from
the agency to the group with no repayment, but these grants cannot be used for micro-credit and on-

                                              Page 3 of 11
lending purposes by the groups. The criteria for the beneficiaries of the grant will be predefined
ensuring careful targeting to reach the most vulnerable.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
One Federal unit and about 26 States Agencies in Nigeria: in Abia, Abuja Federal Captital Territory,
Adamawa, Anambra, Akwa Ibom, Bayelsa, Bauchi, Benue, Cross River, Ebonyi, Ekiti, Enugu,
Gombe, Imo, Jigawa, Kaduna, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Nasarawa, Niger, Ondo, Ogun, Osun,
Oyo, Plateau, Taraba, Yobe and Zamfara. Sub-projects are expected to be small in size and site-
specific.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Varalakshmi Vemuru (AFTCS)
Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Eligible activities in the CDPs include
 BP 4.01                                             rehabilitation, extension or construction of
                                                     primary schools, health centers, rural
                                                     electrification, water points, water reservoirs;
                                                     rehabilitation or construction of feeder road, small
                                                     bridges, culverts, drifts and stock routes,
                                                     boreholes, other basic transport infrastructures;
                                                     and small socio-economic infrastructure for
                                                     community use (public goods) such as markets
                                                     and storage; vocational training centers (skill
                                                     development centers); and natural resource
                                                     management facilities such as community
                                                     reforestation, woodlots or community-managed
                                                     measures for firewood utilization or planting of
                                                     windbreaks, physical and biological measures for
                                                     lowering soil erosion and environmental
                                                     degradation, community sanitation, including
                                                     treatment of human and livestock waste, agro-
                                                     forestry, water catchments systems, drainage
                                                     systems or local management of solid wastes; and
                                                     community energy efficiency, including
                                                     promotion of equitable access to energy-efficient
                                                     stoves or biogas pits. The project ESMF has been
                                                     updated and re-disclosed. Where necessary,
                                                     ESIAs and/or ESMPs will be prepared, consulted
                                                     upon and disclosed during project
                                                     implementation.

                                                     Due to the anticipated potential environmental
                                                     and social impacts that may result from the
                                                     implementation of the above project activities,
                                                     OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. However, the exact



                                             Page 4 of 11
                                            locations of the proposed projects are not known
                                            in sufficient details at the time of project
                                            preparation. The project’s original Environmental
                                            and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has
                                            been updated, consulted upon and re-disclosed in-
                                            country and at the InfoShop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The conservation of natural habitats, like other
                                            measures that protect and enhance the
                                            environment, is essential for long-term
                                            sustainable development. The Bank does not
                                            support projects involving the significant
                                            conversion of natural habitats unless there are no
                                            feasible alternatives for the project and its sitting,
                                            and comprehensive analysis demonstrates that
                                            overall benefits from the project substantially
                                            outweigh the environmental costs. If the
                                            environmental assessment indicates that a project
                                            would significantly convert or degrade natural
                                            habitats, the project includes mitigation measures
                                            acceptable to the Bank. Such mitigation measures
                                            include, as appropriate, minimizing habitat loss
                                            (e.g. strategic habitat retention and post-
                                            development restoration) and establishing and
                                            maintaining an ecologically similar protected
                                            area. The Bank accepts other forms of mitigation
                                            measures only when they are technically justified.
                                            Should the sub-project-specific ESMPs indicate
                                            that natural habitats might be affected negatively
                                            by the proposed sub-project activities with
                                            suitable mitigation measures, such sub-projects
                                            will not be funded under the CSDP AF. As the
                                            AF is financing sub-projects that may affect or
                                            involve natural habitats, the ESMF includes
                                            preliminary measures for avoiding or mitigating
                                            impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           This policy applies to the following types of
                                            Bank-financed investment projects: (a) projects
                                            that have or may have impacts on the health and
                                            quality of forests; (b) projects that affect the
                                            rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                            dependence upon or interaction with forests; and
                                            (c) projects that aim to bring about changes in the
                                            management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                            forests or plantations, whether they are publicly,
                                            privately, or communally owned. The Bank does
                                            not finance projects that, in its opinion, would
                                            involve significant conversion or degradation of


                                    Page 5 of 11
                                                critical forest areas or related critical habitats. If
                                                a project involves the significant conversion or
                                                degradation of natural forests or related natural
                                                habitats that the Bank determines are not critical,
                                                and the Bank determines that there are no feasible
                                                alternatives to the project and its siting, and
                                                comprehensive analysis demonstrates that overall
                                                benefits from the project substantially outweigh
                                                the environmental costs, the Bank may finance
                                                the project provided that it incorporates
                                                appropriate mitigation measures. Sub-projects
                                                that are likely to have negative impacts on forests
                                                will not be funded under CSDP AF project. As
                                                the AF is financing some community forestry
                                                sub-projects, the ESMF includes measures for
                                                managing forests sustainable.
Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project does not raise potential pest
                                                management issues or finance the development
                                                the procurement of pesticides, pesticide
                                                application equipment or the use of pest
                                                management practices.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project does not trigger this policy as there
BP 4.11                                         are no physical cultural assets in the project area
                                                and the project will not finance works that affect
                                                or involve them.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous peoples in the project
                                                area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project interventions will avoid where
4.12                                            possible adverse impacts on people, land and
                                                other economic resources and livelihoods. In
                                                situations where this cannot be avoided, the
                                                borrower will, based upon the principles and
                                                objectives spelt out in the updated Resettlement
                                                Policy Framework (RPF), prepare site specific
                                                Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to address the
                                                needs of persons who will be affected by loss of
                                                economic activities, land acquisition and/or
                                                relocation. The preparation of these safeguards
                                                documents will be inclusive and participatory,
                                                promoting community ownership and social
                                                accountability. The RAPs will be reviewed and
                                                cleared by both the project safeguards team and
                                                the Bank. The RPF of CSDP will be revised to
                                                address potential adverse social and
                                                environmental impacts of the new component 4
                                                and will be reviewed by the Bank. The updated



                                        Page 6 of 11
                                                        RPF has been prepared, consulted upon and re-
                                                        disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s InfoShop
                                                        prior to project appraisal.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project does not trigger this policy.

   Projects on International        No                  The project does not trigger this policy.
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered because the project
   7.60                                                 area is not in dispute.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project is categorized as B and OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 on
     Involuntary Resettlement are triggered. The type of activities to be supported under Components 3
     and 4 include rehabilitation, extension or construction of primary schools, health centers, rural
     electrification, water points, water reservoirs; rehabilitation or construction of feeder road, small
     bridges, culverts, drifts and stock routes, boreholes, other basic transport infrastructures; and small
     socio-economic infrastructure for community use (public goods) such as markets and storage;
     vocational training centers (skill development centers); and natural resource management
     facilities. None of these activities are expected to generate substantial adverse social and
     environmental impacts. To date, the vast majority of sub-projects have been micro-projects for
     which environmental and social measures have been prepared, based on the ESMF.

     However, since the range, scale, locations and number of micro-projects will emerge from the
     participatory process, the environmental and social impacts of the micro projects, as well as
     possible negative impacts in terms of environmental degradation, land acquisition, loss of
     economic activities and/or possible displacement are not known. Therefore, the Environmental and
     Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the
     original project have been updated, consulted upon and re-disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s
     InfoShop.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No long term or cumulative negative environmental and social impacts of sub-projects are
     envisaged
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     No alternatives have been considered.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     Two instruments have been updated for the AF: (i) An Environmental Management Framework
     (ESMF ) and a (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). In addition, an environmental audit and
     ESIA for Bemi Bridge has been prepared during project implementation.



                                                Page 7 of 11
(a) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Safeguards policy OP 4.01 is triggered, in
component 3 and 4, and since the exact locations and impacts of the sub-projects have not been
identified; an ESMF is prepared. The ESMF ensures that the principles and procedures for the
development of in-country capacity and compliance with local regulations are established and it
serves as the basis for environmental assessment of all micro-projects to be carried out under the
CSDP –AF project. The ESMF provides guidance for preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs, and
environmental audits. It includes a screening process that is consistent with both World Bank
operational policies and Nigeria Environmental regulations, and a chapter on project processing
that describes the responsibilities.

As in the parent project, the additional financing is a Category B project, resulting from the site
specific environmental and social impacts associated with small infrastructure projects associated
with the CDD micro-projects. The micro-projects have been implementing environmental and
social measures, based on the ESMF. For the AF, the environmental and social micro-projects are
expected to be minimal, site specific and manageable to an accepted level. However, in those cases
where environmental impacts are more substantial, ESIAs and/or ESMPs will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed.

An environmental safeguards audit was prepared for the parent project to ascertain how well the
ESMF and RPF instruments have been complied with and to identify recent challenges in
safeguards implementation with the aim of proffering solutions to such challenges and providing
guidance for improvement where necessary. This audit carried out in the 26 CSDP rated the
project’s performance with respect to environmental safeguards compliance as credible and
satisfactory. In the audit, reference was made reference to the use of a limited safeguard
instrument used to assess the development of a CDD project for the Bemi Bridge in Cross River
State that attracted criticism from some stakeholders because of concerns about induced impacts
(e.g. logging, poaching) on two parks. However, the appropriate instrument, an ESIA, has been
prepared for the CDD project with an ESMP that prescribed appropriate mitigation measures that
are now been implemented. The ESIA, following consultation with stakeholders, has been
disclosed. The environmental audit has also been disclosed.

The audit also recommended the following: (i) Two additional safeguard policies namely, OP 4.36
– Forests, and OP 4.04 – Natural Habitat should be included to the already triggered safeguard
instruments - OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment and OP 4.12 – Involuntary Resettlement; (ii)
Adequate provision should be made for the implementation of safeguards instruments in the
various states though such capacity-building measures as training; and (iii) Adequate site visits to
administer the adequate safeguards instrument for each CDD project.

(b) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. To
date, no RAPs have been prepared; the safeguards audit of CSDP implementation confirmed that
there have been no instances of Involuntary Resettlement. Most micro-projects have not involved
land take; in some cases, communities have voluntarily donated community land for the micro-
projects. However, since the range, scale, locations and number of micro-projects will emerge
from the participatory process, the social impacts of the micro projects, as well as possible
negative impacts in terms of land acquisition, loss of economic activities and/or possible
displacement are not known. Therefore, the updated Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF),
prepared by the borrower in line with national and World Bank po licies and disclosed in-country
and at the Bank’s Info shop will guide implementation under the project. RAPs will be prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed as and when necessary. The environmental audit has confirmed the

                                          Page 8 of 11
  adequacy of the safeguards instruments and approach. The revised RPF of CSDP is addresses
  potential adverse social and environmental impacts of the new component 4 under the AF. The
  safeguards implementation capacity for the project states and LGAs will be reinforced and
  strengthened in both existing and new project sites.

  Consultation Process: Stakeholder consultation was carried out during project preparation,
  however, additional consultations and more detailed assessment will be carried out as needed in
  the course of the selection of specific project sites. The safeguards instruments (ESMF and RPF)
  were both prepared by the Borrower according to National and World Bank policies and were
  disclosed in-country in Nigeria and in the World Bank’s InfoShop. The Environmental Safeguards
  Audit has also been disclosed in-country and in the World Bank’s Infoshop.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders are the Federal Project Support Unit, State Agencies of the 28 states that will
  implement the project, LGAs, NGOs, other relevant institutions and participating communities.

  All the relevant stakeholders have been adequately informed of the project. There are no major
  concerns raised during the consultations.

  Public consultation will be an on-going activity taking place throughout the entire project process.
  Community participation and consultation are an integral part of CDP planning process and sub-
  project identification and screening process.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Jan-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Feb-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Nigeria                                                          19-Feb-2014
  Comments: Published in two newspaprs: The Guardian and Leadership
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Jan-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Feb-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Nigeria                                                          19-Feb-2014
  Comments: Published in two newspaprs: The Guardian and Leadership
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                            Page 9 of 11
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
    Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    degradation of critical natural habitats?
    If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
    project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
    Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    and constraints been carried out?
    Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    overcome these constraints?
    Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    does it include provisions for certification system?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Name: Foluso Okunmadewa
   Approved By


                                              Page 10 of 11
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 26-Feb-2014
Advisor:
Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)      Date: 26-Feb-2014




                                    Page 11 of 11
