                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC5570

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Russian Federation                Project ID:       P147011
                            Project Name:       Russia Special Economic Zones Enhancement Project (P147011)
                            Task Team           Thomas Edward Haven
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           20-Jan-2015                       Estimated         29-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSPF                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General industry and trade sector (50%), Public administration- Industry and
                                                trade (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Export development and competitiveness (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                       Total Bank Financing:         132.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         68.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           132.00
                              Total                                                                           200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to attract investors to, and increase investment in, select pilot
                           zones in the Russian SEZ program.
                           C. Project Description
                           The total expected size of the project is US$200 million. The IBRD share of the financing will be US
                           $132 million and the borrower's share will be US$68 million. The project will have three
                         components.

                         Component 1: Establishing an efficient system for SEZ management and operation and promoting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Russian SEZs to international investors (US$47 million).

                         1.1 SEZ legal/regulatory environment and management systems

                         This component will improve legal and regulatory norms on SEZs including:

                         a) Development of appropriate mechanisms and agreements that allow the private sector (non-
                         residents operating within SEZs and in areas adjacent to SEZs) to participate in the development of
                         SEZ infrastructure.

                         b) Development of frameworks and agreements (including a package of the needed legislative
                         amendments) enabling private sector management of SEZs, as well as deal-structuring advice on the
                         transfer of SEZ management companies’ functions to private SEZ operators, negotiating terms and
                         conditions, etc. With the appropriate body, this will include the development of PPP arrangements
                         for SEZ development and operations.

                         c) Development of a framework for tendering out government land to private SEZ developers for the
                         development, promotion and operation of the SEZ, negotiating terms and conditions, etc.

                         d) Development of a framework for licensing 100 percent private SEZs.

                         This component will also review and improve screening procedures for firms interested in locating in
                         the zones. Screening procedures should be investor-friendly and include appropriate assessments of
                         investor quality and growth prospects. The improvement process could include financing of financial
                         and technical advisors to review investor applications.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development of management capacity for the staff of federal and regional executive authorities, local
                         government agencies, and SEZ management companies, as well as regional executive authorities and
                         local government agency officials who play a role in the SEZs will also be part of this component.
                         Activities in this theme will include developing training and guidance materials, programs, curricula,
                         teaching aids, and activities; conducting training seminars and courses for upgrading thematic skills;
                         and organizing foreign study tours to learn from international experience in SEZ operations. This
                         will include assistance with developing and implementing investment promotion strategies.

                         Financing of SEZ management contracts may also be part of this component, although as this is not
                         currently included in the budget allocation, funds could be reallocated from Component 2 if the
                         appropriate conditions are in place to award one or more management contracts during project
                         implementation.

                         1.2 Zone attractiveness and investment promotion

                         Surveys will be conducted of potential investors, and analysis carried out of investor needs and
                         attitudes with respect to the current incentives and infrastructure offered in select zones. This could
                         be done for pilot and non-pilot zones. Development of the value offered by the different types of
                         SEZs (e.g. innovation, port, tourism) will also be an aim. Pursuit of this aim will include analysis of
                         investor targets, incentives, infrastructure, administrative services, value-added services and
                         programs, and development phasing. There will also be a review of general and specific investment
                         attraction strategies and management models for each type of SEZ. These will be consolidated into
                         an overall piece that presents all of the SEZ options to investors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ways of improving the efficiency of administrative and regulatory procedures and controls for SEZ
                         investors and companies will be considered. One way of doing so may be through establishing a
                         single window system that allows potential and current investors to obtain all of the necess ary zone
                         residency permits, operating licenses, construction permits, etc.

                         Under this component the project will seek to improve investor awareness concerning investment in
                         Russian SEZs through the design and preparation of new marketing collateral, and its presentation
                         through press conferences and presentations, mass media, exhibitions and business fora, road shows,
                         articles in the Russian and foreign media, and awareness-building on the Internet.

                         Through participation in international workshops and working groups, round tables, professional
                         colloquia, congresses, and fora the SEZ stakeholders will gain more access to international expe
                         rience and best practices.

                         1.3 Tourism zones strategy

                         Given the lack of a sound strategy for developing tourism zones in Russia and the low level of
                         private investment in this sphere to date, the existing operational model of tourism SEZs needs a
                         conceptual revision. The necessary revisions will be reviewed.

                         1.4 Automated information systems for SEZ operations and monitoring.

                         One or more online systems will be developed and deployed. The federal agencies will be assisted in
                         installing systems that help them to automate some parts of their work, and the publicly-run zones to
                         do the same. These systems would be initiated in the pilot zones and eventually rolled out to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         entire SEZ program (if successful).

                         Component 2. Infrastructure, services, and business enabling environment in pilot SEZs (US$146
                         million).

                         This component would help to address challenges related to zone management, private participation
                         in zones, planning and development of physical infrastructure, value-added services and facilities to
                         stimulate private sector development, business environment, and worker skills. The challenges would
                         be addressed in an estimated three pilot zones, whose selection will be approved by an interagency
                         working group (comprising the Ministry of Finance (MoF)) to be established by the MoED.

                         2.1 Establishment and equipping of shared-use centers and other facilities in pilot zones (US$131
                         million)

                         The list of shared use and other facilities will be defined during the project preparation phase, and
                         further refined through detailed feasibility and design studies during the implementation phase. The
                         list will be defined based on well-measured investor demand, as well as considerations of what
                         government and market failures the facilities are addressing and/or what market opportunities they
                         will allow users to exploit.
                         Examples of different types of facilities include: (a) Office, manufacturing, and warehouse facilities
                         for lease, e.g. factory shells; (b) Engineering centers, labs, testing facilities (e.g. for electronic
                         components), and other types of technical specialized shared-use infrastructure; (c) Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure, including recreation facilities, conference/ exhibition space, dining, and suchlike. Such
                         social infrastructure can create a more attractive value proposition for investors and facilitate
                         interactions among firms and researchers for clustering/ agglomeration economy effects; and (d)
                         Basic infrastructure, such as roads, power, water, sewerage, and telecommunications, could also be
                         considered, although this appears to be adequately covered by government resources.


                         The MoED would like to construct 4-6 shared use centers across the pilot zones. Based on
                         construction costs of existing facilities in the SEZ program, the MoED estimates that such facilities
                         will cost an average of US$35 million apiece. Equipment purchases for these centers are also
                         envisaged.

                         2.2 Design and provision of services to firms inside and outside the pilot zones. (US$10 million)

                         Programs and services to stimulate innovation, productivity, and entrepreneurship are critical for
                         Russia’s economic growth and diversification. SEZs can serve as a focal point for new and existing
                         programs and services in such areas, both for firms within and outside the zones. For each pilot zone,
                         an assessment of existing programs and services (offered by the zone and other public agencies) that
                         are relevant to the sectors of interest in the zone would be undertaken. Shortcomings in existing
                         programs and needs for new programs would be identified. This component would then finance the
                         design and implementation of new/improved programs and services. These would likely have a
                         sector focus, e.g. IT or avionics components, in line with the focus of the pilot SEZs. Examples
                         include technology transfer programs, helping firms with commercialization and internationalization
                         of their products and services, market intelligence, specialized training, and other things.

                         2.3 Worker skills (US$5 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This subcomponent could finance on-the-job or other types of training to meet specific demands of
                         zone companies. This subcomponent could receive more emphasis if investor surveys determine that
                         the lack of workers with specialized skills is a key obstacle to attracting investment to the pilot zones.

                         Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$7 million).

                         Funds under this component will be used for managing the project implementation process in
                         accordance with IBRD procedures, including procurement, disbursement, financial management, and
                         the monitoring and evaluation of project results.

                         To coordinate and oversee the preparation and implementation of the project, an Interagency
                         Working Group will be established. It will include representatives of the MoED, MoF, and other
                         relevant federal and subnational executive authorities and organizations.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The government has not yet determined which pilot zones will be chosen for the Project and how
                         many zones will be included. The final selection of pilot zones will be determined by an interagency
                         working group during project preparation. Once the SEZs will be selected and before approving any
                           civil works there, a “due diligence” environmental and social review will be carried out for any
                           proposed pilot SEZs with the focus of ensuring that the SEZ was established and is operating in full
                           compliance with all national environmental laws and regulations and that there are no pending legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           actions or claims against relating to its environmental performance or impact of the SEZ or any of its
                           existing tenants. On the social side the focus will be on past land acquisition, on compliance with
                           occupational health and safety requirements, and on the status and nature of relations between the
                           SEZ and nearby communities including whether there are acceptable mechanisms to identify and
                           address any grievances that might arise. The EMF to be prepared should explain how this “due
                           diligence” environmental review will be conducted and what issues should be specified in the report.
                           Implementation of the specified environmental due diligence activities would be condition to finance
                           selected SEZs further development.

                           Examples of zones that are promising candidates for selection include:

                           * SEZ "Tomsk" in Tomsk region
                           * SEZ "Dubna" in Moscow region
                           * SEZ "Ulyanovsk" in Ulyanovsk region.

                           Activities to be financed under the project include construction of 4 to 6 shared-use infrastructure/
                           centers and other facilities. Types of infrastructure may include, but not be limited to, office
                           buildings, factory shells, and shared facilities (exhibition space, conference halls, etc.). If chosen,
                           potential activities in Tomsk and Dubna would be implemented in "innovation" zones, which are
                           located in peri-urban landscapes. The Ulyanovsk zone is under construction in land adjacent to an
                           airport.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Economic Development (MoED) will be the responsible Implementing Agency for
                           the Project. Project preparation, including preparation of safeguards documentation, will be
                           performed by the MoED together with RusSEZ JSC and hired consultants, or possibly an external
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Project Implementation Unit (PIU).

                           Project implementation will be managed through an internal (to the MoED) or external PIU that will:
                           (i) finance consultancy services, (ii) prepare bidding documents and tenders, (iii) undertake
                           procurement activities, (iv) secure implementation of environmental and social safeguards
                           requirements and, (v) monitor project implementation progress. If external, the PIU will be selected
                           in the manner prescribed by applicable World Bank procurement regulations, as well as by
                           Government of Russia Resolution No. 43, dated January 28, 2005. Assuming that the safeguards
                           implementation capacity of the PIU will be very low, the proposed EMF will provide relevant
                           capacity building measures to be included in the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                           Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO)
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                           Jennifer Shkabatur (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          The project involves construction of shared-use
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                     infrastructure/centers and other facilities which
                                                                     might generate some environmental and social
                                                                     impacts and thus this OP is triggered. To
                                                                     address these impacts the client will prepare an
                                                                     EMF which will set out procedures for
                                                                     screening proposed investments to determine
                                                                     the requirements for an Environmental Impact
                                                                     Assessment (EIA) and/or Environmental
                                                                     Management Project (EMP), and provide
                                                                     information on the potential impacts and
                                                                     appropriate mitigation measures for the types of
                                                                     investments most likely to be financed by the
                                                                     project. These EIAs/EMPs will be prepared
                                                                     when the sites and the nature of investments are
                                                                     known. Any proposed high risk activities/
                                                                     investments (e.g. facilities for handling or
                                                                     disposing of hazardous wastes) which might
                                                                     generate significant or irreversible adverse
                                                                     environmental impacts and thus qualified as
                                                                     Category A projects, will be not supported
                                                                     under the project and the EMF will include
                                                                     relevant exclusion criteria.
                                                                     Once the SEZs will be selected and before
                                                                     approving any civil works there, a “due
                                                                     diligence” environmental and social review will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     be carried out for any proposed pilot SEZs with
                                                                     the focus of ensuring that the SEZ was
                                                                     established and is operating in full compliance
                                                                     with all national environmental laws and
                                                                     regulations and that there are no pending legal
                                                                     actions or claims against relating to its
                                                                     environmental performance or impact of the
                                                                     SEZ or any of its existing tenants.
                                                                     OP 4.01 also applies to technical assistance
                                                                     activities with environmental and social
                                                                     implications. Specifically, this is in relation to
                                                                     TA financed under the project which would
                                                                     have implications for potential environmental
                                                                     and/or social impacts either in the pilot SEZs or
                                                                     the SEZ program overall (e.g. regulatory
                                                                     aspects, design of environmental services such
                                                                     as sewerage, screening criteria for firms, etc.).
                                                                     The EMF should provide guidance for ensuring
                                                                     that the Terms of Reference for TA provided
                                                                 through the project incorporates environmental
                                                                 and social considerations as appropriate.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   While at this stage of the project development it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 is not expected the project will have impacts on
                                                                 important wildlife and wildlife habitats, on a
                                                                 precautionary basis this OP is triggered and the
                                                                 EMF will provide specific guidance for
                                                                 investments and operations insuch cases.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   While at this stage of the project development it
                                                                 is not expected the project will have impacts on
                                                                 forests, on a precautionary basis this OP is
                                                                 triggered and the EMF will provide specific
                                                                 guidance for investments and operations in such
                                                                 cases.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No. The project will not support purchasing
                                                                 pesticides and its activities will not lead to their
                                                                 increased usage.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   While at this stage of the project development it
                         BP 4.11                                 is not expected the project will involve or have
                                                                 impacts on such resources, on a precautionary
                                                                 basis this OP is triggered and the EMF will
                                                                 provide specific guidance for investments and
                                                                 operations in such cases.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project involves construction of shared-use
                         4.12                                    infrastructure/centers and other facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 will be
                                                                 triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                 will be prepared as pilot zones and construction
                                                                 sites still need to be identified. Physical works
                                                                 on most of the project sites will take place in the
                                                                 existing SEZ footprint. Based on the current
                                                                 information, the physical works are not
                                                                 expected to result in resettlement, nor will they
                                                                 include involuntary land acquisition. However,
                                                                 loss or disruption of income sources or means of
                                                                 livelihood may occur due to physical works or
                                                                 other project activities.
                                                                 The government has not yet determined which
                                                                 pilot zones will be chosen for the Project and
                                                                 how many zones will be included in it. The final
                                                                 selection of pilot zones will be determined by an
                                                                 interagency working group during project
                                                                 preparation. Thus, specific location, type and
                                                                 scale of the construction will be defined later
                                                                                                                                 through implementation of activities under
                                                                                                                                 Component 2.
                                                                                                                                 As noted above, once the SEZs are selected and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 before approving any civil works there, a “due
                                                                                                                                 diligence” environmental and social review will
                                                                                                                                 be carried out for any proposed pilot SEZs. The
                                                                                                                                 social review will be done in accordance with
                                                                                                                                 the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to be
                                                                                                                                 prepared by the Client. Site-specific
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared, if
                                                                                                                                 needed, once specific sites for project activities
                                                                                                                                 are identified.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No. The new project will not finance any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            subprojects which might discharge waste waters
                                                                                                                                 directly in the international waterways. This will
                                                                                                                                 represent the screening criteria for selection of
                                                                                                                                 proposed subprojects.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TOR for preparing the Environmental Management Framework and Resettlement Policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      Framework – May, 2014
                                      Designing EMF and RPF - June 2014 - August 2014
                                      Draft RPF and EMF submitted to the WB - September 10, 2014;
                                      EMF and RPF disclosure and consultation – October, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Thomas Edward Haven

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Esma Kreso (RSA)                                                                                                     Date: 23-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Paloma Anos Casero (SM)                                                                                              Date: 27-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
