INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12419
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Belarus                    Project ID:  P148181
Project Name: Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)
Task Team       Igor Kheyfets
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Mar-2015                Estimated    15-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Secondary education (50%), Primary education (25%), General education sector
(25%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      50.00
Total                                                                      50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the proposed Project is to: (i) improve access to quality learning environment in
selected general secondary schools; and (ii) strengthen student assessment and information
management systems in education.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 6


﻿The proposed Project is organized into three components: (i) Ensuring a quality learning
environment in schools receiving students from closed/reorganized schools; (ii) Modernization of
system management in general secondary education; and (iii) Project implementation support.
O
Component 1: Ensuring a quality learning environment in schools receiving students from closed/
reorganized schools.
o
The objective of this component is to provide a learning environment that is conducive to quality
education in selected schools.
Subcomponent 1.1. Strengthening infrastructure of institutions which receive (or plan to receive)
students from schools closed or reorganized under the optimization program.
Subcomponent 1.2: Improving access to and use of laboratory equipment and information
technologies in the educational process.
Component 2: Modernization of system management in general secondary education.
The objective of this component is to facilitate the use of international best practices in assessing the
quality of education and using data analysis for education system management.
Subcomponent 2.1. Improvements to the national student assessment system.
Subcomponent 2.2. Participation in international student assessments.
Subcomponent 2.3. Improvement of the existing Education Management Information System (EMIS)
to facilitate the use of data analysis for supporting sector management decisions.
Component 3: Project implementation support.
The objective of this component is to ensure adequate support for the implementation of the
proposed Project activities.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented country-wide. A preliminary list of beneficiary educational
facilities from every region of the country has been developed on the basis of agreed selection
criteria. The final selection of beneficiary facilities will be determined during project implementation.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)
Solvita Klapare (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Component 1 of the proposed project includes activities to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               rehabilitate school facilities. The schools where the
rehabilitation will take place and exact nature of
rehabilitation needs in each school is not defined yet, and
may include work on external walls, roofs, windows,
floors, basements, laboratories, gymnasiums, and heating
Page 2 of 6


﻿and sewer systems, among others. Rehabilitation works
are expected to have some temporary negative impacts
typical for reconstruction/rehabilitation of small to
medium size constructions. The potential negative
impacts are perceived to be relatively minor and can be
readily mitigated with standard procedures. Due to the
expected environmental impact of these activities, OP/BP
4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered. Based on
the safeguards policy and given the expected nature of the
works, the proposed Project is classified as Category B.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No           All project works are anticipated to occur within the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 existing school sites and it is unlikely that any of the
school buildings selected for the rehabilitation will have a
historic value and/or have present physical cultural
resources. As such, OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural
Resources is not triggered. Nevertheless, the EMF
includes procedures for addressing physical cultural
resources encountered during implementation ('chance
finds').
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          All school rehabilitation works under the project are
OP/BP 4.12                           expected to take place within the existing footprint of
educational facilities and no land acquisition is expected.
The Republic of Belarus enjoys a well-enforced
regulatory framework that prohibits squatters and vendors
within the territory of the school compound, thus
permanent or temporary physical or economic
displacement as the result of the project is not expected
and OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered
by the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 3 of 6


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
The proposed project would support the rehabilitation of school facilities, which are expected to
have some temporary negative impacts typical for reconstruction/rehabilitation of small to medium
size constructions. The potential negative impacts are perceived to be relatively minor and can be
readily mitigated with standard procedures.
The project is not expected to have negative impacts on the population residing in the areas of sub-
projects or change the situation in environmentally important regions. In most cases, the proposed
measures can substantially mitigate the negative impact. No new secondary education institutions
will be built as part of the project, and no current facilities are planned to be extended.
The expected negative environmental impacts can mainly materialize in the process of
construction work and use of laboratory equipment at school classrooms, computer labs, and
canteens (i.e. the major environmental impact is associated with creation of construction waste)
and possible entry of spent laboratory reagents into wastewater. However, with the proposed
measures in the EMF aimed at mitigating the negative impacts properly implemented, the project
will have mostly positive effects for the environment and human health owing to the
modernization and strengthening of the physical infrastructure of secondary education institutions,
introduction of new information technologies to school education.
In addition to the mitigation measures in the EMF, additional measures will be developed for each
school covered by the project. The Environmental Management Plan that will be prepared for each
school will reflect the risks associated with construction work and subsequent operation of
facilities, as well as mitigation measures and mechanisms to monitor the mitigation plan
implementation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No irreversible long-term impacts are expected as a result of the proposed project activities. Short-
term environmental impacts resulting from school rehabilitation activities are expected to be
mitigated through the application of site-specific Environmental Management Plans, which will be
developed in line with the Environmental Management Framework.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Due to the nature of civil works activities, some minor negative impacts are to be expected during
the implementation of construction activities. However, an important principle for selecting
buildings for rehabilitation and preparing design documents will be to screen them for revealing
any structural damage and instability to address these faults. The screening will include potential
environmental issues, such as asbestos-containing materials, lead-based paint and adequate waste
water disposal.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will appoint one staff member to be in charge of
safeguards compliance. Since the proposed PIU has no prior experience with World Bank
safeguards policies, its staff will receive guidance and on-the-job training from the Bank's
Page 4 of 6


﻿safeguards specialists in the early stages of project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
An Environmental Management Framework has been developed. The draft document (in Russian)
was disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Education (http://edu.gov.by/) on January 9, 2015,
and public consultations have been carried out in 89 districts and towns throughout the country.
The final version of the EMF in Russian was disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Education
on March 4, 2015 and in English in the World Bank's InfoShop on March 27, 2015. During the
course of project implementation, citizen engagement mechanisms will assess beneficiaries'
satisfaction with the project activities and any grievances arising will be addressed at the project
level.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           27-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Belarus                                                  09-Jan-2015
Comments: The draft EMF was disclosed (in Russian) on the website of the Ministry of
Education (http://edu.gov.by/) on January 9, 2015, and public consultations have
been carried out in 89 districts and towns throughout the country. The final version
of the EMF in Russian was disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Education on
March 4, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
a          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Igor Kheyfets
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza        Date: 27-Mar-2015
Manager:                      (PMGR)
Page 6 of 6


