INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA9430
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Albania                     Project ID:  P132982
Project Name: Results-based Road Maintenance and Safety Project (P132982)
Task Team       Artan Guxho
Leader:
Estimated        17-Dec-2014                Estimated    26-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (70%), Public administration-
Transportation (30%)
Theme(s):       Regional integration (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%),
Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Infrastructure s ervices for
private sector development (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     156.00             Total Bank Financing:    80.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                     76.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        80.00
Total                                                                       156.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To maintain the condition and improve the safety of the Albanian Primary and Primary-Secondary
road network, and strengthen sustainable and efficient road asset management and safety practices,
for the benefit of road users.
Page 1 of 7


﻿3. Project Description
Description and Components
The Project seeks to ensure that existing road network investments can be maintained and that road
asset management and safety systems can sustainably be introduced. Broadly, this will be realized
through: (a) maintaining the project roads under 5-year hybrid performance-based maintenance
contracts; (b) the provision of technical assistance (TA) to improve road safety capacity at both ARA
o        and the IMRSC; (c) the provision of TA and institutional support to improve operating efficiencies
within ARA, targeted at road asset management, and (d) technical and advisory support to complete
and develop sector strategies and programs. It has four components with a total investment of US
$156 million, of which US$80 million will be financed by IBRD and US$76 million by GoA.
Component 1 - Maintenance Works and Monitoring (Total US$139.20 million; IBRD US$68.46
million) will provide periodic and routine maintenance of project roads, under hybrid type
performance-based maintenance contracts, comprising 1,053 km of Primary (P) roads and 282 km of
Primary-Secondary (PS) roads. This component will also finance Monitoring Services Consultant.
The primary role of the Monitoring Consultant is to ensure that the service levels defined in the
maintenance contracts are complied with, but it will also provide an initial road safety audit, arrange
for iRAP surveys, ensure that identified additional road safety black-spots and required safety
enhancements are incorporated into the capital works, and develop the Social Transparency System
(STS). This is a DLI-based component, and financing is linked to the achievement of agreed
disbursement linked indicators
Component 2 - Institutional Reforms (Total US$7.20 million; IBRD US$3.60 million) will support
institutional reforms at both ARA and MoTI, aimed at enhancing capacity in road safety and road
asset management on a country level, and will consist of two sub-components:
(a)    (a)    Sub-Component 2.A: Operationalize road safety in ARA, MoTI and IMRSC, by
strengthening organizational and policy-oriented actions, introducing Road Safety audit training
accreditation courses, supporting Road Safety media campaigns, and enhancing the Accident
Information System (AIS).
(b)    (b)    Sub-Component 2.B: Institutionalize Road Asset Management Systems (RAMS), by
enhancing ARA's capacity to collect and analyze road data, and provide training to ARA staff in
using the system to plan and budget for road maintenance and investments.
Component 3 - Sector Reforms (Total US$5.8 million; IBRD US$4.8 million) will support transport
sector reforms. Financing under this component will be based on standard Bank IPF disbursement
procedures, and it is fully covered by IBRD loan, with the Government financing only VAT. The
component will provide financing to address sector reforms, which would include, but not limited to,
technical and advisory assistance to GoA to finalize the Transport Sector Strategy and associated
implementation plan; and technical and analytical support for medium term budget planning.
Component 4 - Project Management and (Total US$3.60 million; IBRD US$3.00 million) will (a)
support project management functions of ARA's Project Management Team (PMT); (b) provide an
operating budget; (c) finance annual DLI and Technical audits; and (d) support project completion
and beneficiary impact assessments.
Instrument of Choice: MoF has confirmed their preference for a Hybrid Results-based Investment
Page 2 of 7


﻿Project Financing (IPF), with Disbursement Linked Indicators.
Disbursement Arrangements
O
)         Disbursements will be made through semi-annual loan advances based on: (i) yearly rolling cash
flow forecasts of Interim Financial Reports (IFRs), (ii) documentation of previous advances and (iii)
for some advances, documentation of previous advances in parallel with the confirmation of the DLIs
achievement. The use of six-month IFRs will allow for loan advances to provide regular and
consistent levels of liquidity to implement project activities. Both, the IFRs produced at the end of
each second semester and the Independent Audit annual reports, will be used to (i) validate and
certify achievement of DLIs, (ii) recognize expenditures incurred and reported as eligible, and (iii)
convert prior advances into disbursements -- in part or in total, depending on whether the DLIs have
been partially or completely achieved. Almost 90 percent of the Bank's Loan will use results-based
disbursement based on DLIs, while the disbursement for the remaining 10 percent, covering sector
support and project management will be based on standard IPF disbursement procedures. For
Components 1 and 2, the Bank's funding is divided across the number of DLIs in a given percentage
with 80 percent of the loan allocated to implementation of maintenance works and 20 percent
allocated to road safety and asset management.
Preparation of Environmental and Social/Resettlement Documentation.
ARA and the preparation consultant have developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), an
Environmental Policy Framework (EPF); and Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) two
representative project roads sections to guide program implementation. It is proposed that the review
of EMPs will initially be on a prior approval basis, until the Bank team confirms the acceptable
quality of the plans, and after that a certain percentage of the plans will be subject to a post review.
While the Project is not envisioned to entail land acquisition, or resettlement, an RPF has been
prepared to serve as guide, in the event that temporary and/or partial land acquisition, dislocation of
street vendors appears necessary, and to complete site-specific RAPs (template is included in the
RPF), which will be subject to prior approval.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Throughout Albania, and covering 1,053 km of Primary (P) roads and 282 km of Primary-Secondary
(PS) roads.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
Esma Kreso (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes         Since the road sections are not fully defined at the
BP 4.01                                    time of project Appraisal, an Environmental
Management Framework document (EMF) has
been prepared for the project. The EMF sets forth
the guidelines for site-specific EMPs and helps
formulate sound environmental performance into
Page 3 of 7


﻿the planning and design stages of the activity. The
EMF screening procedure ensures that no
activities corresponding to a Category A are
financed and that no additional safeguards are
triggered. The EMF includes two template
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for the
Paper-Paulesh and Paper-Vidhas road sections.
Furthermore, implementation of the EMP will
also feed into the results-based approach for the
issued maintenance contracts.
Major anticipated environmental issues include
dust and noise generation from machinery,
adequate site organization, storage of paints,
equipment and machines, waste separation and
management, chance findings, use of salt and/or
materials in winter maintenance, and possible
small construction interventions in order to
improve road safety.
It is proposed that the review of implementation-
developed EMPs by the WB initially be on a prior
approval basis until the WB team confirms the
acceptable quality of the plans, after which a
certain percentage of the plans will be subject to a
post review which will serve as a basis for
disbursement.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes          The EMF provides precautionary measures for
the road maintenance activities in the proximity
of, or within protected areas or otherwise
sensitive natural habitats including forested areas.
This provision is mostly due to the fact that the
specific road sections to be included under the
project are not known at this stage.
a         Forests OP/BP 4.36              No           The project will not finance any roads in forested
areas, while provisions on possible roads
maintenance in forested areas under protection
regimes included in the EMF under the natural
habitats screening procedure.
Pest Management OP 4.09         No
Page 4 of 7


﻿Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No         The EMF and site-specific EMPs have provisions
BP 4.11                                     in case of chance findings on site, while
precautionary section in the EMF is included for
o                                                     works that may deal with maintenance of specific
bridges, which may, due to their historical value
or age be a cultural monument. All works on such
sites will include direct involvement of the
monument and heritage protection authorities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes         A precautionary Resettlement Policy Framework
4.12                                        (RPF) including a template Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) has been prepared for the project. As
the project is not envisioned to entail land
acquisition or resettlement, no RAPs have been
prepared during project preparation. In the event
that some land acquisition appears necessary, a
RAP will be prepared and will be subject to prior
approval.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The main environmental impacts associated with the project include those associated with small-
scale construction works related to road maintenance activities, such as dust and noise generation,
waste management, material supply and worker safety. The EMF screening procedure will help
guide the Client in ensuring that the site-specific impacts are mitigated, that no additional
safeguards policies are triggered and that no category-A works are financed.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The road maintenance activities will also help improve the road safety aspects in project roads and
in the entire National Road Network, and as such are expected to have long-term positive social
impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No alternatives are considered but the environmental and social screening of each proposed
activity will help ensure no additional safeguards are triggered and that the project activities
financed are not corresponding to a Category A.
Page 5 of 7


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will be implemented through the the Project Management Team (PMT) within the
Albanian Road Authority (ARA) - formerly General Roads Directorate. The ARA has been
implementing Bank-funded projects since 1998, the most recent of which was the Albania
Transport Project, a Category A construction of a section of the motor-way to the North of the
Country. During implementation of the Transport Project, PMT fully and satisfactorily
implemented requirements of the Environmental Assessment and EMPs, and RAP, with no
significant issues or deviations with excellent staff support from the in-house Environmental and
Expropriation departments, and adequate reporting. Similar implementation arrangements will
remain for this project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMF and two Environmental Management Plans for Paper-Vidhas and Paper- Paulesh road
sections have been disclosed in country, both online and in the local community in October 2014.
The public consultations were announced in the local community and in the newspapers, with
targeted invitations sent out to different institutions including NGOs. The consultations were held
on October 22, 2014. All subsequent EMPs will be disclosed in a similar manner within the local
communes prior to start of any works. The EMF, RPF and two EMPs have been finalized and
were disclosed, both in-country and the Bank Infoshop on December 1, 2014.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           01-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Albania                                                  01-Dec-2014
Comments: Disclosed on the website of ARA and also in Paper and Vidhas communes.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           0 1-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Albania                                                  01-Dec-2014
Comments: Disclosed on the website of ARA and also in Paper and Vidhas communes.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 6 of 7


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Artan Guxho
Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                  Date: 18-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


