                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6042

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                        Project ID:     P148110
                            Project Name:      MN Education Quality Reform Project (P148110)
                            Task Team          Prateek Tandon
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                          Estimated       31-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASHE                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (60%), Education for the knowledge economy (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        25.00                Total Bank Financing:       25.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                25.00
                              Total                                                                      25.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.     The Project Development Objective is to improve the quality of education for primary school
                           children in Mongolia with particular emphasis on improving reading and math learning outcomes.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project consist of four components:

                           Component 1: Improving reading competencies and acquiring basic math skills (estimated cost: US
                           $7 million).

                           Sub-component 1.1 would involve a scaling up of the existing READ program to achieve national
Public Disclosure Copy




                           coverage.
                           Sub-component 1.2 will support the national rollout of Early Grade Reading and Mathematics
                           Assessments (EGRA and EGMA) as well as the national assessment for 5th grade.

                           Component 2: Pre- and in-service professional development of teachers (estimated cost: US$3
                           million).

                           Sub-component 2.1 will support primary education Teacher Training Colleges throughout the
                           country.
                           Sub-component 2.2 will support pedagogical in-service training for teachers and the improvement of
                           academic leadership of school principals.

                           Component 3: Implementation of a School Grants Program (estimated cost: US$10 million). The
                           component will scale up the Ministry of Education and Science’s (MES) “Talent Program” of school
                           grants that is currently being rolled out in 100 pilot schools throughout the country.

                           Component 4: System management, monitoring and evaluation (estimated cost: US$5 million). The
                           purpose of this component is to support the MES to effectively implement the project with the
                           support of qualified TA.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Nationwide. The project aims to improve the quality of education for primary schools in Mongolia.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Overall responsibility for the proposed project will be vested with the MES. Project implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be mainstreamed using the MES structure at the central and decentralized levels. Education
                           departments and relevant government officials at Aimag (province) and Soum (village) levels and
                           schools will be responsible for the activities executed at the decentralized level over the five-year
                           project period. MES has experience with Bank-financed projects. It has successfully implemented a
                           number of Bank-implemented projects in the education sector, including the current Global
                           Partnership for Education Early Childhood Education Project, as well as the recently closed IDA-
                           financed READ and the Education-for-All Fast Track Initiative Projects. Ministry officials are
                           familiar with the proposed interventions, as most have already implemented under the current MES
                           strategy on a pilot basis. They are also familiar with Bank procedures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Feng Ji (EASCS)
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will not finance civil works, but
                           BP 4.01                                              support capacity building activities for primary
                                                                 schools in Mongolia, including scaling up of the
                                                                 existing READ Program (i.e., development and
                                                                 provision of books and classroom libraries,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 teacher training, and an impact evaluation), and
                                                                 Talent Program (i.e., management, staff
                                                                 development, services, teaching materials,
                                                                 sports, furniture and equipment, and
                                                                 maintenance). The project will have minimal or
                                                                 no adverse environmental impacts. Considering
                                                                 the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the
                                                                 project and the nature and magnitude of its
                                                                 potential environmental impacts, no
                                                                 environmental instruments will be prepared.
                                                                 This is triggered due to the need to assess and
                                                                 take into account, in an integrated manner, the
                                                                 social aspects of the project particularly any
                                                                 impacts on IP communities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The project does not have the potential to cause
                                                                 significant conversion (loss) or degradation of
                                                                 natural habitats, whether directly (through
                                                                 construction) or indirectly (through human
                                                                 activities induced by the project).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project will not have impacts on the health
                                                                 and quality of forests, nor affect the rights and
                                                                 welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                 upon or interaction with forests, nor aim to
                                                                 bring about changes in the management,
                                                                 protection, or utilization of natural forest or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not include any procurement of
                                                                 pesticides or pesticide application equipment;
                                                                 nor introduce any new pest management
                                                                 practices, or expand/alter existing pest
                                                                 management practices; nor lead to substantially
                                                                 increased pesticide use and subsequent
                                                                 environmental and health risks.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project will not have impacts on physical
                         BP 4.11                                 cultural resources, or designed to support the
                                                                 management or conservation of physical
                                                                 cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This project will improve the quality of
                                                                 education for primary schools in Mongolia, and
                                                                 it is a nationwide project. Though largely an
                                                                 ethnically homogeneous nation, with 80-86% of
                                                                 the population estimated to be of Khalkh
                                                                 Mongol origin, Mongolia is home to more than
                                                                                                                                 10 ethnic minorities that have historically
                                                                                                                                 resided within the current state boundaries.
                                                                                                                                 These ethnic minorities include Kazakh, Tuva,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Dukha, Chantuu, Khoton and others. Since the
                                                                                                                                 exact locations of project activities cannot be
                                                                                                                                 determined, and according to the Bank’s
                                                                                                                                 OP4.10, an Indigenous People Planning
                                                                                                                                 Framework (IPPF) will be prepared. The main
                                                                                                                                 purpose of the document is to: 1) ensure ethnic
                                                                                                                                 minority groups can benefit from the project
                                                                                                                                 development; 2) guide “Free, prior, and
                                                                                                                                 informed consultation” with ethnic minority
                                                                                                                                 communities; and 3) ensure issues raised by
                                                                                                                                 ethnic minority communities being incorporated
                                                                                                                                 into subcomponent designs.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not finance civil works but will
                                 4.12                                                                                            support capacity building activities for primary
                                                                                                                                 schools in Mongolia, including scaling up of the
                                                                                                                                 existing READ Program (i.e., development and
                                                                                                                                 provision of books and classroom libraries,
                                                                                                                                 teacher training, and an impact evaluation), and
                                                                                                                                 Talent Program (i.e., management, staff
                                                                                                                                 development, services, teaching materials,
                                                                                                                                 sports, furniture and equipment, and
                                                                                                                                 maintenance). Therefore, no involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement is expected for the purpose of the
                                                                                                                                 project implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project is not associated with an
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not located in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The PAD Stage ISDS will be prepared after the pre-appraisal mission from October 25 to
                                      November 8, 2013. The IPPF will be completed by January 15, 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Prateek Tandon

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Surhid P. Gautam (RSA)   Date: 12-Dec-2013
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)     Date: 13-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
