                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2725

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                        Project ID:      P131001
                            Project Name:       Lombok Regional Economic Development Project (P131001)
                            Task Team           Alexandra L. Drees-Gross
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated        01-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASFP                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other industry (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Micro, Small and
                                                Medium Enterprise support (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to promote the sustainable development of and reduce poverty
                           in Lombok through the creation of a competitive tourism-based economy. The project will focus on
                           three key aspects: integrated tourism masterplanning, private sector development, and the creation of
                           basic tourism infrastructure.

                           Through this intervention, the project is expected to help build the foundation for the Bali-Nusa
                         Tenggara (NTB) corridor to become the “gateway to tourism? as outlined in Indonesia’s Masterplan
                         for Acceleration of Economic Development (MP3EI). The project is expected to create jobs in the
                         sector and contribute to preservation and management of Indonesia’s prime tourism assets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the longer term, the project is expected to develop a mechanism for replicating integrated tourism
                         planning and development throughout Indonesia as a driver for sustainable and inclusive growth.
                         This would help the GOI reach its goal of promoting equity across regions and reduce poverty in
                         some of its poorest provinces such as NTB.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would be a loan of an estimated USD 100 million to the Government of
                         Indonesia. The main implementing agencies are the Ministry of Tourism and Creative Economy and
                         the Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC)—a state-owned enterprise that has acquired the
                         rights to develop the Mandalika region of Lombok. Through a comprehensive and integrated
                         approach, this project aims to address the set of drivers of tourism competitiveness in the NTB
                         region: institutional development for tourism planning and management, human capital and SME
                         development to serve the tourism-based economy, and improved infrastructure services. While the
                         project will focus on the Mandalika resort, as the entry point, the project is expected to benefit the
                         wider set of communities in Lombok and spur sustainable development and poverty reduction
                         throughout the island.

                         Mandalika is located on the south coast of Lombok. The concept is to develop a tourism destination
                         that complements Bali, extending visitor stays and attracting tourists to the less well known NTB
                         region. Mandalika will be branded as quiet tourism. The resort will provide a combination of coastal
                         and inland attractions, emphasizing green and quiet beach tourism, as well as providing quality
                         products such as coral reefs and cultural event based activities and eco-parks further inland.

                         BTDC aims to replicate Bali’s Nusa Dua model of development. BTDC expects to build on that
                         experience but explicitly focuses on how the resort’s development can optimally benefit local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities, including exploring potential actions such as mandating high percentage of local
                         employment in the resort, working to develop training centers for tourism, and integrating local and
                         cultural villages and events into the Mandalika product. The illustrative master plan for the resort has
                         already been developed. BTDC is planning to develop a more detailed technical master plan.

                         Components. The three components proposed are:

                         Component 1: Tourism development policy, planning and management. This component would
                         provide technical assistance to local governments, private sector and communities in Lombok to
                         develop, implement, and monitor integrated master plans for sustainable tourism-based economic
                         development. At present, there exists weak institutional capacity for integrated destination planning
                         and management. Further, community understanding on the long term benefits of tourism for poverty
                         reduction and sustainable income creation is low, particularly in southwestern areas of Lombok
                         where mining is a primary industry.

                         This component would build upon the approaches and methodologies developed under the United
                         Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) Pangandaran Sustainable Tourism pilot project.
                         The tourism master planning model involves stakeholder engagement and community involvement
                         and promotion of sustainable tourism development models. The plans would be prepared through a
                         participatory process and would seek to build consensus on strategies for managing and preserving
                         the destination’s tourism assets, including both natural and cultural. Building on existing plans, the
                         TA would aim to further improve quality of detailed technical master plans and provide assistance
                         for implementation readiness, especially with regard to social and environmental aspects. Specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities to be supported include:
                         •        Developing a sustainable tourism management plan, with a common vision, endorsed by a
                         broad set of stakeholders.
                         •        Building the image of the destinations and developing domestic and international marketing
                         campaigns.
                         •        Building capacities of tourism stakeholder groups for effective skills for tourism
                         development.

                         Component 2: Skills development and promotion of SMEs. The objective of this component would
                         be to improve skills to support the growing tourism-based economic sector in Lombok and promote
                         the growth of micro and small enterprises (MSMEs) working in tourism and related creative
                         industries. Special efforts would be made to ensure that women and poor communities in particular
                         can share in the opportunities provided by tourism development.

                         Quality of services in the tourism industry needs to be improved in order to meet the growing
                         demand from the private sector. The MOTCE has prioritized this issue through the establishment of a
                         ministerial level “certification? program for hotel professionals. In addition, the STB Bali training
                         center and a university in Lombok have established an MOU to facilitate training and skills
                         development. Enhancing skills to deliver high quality tourism experiences is a key aspect of
                         competitiveness that needs to be address for the Government to reach its goals in terms of improving
                         tourism competitiveness. SMEs also require additional support for marketing, business development
                         and product development to share in the benefits of the tourism industry.

                         Implementation. This component would be implemented by firm or NGO with experience in tourism
                         promotion and/or SME development. Specific activities would include:
                         •        Tourism industry skills development through establishment or support of a training center or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other human resource development programs. This will build particularly on the BTDC’s experience
                         in this area and also draw upon lessons and resources available in Bali and other parts of Indonesia.
                         •        Technical assistance programs to support SMEs to identify tourism products, improve skills
                         related to financial management, marketing and business development.
                         •        Establishment of partnerships with vocational training programs.

                         Component 3: Infrastructure development. The objective of this component would be to provide
                         financing and technical assistance to establish the critical infrastructure investments in Lombok. The
                         project will initially focus on the infrastructure planned under Mandalika resort in partnership with
                         the BTDC.

                         Basic infrastructure necessary prerequisite to further site development and investor interest. It is
                         important for the region’s long-term development that the Mandalika site be developed in a manner
                         that preserves the tourism assets and promotes socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable
                         development. The Ministry for SOEs has mandated BTDC to start the construction of three hotels
                         and one golf course in the first stage of development. Current resources for water and electricity will
                         not support this development.

                         Implementation. This component would finance construction of physical infrastructure. This would
                         include financing of (i) surface infrastructure – local roads into the area and within the area; (ii)
                         utility networks – potable water; electricity; communication & data; (iii) landscaping – soft
                         landscape; public space; and (iv) public facilities and services.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1: Tourism development policy, planning and management. The integrated tourism
                         master plan and destination management will cover Lombok. The plan would involve the selection of
                         tourist destinations, plans for tourist areas development, destination management, among other
                         issues, and would guide the infrastructure and facilities development to support tourism. All of these
                         aspects will affect the use of the natural resources, change the landscape and land uses of some sites
                         in the island as well as would affect the communities’ (including IPs) livelihoods and social life. The
                         preparation of a tourism master plan and destination has not started yet and therefore the locations of
                         tourist areas and infrastructure to be developed along with their potential social and environmental
                         impacts cannot be identified at this stage. It is expected that the master plan will cover the social and
                         environmental management framework to guide the preparation and implementation of the activities
                         specified in it to address potential social and environmental impacts caused by the development of
                         such activities.

                         Component 2: Skills development and promotion of SMEs. This component mainly involves
                         technical assistance for and capacity building of the SMEs involved in the tourism sector in Lombok.
                         At this stage, the specific types and locations of the SMEs that will be involved in the project have
                         not been defined and therefore sub-project potential social and environmental impacts cannot be
                         identified. It is expected that the design and delivery of the technical assistance and capacity building
                         will incorporate social and environmental management aspects that will lead to the promotion of
                         productive and sustainable enterprises.

                         Component 3: Infrastructure development. This component will finance strategic infrastructure in
                         Lombok with an initial start in Mandalika site under the BTDC. The Spatial Development Plan of the
                         NTB province in which Lombok is part of, outlines the plan of the main infrastructure. Further,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BTDC has prepared a Master Plan for Mandalika site which lay out the main infrastructure and land
                         uses. Both plans have not been detailed and therefore the exact sites or alignments of the
                         infrastructure have not been defined. Hence the projects’ impacted areas are unknown at this stage.

                         Lombok is the westernmost island Lesser Sunda island chain of Indonesia. Lying directly east of Bali
                         across the Lombok Strait, the island is roughly circular with a diameter of around 70 kilometers .
                         With less than 3 million inhabitants spread across 4,725 km2 of land, Lombok is relatively un-
                         crowded. Much of the population is centered around Mataram, the capital of West Nusa Tenggara
                         province, which also includes the island of Sumbawa to the east. The Lombok island is dominated by
                         the centrally-located Mount Rinjani, which rises to 3,726 m; the second highest volcano in Indonesia.

                         Mandalika site of BTDC is located in the south coast of Lombok with a total area of about 1,250
                         hectares. The existing land uses are mostly agricultural land, garden, bushes, moors, unused land,
                         rice fields, some scattered settlements, and some areas of small businesses, including shops, small
                         hotels, and restaurants. There is also one international hotel (Novotel) in the site. No natural forest or
                         protected forest is located in the project site.

                         The climate in the project area is a wet tropical climate with one dry and one wet season. It is
                         influenced by the monsoon and the average temperature is 26.6C with maximum of 33C and
                         minimum or 23C in Mandalika area. The geological formation of the project area is dominated by
                         alluvial, andesitic, limestone and young volcanic sediment with an elevation from 0 to 100 meter
                         above the sea level. It is located in a Seismic Area 4 and is considered as medium risk.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         About 1,130 of the 1,250 Ha of Mandalika area is under the BTDC’s land management land rights
                         (or HPL = Hak Pengelolaan) and the remaining is individual property rights. However, the BTDC’s
                         so called “clear and clean? (the CC land) land is only about 995 hectares out of the HPL of 1,130 Ha,
                         and the remaining area are claimed by groups of individuals. As the Mandalika area had not been
                         developed since its acquisition in 1993, some of the CC land is now being used for small shops,
                         houses, small hotels, and cultivated for fish ponds and agricultural uses by local communities. The
                         local communities are aware of the CC land status which does not belong to them and have intended
                         to use it temporarily while waiting for the BTDC to develop it. These activities will have to be
                         cleared from the CC land later on when the site development starts.

                         There are two “enclaved? small villages located about 3 km from the Mandalika site where ethnic
                         groups of Sasak are living. They are considered by themselves and by the provincial and district
                         governments as part of indigenous peoples communities in Lombok. These two villages have been
                         preserved by the district government and are two important tourist destinations in the district. It is
                         anticipated that tourism development of the Mandalika site will also affect these two villages as part
                         of the attractive tourist destinations.

                         The project supports the development of a sustainable tourism destination in Mandalika as described
                         in section C above. Certainly, the natural resources and environment will be affected by the project
                         and should be properly managed to address potential adverse impacts and to ensure sustainability.
                         Furthermore, access of the public to the beach should be properly maintained despite of the
                         exclusivity of the resort. It was reported that there is an old mosque and tomb that are located outside
                         but nearby the Mandalika site which are considered sacred by the local communities and therefore
                         should be kept intact, despite of their potential as tourist destinations.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The two main implementing agencies for the project are the Ministry of Tourism and Creative
                         Economy (MOTCE) and the Bali Tourism Development Corporation (BTDC), which is a state-
                         owned enterprise. Neither of these two institutions has implemented Bank-financed projects in recent
                         years. To understand the situation of the capacity of the MOTCE and BTDC for safeguards
                         management, the task team will make a further assessment prior project appraisal.

                         MOTCE. At the MOTCE, the primary agency involved in the project will be the Directorate of
                         Tourism Planning and Tourism Investment which is responsible for the GOI’s destination
                         development program, including promoting the development of Mandalika site as a priority. During
                         project appraisal, the Bank will discuss with the MOTCE whether there should be a Central Project
                         Management Unit established under this Ministry who will be exclusively responsible for and
                         coordinate project preparation and execution. The need for social and environmental safeguards
                         specialists in this Ministry to support and oversee BTDC will be discussed with MOTCE and
                         assessed during project appraisal. Also the discussion about the Bank’s requirements on the social
                         and environmental safeguards will be discussed with MOTCE prior project appraisal.

                         Preliminary discussions with the Bappeda NTB province and Bappedas in Lombok revealed that
                         their understanding of the Bank’s social and environmental safeguards policies is limited. They also
                         have limited experience in Bank-supported projects. There are Bappedalda in the province and
                         Bappedalda or Environmental Agency in each of the district in Lombok, whereby the project can
                           work with pertaining environmental issues (also to a certain extent social issues). All of these
                           agencies will have to work together during the preparation of the integrated Tourism Master Plan to
                           include social and environmental management aspects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consulting firms who would be implementing the Component 2, i.e., technical assistance, capacity
                           building and supports to the tourism-related SMEs in Lombok, are not known at this point, but as is
                           the case in other parts of the country, they are expected to have limited understanding on the Bank’s
                           social and environmental safeguards policies. Assessments on the capacity of consulting firms will
                           be carried out in more detail prior to project appraisal. The assessment should result in identification
                           of areas that would need to be strengthened to ensure that the design and delivery of the technical
                           assistance, capacity building and supports to the SMEs incorporates social and environmental
                           management aspects that will lead to the promotion of productive and sustainable enterprises.

                           BTDC. BTDC is a state-owned enterprise established by the GOI in 1973, with the mission of
                           assisting the government through the development of tourist resorts. The company’s initial role was
                           to acquire land, create a master plan, build infrastructure and resort facilities of international
                           standards, and establish an attractive investment environment in Nusa Dua. Based on initial
                           assessment, BTDC is aware that it needs to follow the Bank’s safeguards policy as one of the
                           requirements for borrowing although the scheme of the funding flows remain to be discussed with
                           the MOF, MOTCE or the Ministry of State-owned Companies. The BTDC will implement the
                           project as part of its mission to develop the Mandalika site as tourist resort, or in other words, it will
                           act as a project implementation unit. To that end, the BTDC will be responsible for managing the
                           implementation of activities to address social and environmental issues.

                           Institutional capacity and areas of strengthening of the capacity of the MOTCE in supporting,
                           overseeing, and supervising the BTDC in preparing and implementing safeguards instruments
                           especially for social safeguards (land acquisition, indigenous peoples) and environmental safeguards
                           will be assessed during appraisal. Similarly, during the project appraisal the same assessment will be
                           done for BTDC in preparing, implementing and monitoring the implementation of social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental instruments and measures. At present, BTDC has a staff responsible for land
                           acquisition and environmental management. Funding seems to be not a significant issue for BTDC.
                           At this point, BTDC is allocating quite significant amount of funds to acquire land that has
                           certificates in the Mandalika site (so-called enclave land) as part of its ten-year plan. During
                           appraisal, if necessary, MOTCE and BTDC need to prepare detailed work plans for strengthening its
                           capacity in social and environmental management. This is in line with the vision to develop a
                           domestic and international tourist destination that is also sustainable.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Indira Dharmapatni (EASIS)
                           Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes               The project is classified as Category A project.
                           BP 4.01                                                 The policy is triggered due to the project’s
                                                                                   potential significant environmental and social
                                                                                   impacts over a wide geographic area and there is
                                                             a need for assessing a project’s induced and
                                                             cumulative impact from both environmental and
                                                             social perspectives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             A strategic Environmental Assessment (EA) in
                                                             the form of a Regional Environmental and
                                                             Social Assessment (RESA) will be prepared to
                                                             capture issues at the regional level as well as
                                                             issues of strategic significance. The conduct of
                                                             the RESA will be implemented in two phases:
                                                             Phase 1 will be prepared during project
                                                             preparation, while Phase 2 will focus on the
                                                             strategic EA of the development of the tourism
                                                             master plan and would be done during project
                                                             implementation. The precise determination of
                                                             what will be covered in the RESA during
                                                             preparation and during implementation will be
                                                             decided during the finalization of the TOR.

                                                             A supplemental Environmental and Social
                                                             Impact Assessment (ESIA) will also be
                                                             prepared as part of project preparation to
                                                             complete the AMDAL EA of Mandalika site.
                                                             The ESIA will focus on the gaps in the AMDAL
                                                             EA such as induced and cumulative impacts,
                                                             impacts on coral reefs, mangroves, ancillary
                                                             facilities and social impacts. The ESIA will be
                                                             prepared during project preparation. The ESIA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             will also have an annex on ESMF to screen
                                                             activities that will not be known by appraisal,
                                                             especially for Component 2.

                                                             Public consultation of the improved ESIA, the
                                                             master plan and the environmental management
                                                             frameworks will be adequately prepared and
                                                             implemented by BTDC, MOTCE and the
                                                             consulting firms (in charge for component 2)
                                                             prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The policy is triggered because of the potential
                                                             impact of the project on natural habitats such as
                                                             coral reefs and mangroves.

                                                             The scope of the biodiversity survey in the
                                                             ESIA to include marine biodiversity and marine
                                                             and coastal natural habitats with particular
                                                             attention to critical natural habitats. The results
                                                             should also be useful to the RESA.
                                                                 An Environmental Management Framework
                                                                 related to sub-projects of SME development that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 would bring adverse impact to natural habitat
                                                                 and its mitigation effort shall be prepared for
                                                                 component 2. In addition, the activities that
                                                                 involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                 any critical natural habitat shall be avoided and
                                                                 to be put into negative list in the environmental
                                                                 management framework.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD   Triggering of this policy is TBD as further
                                                                 investigation is still needed whether the tourism
                                                                 master plan to be developed during
                                                                 implementation, and the activities related to
                                                                 developing eco-parks will impact forests and
                                                                 forest-dependent communities or not.

                                                                 For Component 2 for SME development, no
                                                                 activity is allowed in the protection and
                                                                 conservation forest area and this shall be put as
                                                                 the negative list.

                                                                 The project site for infrastructure development
                                                                 of Component 3 in Mandalika consists of
                                                                 mostly dry field, bushes and grasses. There was
                                                                 no primary or secondary forest left. No natural
                                                                 forest or protected forest is located in the project
                                                                 site. This has been confirmed during a meeting
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 with the Head of Forestry Agency at Provincial
                                                                 level.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The policy is triggered due to the use of
                                                                 pesticides in maintaining golf courses that will
                                                                 be developed with project support.

                                                                 A Pest Management Plan should be developed
                                                                 as part of the ESIA. In addition, a Pest
                                                                 Management Framework should be developed
                                                                 as part of the RESA to guide other parties
                                                                 appointed to build golf courses. For potential
                                                                 sub-projects under SMEs development, the use
                                                                 of pesticides shall be put into negative list in the
                                                                 environmental management framework.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The policy is triggered. The project impact on
                         BP 4.11                                 PCR, including direct, indirect and cumulative
                                                                 impact, will be covered in the RESA and ESIA,
                                                                 and, where relevant and applicable, a PCR
                                                                 Management Plan be prepared as part of the
                                                               ESIA.

                                                               The chance find procedures during construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               of Component 3 and the Management Plan for
                                                               the traditional mosque and tombs already found
                                                               in area close to the project site shall be
                                                               developed as part of the supplemental ESIA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes   The policy is triggered as the project covers
                                                               Lombok Island. Preliminary screening on the
                                                               existence of IPs in Lombok based on the World
                                                               Bank’s IPs Screening Study (2010) suggested
                                                               that there are IPs communities in Lombok Barat
                                                               (two villages) and Lombok Timur (four
                                                               villages) districts. The RESA for Lombok Island
                                                               and ESIA as supplement to the AMDAL
                                                               Mandalika will cover a Social Assessment for
                                                               all project affected peoples, including
                                                               disaggregated data, inventory, screening and
                                                               analysis for IPs. Based on the Social
                                                               Assessment, the project will have to prepare an
                                                               Indigenous Planning Framework (IPPF) as a
                                                               guide it to address sub-projects’ impacts on the
                                                               IPs communities, if any, for those whose
                                                               locations are unknown at the project appraisal
                                                               stage. For sub-projects which locations and
                                                               impact areas are known at the appraisal stage,
                                                               an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
                                                               prepared, based on the Social Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               prepared in the RESA and ESIA. The Social
                                                               Assessment will be used to prepare the ESMF,
                                                               which will be developed for sub-projects that
                                                               are not known at the appraisal stage, particularly
                                                               for Component 2.
                                                               Field visits noted that there are two villages
                                                               (Sade comprises about 30 households, and Ende
                                                               about 150 households) in Lombok Tengah
                                                               district, located about 3 km from the Mandalika
                                                               site. They are two ethnic groups which are
                                                               claimed by the local governments of Lombok
                                                               Tengah and province of Lombok as IPs
                                                               communities and their existence have been
                                                               preserved. These two villages are main tourist
                                                               destinations in Lombok Tengah. As the
                                                               Mandalika resort will generate tourists, it is very
                                                               likely that the tourists will select these two
                                                               villages as their visit destinations and
                                                               consequently, will affect the IPs communities.
                                                                Prior to appraisal, BTDC will have to prepare a
                                                                Social Assessment as part of the ESIA and IPP
                                                                for identifying the potential impacts and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                develop measures to avoid and optimize
                                                                potential positive impacts and minimize the
                                                                adverse impacts, respectively.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The policy is triggered due to potential land
                         4.12                                   acquisition and resettlement impact of the
                                                                project. As the types and sites of sub-projects
                                                                that would involve involuntary resettlement
                                                                (particularly Component 2 and Component 3
                                                                outside Mandalika) and would be financed
                                                                under this project are unknown at appraisal, the
                                                                project will have to prepare a Resettlement
                                                                Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the
                                                                preparation and implementation of the
                                                                Resettlement Plan (RP) of each sub-project
                                                                involving involuntary resettlement.

                                                                As explained above, BTDC has been given land
                                                                rights by the Government. The land had been
                                                                acquired many years ago by LTDC (other
                                                                entity). However, there are some issues of land
                                                                claims of some of the BTDC land and land
                                                                usage by local people. BTDC will have to carry
                                                                out a Social Assessment, and a Due Diligence
                                                                Study on the land acquisition and issues as part
                                                                of the ESIA (supplement to AMDAL). BTDC is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                also planning to acquire private land in the
                                                                Mandalika site. Based on ESIA, BTDC should
                                                                prepare a RP for the future land acquisition and
                                                                for those who are currently using the BTDC’s
                                                                land. A draft RP should be available prior to
                                                                project appraisal.

                                                                In addition to this, in the case that public access
                                                                to the beaches in the resort is restricted due the
                                                                development of the Mandalika site under
                                                                BTDC, the RP should also establish a process
                                                                by which members of potentially affected
                                                                communities participate in design of project
                                                                components so that they can maintain access to
                                                                the natural resources, i.e. beaches in the resort.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        TBD   Triggering of this policy is TBD based on
                                                                whether Mandalika site will use water from the
                                                                Batujai Dam. The task team shall further
                                                                evaluate the issue during project preparation
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             There are no international waterways in the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            project-affected area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There is no disputed territory in the project-
                                 7.60                                                                                            affected area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Supplemental EIA (AMDAL) to cover biodiversity aspects of the project and also the
                                      addition of several environmental aspects such as quarry construction, construction waste
                                      management, induced impacts for the infrastructure development of Component 3 of Mandalika
                                      shall be conducted by BTDC. BTDC should also prepare other safeguard instruments such as the
                                      ESIA as part of the supplemental AMDAL, RP, Social Assessment and IPP. The Regional
                                      Environmental and Social Assessment (RESA) for Component 1, and ESMF, RPF and IPPF for
                                      Component 2 and Component 3 other than Mandalika site will have to be prepared by the project
                                      (MOTCE). All of the documents are to be completed prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Alexandra L. Drees-Gross

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 16-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Hormoz Aghdaey (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 16-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
