                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC8249

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Dominican Republic                Project ID:       P147213
                            Project Name:       INTEGRATED SOCIAL PROTECTION AND PROMOTION PROJECT
                                                (P147213)
                            Task Team           Carine Clert
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Jul-2014                           Estimated         12-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSHS-DPT                              Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (80%), Public administration- Other social services (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Other social protection and risk management (40%), Social safety nets (40%),
                                                Urban services and housing for the poor (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     70.00                       Total Bank Financing:          70.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           70.00
                              Total                                                                           70.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to improve access of poor Dominican citizens to an integrated package of
                           social protection and promotion opportunities in selected territories.

                           In the context of this Project, “promotion” broadly refers to a set of services and opportunities that
                           contribute to increase the human capital of the poor and their livelihood opportunities, including:
                         bridging CCT coverage gaps to increase investments in health and education, enhancing CCT users’
                         employability and/or access to self-employment/small entrepreneurship programs, and testing agile
                         modalities to provide CCT users with basic housing improvements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The underpinning vision of the Project is two-fold: (i) to support area-based transformative
                         interventions that will not only contribute to address the multidimensionality of, and regional
                         disparities in, extreme poverty in a more effective and inclusive manner, but generate conditions for
                         a sustainable exit of moderately poor households from the CCT, while (ii) continuing to support
                         required improvements in the social protection system that are needed for the success and
                         sustainability of these territorial interventions such as enhanced targeting and results-based
                         orientation.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would have three components:

                         Component 1. Integrated Area-Based Social Protection and Pro-poor Service Delivery. Building on
                         Progresando Unidos, this Component would contribute to the financing of services and opportunities
                         for extremely-poor and moderately poor CCT users in selected territories, partly through an output-
                         based approach (OBA)- i.e. linking payments to different service-providers to previously specified
                         and verifiable outputs, as follows:
                         (i) Bridging CCT Coverage Gaps for extremely-poor Households with a view to smooth their
                         consumption levels and increase access to education and health services, all of which contribute to
                         human capital improvements;
                         (ii) Increasing access of extremely poor CCT users to housing improvements, through the financing
                         of a pilot housing improvement scheme; and
                         (iii) Increasing Access of CCT Users to productive opportunities; providing a tailored “menu” of
                         skills-enhancing opportunities for labor market insertion: micro-grants for small businesses for
                         extremely-poor households, and/or connection of moderately poor adults to existing micro-finance
                         schemes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2. Strengthening the CCT PROSOLI and its Articulation Capacity.
                         To ensure the success of the above integrated area-based strategy, this component would support the
                         strengthening of PROSOLI, complementing support provided by the IADB, and focusing on
                         operational improvements. Sub-components would include:
                         (i) Incentivizing territorial coordination, presence and outreach. Through an output-based approach,
                         this component would contribute to the financing of various pre-investments that will be required to
                         ensure sound delivery and implementation of the integrated area-based approach.
                         (ii) Strengthening Inter-connectivity of Management Information Systems, to ensure better
                         coordination between PROSOLI, SIUBEN, and major service providers to be included in the
                         operation, such as the Vocational Training Institute INFOTEP.
                         (iii) other relevant Technical Assistance and Capacity-building (refinement of the Unidos Strategy
                         and revisions to the Operational Manual; specific support to the graduation strategy of Progresando
                         Avanzando, for those CCT households who no longer qualify for the program; strengthening of the
                         recently developed units of PROSOLI for linkages to productive activities and housing
                         improvements; and strengthening of regional intersectorial CCT Committees, among others).

                         Component 3. Enhancing Equity, Results-orientation, and Transparency.
                         This last component would complement targeted interventions at the territorial level with
                         institutional strengthening at the national policy level to sustain progress in the building blocks of the
                           social protection system, including: (i) updating and strengthening the SIUBEN; (ii) enhancing
                           results-orientation and user feedback mechanisms; and (iii) promoting innovation and policy
                           development. A flexible set of technical assistance and capacity-building activities will inform social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           protection debates and reform in the DR including, among others, a move toward pro-poor social
                           policies that could complement targeted programs such as PROSOLI, with housing and productive
                           inclusion as an important feature. Finally, this last component would also provide support for the
                           coordination of the Loan implementation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Project location will be confirmed during preparation. It is expected that it will be carried out in some
                           or all of the 14 provinces that are targeted by the Unidos Strategy (out of 32throughout the country).
                           These 14 Provinces have been selected based on poverty levels, and are as follows: Elías Piña, El
                           Seibo, Bahoruco, Pedernales, Monte Cristi, Independencia, San José de Ocoa, Monte Plata, San Juan,
                           Barahona, Santo Domingo, Santiago, Monte Plata, and San Cristobal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Social Cabinet is responsible for administration of the loan. Its Project Coordination Unit (PCU)
                           will manage fiduciary and safeguard issues. The PCU’s capacity to carry out that task will be
                           assessed during preparation, and if necessary, the proposed Project will include activities to improve
                           the PCU’s ability to do so.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Sarah Keener (LCSSO)
                           Andrea Gallina (LCSSO)
                           Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The Project has a housing component
                           BP 4.01                                               (increasing access of extremely poor CCT users
                                                                                 to housing improvements, through the financing
                                                                                 of a pilot housing improvement scheme) that
                                                                                 involves rehabilitation of existing housing
                                                                                 structures, which are small, simple structures.
                                                                                 No new construction will be financed. If any
                                                                                 negative environmental impacts occur they will
                                                                                 be minimal. Standard measures to prevent or
                                                                                 mitigate any minor environmental or social
                                                                                 impacts that could be caused by Project
                                                                                 activities will be included in the Operational
                                                                                 Manual and will be monitored as part of overall
                                                                                 supervision. Thus the Project environmental
                                                                                 assessment category is C.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The Project will not involve any works that will
                                                                                 have significant impacts on natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The Project does not involve forests or
                                                                                                                                 significant impacts on forests.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The Project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                                                                                                 of any significant quantities of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The Project will not involve works or activities
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         that would have significant impacts on physical
                                                                                                                                 cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The Project will not trigger this safeguard policy
                                                                                                                                 since there are no indigenous peoples that fulfill
                                                                                                                                 the characteristics of the policy in the Project
                                                                                                                                 areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is not
                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered as the rehabilitation of housing
                                                                                                                                 structures will not require any land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 or cause any involuntary resettlement as defined
                                                                                                                                 by the Policy.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Project activities will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project will not be implemented in areas
                                 7.60                                                                                            known to involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Given that safeguards have not been triggered, no related studies are required.

                                      Regarding a social assessment, the proposed Project will use the Government’s Single Beneficiary
                                      Selection System (known as SIUBEN) to target beneficiaries, and that information dissemination
                                      to potential users is expected as part of component 2. Consultations with NGOs in selected
                                      territories were conducted as part of field-visits during Project identification, and NGOs form part
                                      of the Poverty Alliance Network that is associated with the Social Cabinet. Social analysis, versus
                                      a stand-alone report or social assessment, will be used as an iterative process throughout
                                      preparation and implementation. The team and the client will be able to count on a small PSIA
                                      grant that will provide an even more thorough quantitative analysis of the target population, as per
                                      the latest results of the 2011-2012 Second SIUBEN survey. Regarding the supply-side of the
                                      Project, part of preparation and monitoring will involve identifying gaps in services and
                                      opportunities at the territorial level. In this context, a separate, stand-alone social assessment is not
                                      required.
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Carine Clert

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)       Date: 24-Jun-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Margaret Ellen Grosh (SM)   Date: 25-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
