INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1063
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Nov-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        West Bank and Gaza         Project ID:  P150481
Project Name: Health System Resiliency Strengthening (P15048 1)
Task Team       Samira Ahmed Hillis
Leader:
Estimated       14-Oct-2014                Estimated    21-Jan-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (100%)
Theme(s):       Health system performance (60%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases
(3 0%), Other human development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       8.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Special Financing                                                           8.50
Total                                                                       8.50
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project PDO is to support the Palestinian Authority in securing continuity in healthcare service
delivery and building its resilience to withstand future surge in demand for effective healthcare
coverage.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of4


﻿The focus of the proposed Project is to support immediate emergency needs of the health sector.
Secondly, the fiscal health of the health system will be strengthened by rationalizing Outside Medical
Referrals; the main reason behind the arrears and deficit. The project will support the development of
functional arrangements for public health coverage and medical referrals, including capacity building
0
to the MOH with a particular emphasis to strengthen resilience in the MOH health care provision, to
ensure the sustainability of interventions. Overall, the Project's components - addressing immediate
sector needs (Component 1), rationalizing OMRs (Component 2), and supporting health coverage
(Component 3) will present a clear set of actions the Government can take to address the current
health system crisis and to respond to the needs of the population. The proposed Project aims to help
the MOH to implement policy findings and recommendations from recent analyses, including a
Public Expenditure Review, a Dual Practice study, Health Insurance analysis studies, and Outside
Medical Referrals studies supported by the World Bank and several analysis conducted by several
donors (USAID, WHO, EU, DFID, IDC-Italy, SDC-Switzerland, NORAD and others) on clinical
protocols, the contracting of hospitals, HIS, and protocols of medical conditions
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Implemented for the benefit of populations in West Bank and Gaza, the Project does not include any
physical investments.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maged Mahmoud Hamed (OPSOR)
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
a
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
a
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 2 of 4


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
None
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
O
in the project area:
None
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
None
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
NA
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
No safeguard issues
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
O
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ No       NA   X
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ No      NA   X
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 3 of 4


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:   Name: Samira Ahmed Hillis
Approved By
Practice Manager/   Name: Enis Baris (PMGR)                  Date: 19-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


