                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3290
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Algeria                            Project ID:    P128082
                            Project Name:      DZ-Improved Desert Ecosystems and Climate Resilient Oases (P128082)
                            Task Team          Li Song
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Jan-2014                        Estimated   20-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Land degradation
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                              sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Land administration and management (60%), Environmental policies and
                                              institutions (20%), Water resource management (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      31.40           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  24.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          7.40
                              Total                                                                                     31.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to increase adoption of climate resilient approaches to


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         desert ecosystem management and to improve access to alternative livelihoods in selected pilot
                         oases.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There is a clear need to improve the livelihoods of people living in rural (desert) areas to help them
                         utilize scarce natural resources in a more sustainable and profitable manner and to facilitate
                         adaptation to both climate and social changes likely to put even great demands for resource use
                         efficiency into play in the future. This is expected to result from leverage of successful pilot
                         participatory development activities that support environmentally and socially sustainable livelihood
                         improvement in a small number of communities that represent different types of oases in the
                         Algerian desert.

                         A powerful tool for the sustainable and fruitful management of the sensitive ecosystems of desert
                         regions is called “integrated management of desert ecosystems”, or IMDE. For the purposes of this
                         project, IMDE is defined as an integrated approach to management focusing on enabling economic
                         opportunities specific to deserts that integrate the health and diversity of the desert biome with the
                         vast potential for innovative livelihood opportunities that also sustain valuable repository knowledge
                         linked to adaptive practices. It is intended that such an approach ultimately enhance desert livelihood
                         opportunities and increase the resilience and adaptation responses of desert communities and
                         ecosystems to projected pressures, in particular climate change impacts.

                         IMDE provides a methodology in which all relevant government sectors work together, in a
                         transparent and decentralized way, and in close cooperation with desert residents and stakeholders.
                         The objective of this locally based management is to ensure that any development that occurs in this
                         sensitive area does so in an environmentally and socially sustainable fashion. It is an approach
                         which links development to sustainable management of ecologically sensitive and protected/
                         conservation areas, promotes co-management of resources between government and local
                         stakeholders, and integrates management by government through cooperation of sectors. Because of
                         the fragility of desert ecosystems generally, IMDE requires that all development sectors (e.g.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agriculture, tourism, public works, local government, etc.) plan and integrate their annual work
                         programs to be complementary and to recognize the very real possibility of unintended consequences
                         across sectors.

                         Presently, the existing 5 year plan of the Ministry of Agriculture, SNAT, and other sector plans
                         follow basically traditional processes requiring little local participation in development. The process
                         appears to have limited impacts of Government investment in the South. As such, “business as
                         usual” will not be sufficient to deliver what is needed to address environmental, social and
                         development issues in the South over the long run, and the current system is deeply engrained in the
                         Government and will not be easy to change. What the project can do to leverage a change to this
                         top-down approach to development planning is to present real examples of the potential benefits of
                         combining environmental and social protection into the agriculture and rural development sector
                         planning model. It can also introduce an element of local stakeholder participation in the
                         prioritization of sector development investment in their localities. Existing government and
                         community systems necessary to support a program of integrated desert management are in place,
                         but there is a strong need for capacity building, particularly in support of spatial planning at the local
                         level and on specific management methodologies.

                         Project financing will complement existing government programs in the pilot areas, making them
                         more environmentally and socially sustainable. The project will be supported by an US$7.4 million


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         grant, from the GEF and the Special Climate Change Fund. It will finance activities that complement
                         existing Government programs that reduce environmental degradation and improve rural livelihoods
                         in the country’s South. The Project concentrations on two broad agendas. These are: (i) capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         building (training, legislative support, equipment) in the integrated management of desert ecosystems
                         (IMDE) for all concerned stakeholders (e.g. central governments, wilayas, managers, development
                         agents, researchers, local beneficiaries, associations); and (ii) pilot investments to the IMDE in
                         selected demonstration areas.

                         Component 1. Strengthen capacity for integrated management of desert ecosystems (IMDE). This
                         component will strengthen the capacity of all concerned stakeholders in desert areas for an IMDE
                         that supports mitigation of and adaptation to climate change. Specifically, the component will:

                         •       provide training to farmers (e.g. on efficient use of water, agricultural practices resilient to
                         climate change, etc.), local associations (e.g. on improving marketing of local handicrafts, promote
                         eco-tourism) and selected public actors (e.g. on improving the management of water resources).

                         •        share knowledge among the project’s partner agencies and across the countries participating
                         to the MENA-DELP regional program (Morocco, Jordan and Tunisia). This consists in organizing
                         training workshops on IMDE for public institutions and other stakeholders at the central level (such
                         as the Steering Committee, PCU, PMU); raising awareness events; exchange of visits among national
                         and local partners of the project and other actors; field trips and study tours to learn about good
                         practice experiences related to oasis management; and promoting the CNDRB as a centre of
                         excellence for the IMDE.

                         •        organize a start-up and a final workshop as well as other events to promote GoA’s
                         replication of successful project activities. The final workshop will include participation of
                         stakeholders to: (i) check and validate the project’s results and success; (ii) identify the investments
                         considered the most successful in each pilot site; (iii) support an action plan for the GoA replication
                         of the successful investments at a larger scale.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected results: Stakeholders receive training to better adapt to and mitigate climate change. Good
                         practice experiences are shared among stakeholders. A final workshop will generate a path for
                         expanding and replicating successful investments at a larger scale.

                         Component 2. Piloting the IMDE approach through investments. This component will support
                         climate-resilient and mitigation investments that improve livelihoods and conserve biodiversity. For
                         each pilot area, it includes the activities presented below :

                         •        Tamentit and Sidi Ahmed Timmi. (i) define a framework to guide the actions funded by the
                         GoA’s development programs in these sites; (ii) improve agricultural production (e.g. rehabilitate
                         palm trees by introducing climate-resilient species and a suitable drainage system); (iii) support
                         alternative income generating activities, such as black pottery and eco-tourism (including solar
                         energy for water heating and cooking), and create/strengthen a maintenance system for solar
                         equipments; (iv) improve water management (e.g. assess the current state of foggaras and rehabilitate
                         them through modern maintenance tools and techniques).

                         •        Taghit-Guir. (i) develop a management plan for oasis and conduct studies on desertification
                         and soil degradation; (ii) rehabilitate the irrigation systems for palm groves and use of treated
                         wastewater (e.g. connecting treated wastewater with palm groves, introducing equipments based on

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         renewable energy); (iii) support alternative income generating activities, such as eco-tourism
                         (including solar energy for water heating) and create/ strengthen a maintenance system for solar
                         equipments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        In Guezzam. (i) define a framework to guide the actions funded by the GoA’s development
                         programs in In Guezzam; (ii) increase agricultural and pastoral production as well as the supply of
                         local markets (e.g. introducing pumping system based on renewable energy and equip it with
                         maintenance system); (iii) support alternative income generating activities (e.g. leather). In addition,
                         in Moulay Lahcen, the project will develop a conceptual program based on an integrated vision to
                         create a small agricultural village that operates sustainably and is able to adapt to climate change.

                         •       Tinerkouk. (i) establish a system to monitor natural environment; (ii) prepare management
                         plans for the protected area and for the CNDRB; (iii) improve agricultural production and
                         management of water resources (e.g. rehabilitate palm groves, assess the current state of foggaras);
                         (iv) support alternative income generating activities (e.g. eco-tourism, including solar energy for
                         water heating; local handicrafts), and create/strengthen a maintenance system for solar equipments.

                         Expected results: Oasis management plans are developed. Irrigation systems are rehabilitated and
                         maintained. Water is used efficiently in agriculture (drip irrigation, treated wastewater). Renewable
                         energy is promoted for water pumping and water heating in ecolodges. New variety of palms is
                         introduced and palm productivity is improved. Income generating activities are promoted (eco-
                         tourism, handicrafts). A system to monitor natural environment is established. A conceptual program
                         for creating a small agricultural village is developed.

                         Component 3. Project management. This component will support the establishment and management
                         of a fully functioning project monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system within the Project
                         Coordination Unit (PCU) at the MATE and the Project Management Unit (PMU) at the MADR. It
                         will cover the cost of M&E, the costs of functioning and operation (equipment, material, and travel
                         expenses for the PMU and PCU) and consulting services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected results: PCU and PMU are established and operational. Adequate management and
                         coordination of project activities is ensured. The M&E system of the project is established and
                         operational.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Four sites have been selected based on consultations with MATE and MADR: Taghit (wilaya of
                         Bechar), In Guezzam (wilaya of Tamanrasset), Tamentit and Tinerkouk (wilaya of Adrar). The
                         selection was based on two major criteria: representativeness for different types of oases and various
                         types of vulnerability to climate change in Algeria desert areas. They host important biodiversity
                         (date varieties, plants with high level of endemism, endangered wildlife), traditional values (ksour,
                         artisanal products), and an exceptional endowment with renewable energy (solar, wind). All sites
                         suffer from hyper-arid climate, low rainfalls and high summer temperatures. However, each of them
                         faces distinct situations and challenges, as presented below.

                         TAMENTIT and SIDI AHMED TIMMI

                         Current situation. Located in wilaya of Adrar, the commune covers 6,900 km2 and has 9,900
                         inhabitants. The main economic activity is growing palm trees. An ancient system, called foggara,


                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         provides water for irrigation and households. This traditional system unified communities
                         throughout centuries, thus aquiring important social and cultural values. In 2001, the oasis became a
                         wetland of International Importance under Ramsar Convention. Currently, it covers 41 foggaras, that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         irrigate about 750 ha of palm trees. Other activities, such as sales of local products and handicrafts (e.
                         g. black pottery) are developed on a small scale.

                         Challenges. Maintaining foggaras requires hard physical work. This is not attractive for youth, who
                         prefer to search for better jobs in the country’s north. As a result, many foggaras became silted and
                         non-functional, and less water is available for irrigation. In addition, there is insufficient drainage
                         around palm trees, which increases soil salinity. Overall, little water availability and soil salinity
                         have led to degraded palm areas and reduced revenues to farmers; this accelerates youth migration to
                         the country’s north. In this context, the main challenge is how to keep the foggaras operational, while
                         diversifying farmers’ revenues.

                         TAGHIT-GUIR

                         Current situation. The area is situated in the center of the wilaya of Bechar. It covers about 8,000
                         km2 and has 6,500 inhabitants. It has unique scenic beauty due to its varied landscapes: dunes, wadis
                         and palm trees, which form a 15 km line along the Great Western Erg. The area hosts more than 300
                         varieties of palm species and includes flora of high endemism and endangered animal species (Dorca
                         gazelles, etc.). Growing palm trees and camel breeding are the main sources of livelihood, followed
                         by other irrigated crops. The area benefits from surface water, which is used for irrigated agriculture
                         and drinking water. Other activities – such as tourism, handicrafts – have been developed on a
                         limited scale.

                         Challenges. Despite the variety of palm species, the palms in the oasis are severely affected by raw
                         sewage discharge from the nearby towns directly into the oued or seasonal river that nourishes the
                         oasis itself. In addition, some palm trees suffer from diseases, such as Bayoudh. As a result, palm
                         groves are increasingly degraded or dying. This substantially reduces farmers’ revenue and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stimulates migration to the country’s north.

                         IN GUEZZAM

                         Current situation. The site is located on the southern tip of the wilaya of Tamanrasset, which is in the
                         deep Sahara on the border with Niger. It covers 46,800 km2 and has 16,100 people, of which 50
                         percent are nomads. In recent years, the droughts have reduced the available forage on the traditional
                         rangelands in this area; consequently, some nomads turned to hybrid agro-pastoralism to diversify
                         their livelihoods, often with the encouragement of GoA programs. The area benefits from an
                         important aquifer, found at 400 m depth, which can irrigate about 4,000 ha. The main economic a
                         ctivities include livestock breeding by nomads, and small-scale irrigated agriculture (vegetables and
                         palms) by the sedentary population.

                         Challenges. Despite good groundwater availability, there are insufficient wells that allow water
                         provision for irrigating agriculture and livestock breeding. Thus, a large share of population is
                         abandoning the area, in favor of other cities.

                         TINERKOUK

                         Current situation. This is a protected area located in the north of wilaya of Adrar. It is situated on

                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         high mountain dunes and covers six oases. It extends on 20,200 km2 and has 15,800 people. The area
                         is of exceptional landscape quality, with pristine dunes, unique bodiversity (e.g. gazelles, mountain
                         sheep), an ancient fortress and traditional houses (ksours) - which offer high potential for eco-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tourism. Water is supplied directly from groundwater (for five oases) and foggaras (for one oasis).
                         The main activity is growing palm groves, vegetables and fruit trees. Other activities, such as
                         handicrafts, are developed on a limited scale (e.g. Fatis carpets).

                         Challenges. Intense sand storms cause siltation of irrigation systems, which reduce agricultural
                         production and biodiversity. In addition, groundwater is overexploited, leading to decline of water
                         table.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Djibril Doucoure (MNSEE)
                         Andrew Michael Losos (MNSEE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Planned interventions could include modifying
                         BP 4.01                                             agricultural, irrigation, or drinking water systems.
                                                                             Some activities may include construction of
                                                                             works, though likely on a small scale limited to
                                                                             small municipal infrastructure.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              The project will include activities in a protected
                                                                             area. In addition, it is likely that endemic or
                                                                             sensitive species may be found in the project pilot
                                                                             areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes              Project activities in proximity of ancient
                         BP 4.11                                             settlements (ksours) may require action under this
                                                                             policy. Chance finds policy will be included in
                                                                             site-specific ESMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                         Projects on International           Yes              The project will involve the small-scale taking
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                of groundwater from an aquifer which straddles
                                                                             the Algeria-Niger border at In Guezzam. The
                                                                             nature of the activity involved represents only
                                                                             minor additions or alterations to the existing
                                                                             scheme and therefore does not require
                                                                             notification of fellow riparian states (in this case,



                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                                                                                 Niger) as provided in paragraph 7(a) of OP/BP
                                                                                 7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is expected to have significant positive environmental impacts. By taking a more
                              integrated approach to desert ecosystem management, the project will bring mutually reinforcing
                              improvements which will help Algeria to develop its desert regions in a more sustainable manner
                              and reduce the pressure on stressed oasis ecosystems. The above notwithstanding, due attention
                              has been paid to the possible negative environmental impacts of ALG-DELP. Considering the
                              programmatic nature of the project, and the fact that all activities in all sites have not yet been
                              precisely identified, an ESIAF has been developed. The ESIAF presents the environmental and
                              social sensitivities of the four project sites along with the institutional and regulatory context
                              operative in Algeria and contains an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                              The ESIAF provides blueprints for the assessment of environmental and social risk at each site,
                              and the preparation of either a site-specific Environmental Impact Notice (EIN) or simple
                              mitigation measures for each site as required. The ESMF also provides an estimate of costs and
                              staffing requirements for the implementation of all safeguards measures for the project.

                             The project involves environmental interventions and therefore triggers the World Bank
                             Environmental Assessment Policy (OP/BP 4.01) and is assigned to Category B. The policies on
                             Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) are also triggered
                             because of the possibility that endemic or sensitive species or historical artifacts may be found in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             areas affected by project activities. All of these policies have been considered in preparing the
                             ESIAF and relevant mitigating measures will be prescribed in individual Site-Specific ESMPs.

                             The project does not finance activities involving involuntary resettlement, thus the OP/BP 4.12 on
                             Involuntary Resettlement will not be triggered. Any activity involving lands will only be carried
                             out on public lands where resettlement is not required or on private lands where voluntary
                             participation of the landholder is documented in writing. In addition, this project will not create
                             any new restrictions to livelihoods located in protected areas. However, in the desert, access to
                             water is at least as important as access to land. Therefore, any modifications made to the foggaras
                             or any other system providing water will need to be done in a transparent and equitable fashion
                             that benefits all members of the community without restricting access.

                             The safeguard policy on International Waterways (OP 7.50) is triggered for this operation. The
                             Tin Seririne aquifer straddles the border between Algeria and Niger in the central Sahara desert.
                             This is a small, productive aquifer, which is connected to the larger aquifer of the Irhazer-
                             Lullemeden basin shared between Niger and Mali. In Guezzam, one of the sites of the proposed
                             project, is located on this aquifer, and water from it will be used for activities under the project.
                             The project’s intervention in the vicinity of the Tin Seririne aquifer represents only minor
                             additions and alterations to the existing scheme, and the project therefore qualifies for an
                             exception to the requirement that Algeria notify Niger under paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50.


                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           This project is not expected to incur any indirect or long-term negative impacts due to anticipated
Public Disclosure Copy




                           future impacts in the project area. Natural resource use (e.g. groundwater, agroforestry in oases) is
                           monitored and controlled by the relevant government ministries (Ministries of Water Resources,
                           Agriculture and Rural Development, etc.), so any replication of project activities involving natural
                           resources will be subject to this national control regime.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Several alternatives were considered during project preparation. These included ‘no-project’
                           alternative and technical alternatives. The present situation of the desert areas is extremely
                           vulnerable to climate change, particularly considering the already limited water supply, the arid
                           climate and the unsustainable agriculture. Under these circumstances and without a new approach
                           to sustainable desert management, many desert areas are not in a state to provide a sustainable
                           living to the inhabiting communities. Thus, the no-project alternative was deemed to lead to a
                           poorer environmental outcome than the project alternative. The technical alternatives involved
                           primarily a choice of project sites: at the beginning of project preparation, about seven pilot sites
                           were considered. However, the focus on too many scattered sites could easily dilute the
                           effectiveness of the project. Therefore, to increase project effectiveness and reduce costs, the team
                           agreed to focus on only four pilot sites.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The MATE will be the Government agency responsible for the general coordination and
                           implementation of the project, while the responsibility for executing project activities is shared
                           with MADR. To address all safeguards policy issues, an ESIAF - which includes an
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) - has been developed for this project.
                           It considers all environmental and social issues, participation, as well as hydrological issues for all
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project sites. In addition, the ESIAF prescribes a methodology for identifying the impacts and
                           mitigation measures related to environmental and social impacts at each project site, and includes
                           these in site-specific EINs or simple mitigation measures.

                           MATE and MADR have sufficient capacity to implement the required safeguards measures for the
                           project through their regional services. These services are accustomed to environmental
                           assessment and to implementation of mitigating measures for projects undertaken under national
                           law, and none of the measures prescribed under the ESMF or likely to be prescribed in site-
                           specific EINs for this project presents a novel challenge for these ministries.

                           The safeguards procedures outlined in the ESIAF have been designed to correspond as closely as
                           possible to those in effect under Algerian law and therefore maximise familiarity and efficiency
                           from the point of view of the government officials who will apply them. At the same time, they do
                           impose additional requirements to meet all the provisions of the World Bank safeguards. Training
                           specific to the Bank safeguards policies will be provided and any capacity gaps identified will be
                           addressed through additional strengthening measures as required. In addition, the Environmental
                           Assessment Evaluation Directorate of MATE will validate the environmental categorisation of
                           each sub-project proposed for funding by authorities at the local level. This will ensure adequate
                           quality control over the assessment of environmental risks associated with sub-projects.



                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The communities living in the pilot areas (Tinerkouk, In Guezzam, Taghit-Guir and Tamentit/Sidi
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ahmed Timmi) are the primary beneficiaries of the project. These include primarily farmers,
                           nomads, and associations that will benefit from works and goods for implementing concrete
                           options to improve resilience to climate change, training, study tours and awareness campaigns. In
                           addition, women and youth will benefit from specific project activities (e.g. strengthening
                           associations and creating value chains for handicrafts). These beneficiaries will count about
                           15,600 people, of which about 30 percent women.

                           Public consultations were conducted jointly by MADR and MATE staff accompanied by World
                           Bank specialists with the populations of the project sites during preparation, and their findings
                           have been used to inform the preparation of the ESIAF. Further consultations will be undertaken
                           for the preparation of individual Site-Specific EINs. In addition, local people will be included as
                           members of the local committees managing sub-projects, giving them a direct voice and influence
                           in the management of project activities in their area.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Algeria                                                          04-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Website of CNDRB, an agency of MATE. Paper copies available in civil offices at
                                         project sites.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Li Song
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                 Date: 14-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                     Date: 14-Dec-2013




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
