                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA9088
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Dominican Republic                Project ID:    P147483
                            Project Name:     Caribbean Regional Communications Infrastructure Prog - Dominican Rep.
                                              (P147483)
                            Task Team         Elena Gasol Ramos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       19-May-2014                         Estimated   28-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: TWICT                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Telecommunications (50%), Information technology (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (10%), Regulation and competition policy (30%),
                                              Infrastructure services for private sector development (60%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:               30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    30.00
                              Total                                                                                    30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) of the Dominican Republic CARCIP is fully consistent
                           with the overall regional program development objective and seeks to increase access to regional
                           broadband networks and advance the development of ICT-enabled services in the Caribbean Region.



                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         CARCIP’s objective is expected to be achieved through: (a) targeted investments in ICT
                         infrastructure that fill the gaps at the national and municipal level, preferably in partnership with the
                         private sector; (b) creating an open innovation ecosystem that fosters the development of ICT skills
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and ICT enabled services; and (c) strengthening institutional capacity/arrangements to ensure
                         effective program implementation and outcomes.
                          3. Project Description
                         The program is being implemented in phases, based on country demand and readiness. Phase 1 of
                         CARCIP includes four countries (Grenada, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines under
                         sub-Phase APL 1A, joined by the Dominican Republic under sub-Phase SOP 1B), and initiated in
                         FY13. Other eligible CARIFORUM countries may join in subsequent phases, and would be targeted
                         for development in FY13-14. The components for SOP 1B will be as follows:

                         1. Component 1: Regional Connectivity Infrastructure ($25 million). This component will support
                         the reduction of connectivity gaps between rural and urban, and poor and developed areas in the
                         Dominican Republic, through the deployment of a National Fiber Optic Network. This network will
                         provide high-speed fiber optic connectivity to several municipalities in the country. The
                         infrastructure will contribute to increase access to more affordable high-speed connectivity in the
                         Dominican Republic. The fiber optic network will reach interconnection points with regional and
                         global backbone networks, as part of CARCIP’s regional strategy.
                         There are two subcomponents: (A) Enabling Environment (US$1million); and (B) Broadband
                         Backbone Network (US$24million). Subcomponent 1A will provide technical support to ensure that
                         the legal and regulatory framework is aligned with the project, as well as design the PPP bidding
                         process to leverage the project funds with private sector investment. Subcomponent 1B will roll out
                         the connectivity infrastructure according to the proposal awarded in the competitive bidding process.

                         2. Component 2: Open Innovation Hub ($3.5 million). This component will provide targeted support
                         for human capacity and business development, while facilitating the creation of a culture of use and
                         adoption of ICTs throughout the general public. Funds under this component would also contribute
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to collaboration with the private sector for targeted skills development, building on top of
                         INDOTEL’s social programs (e.g. telecenters).

                         3. Component 3 ($1.5 million): Implementation Support. This component will provide resources for
                         the establishment and logistic support for a core PCU staff to administer and coordinate the project’s
                         implementation and conduct monitoring and evaluation. It will also support oversight arrangements
                         and capacity building for key Policy and Regulatory institutions.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The physical components of terrestrial connectivity to be financed under the Program will likely
                         include construction of ducts, poles and deployment of earthed and unearthed cables, to form
                         networks at the national, governmental, and rural levels. The most cost-effective option identified
                         for the land-based National Optical Fiber Backbone Infrastructure is the adaptation of existing
                         capacity, such as in the country's national electricity transmission company, ETED (Empresa de
                         Transmisión Eléctrica Dominicana). Use of the existing land network would also minimize
                         environmental and social impacts by reducing the need for excavation and construction of new cable
                         segments; however, emplacement of new buried cables would still be necessary where the existing
                         infrastructure does not extend. Most of the cables would be located along existing rights-of-way and/
                         or roadways, which again would serve to minimize environmental and social effects. There are


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         existing cables across the island, reaching the western border of the Dominican Republic with Haiti
                         at several points. Expansion of the system to reach new areas may occur in future phases of the
                         project. Trenching activities will require environmental management for runoff control, traffic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safety, dust control, vegetation clearing, laydown areas and access points, and other standard
                         environmental provisions. Additional construction or rehabilitation works may include
                         communications centers or other buildings, landing stations, and towers.

                         Several existing submarine cables extend from Landing Stations on the north, east, and south coasts,
                         near Puerto Plata, Punta Cana, and Santo Domingo respectively, and reach landing points which are
                         already existing and in operation, therefore any civil works in coastal areas will be excluded. The
                         cost of new submarine cables is considerable, therefore existing cable capacity will be utilized and
                         no new submarine cables will be constructed

                         Given the nature of the planned investments (new construction and rehabilitation) small-scale land
                         acquisition is anticipated in the project. OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) is therefore
                         triggered. The exact nature and extent of acquisition is unknown during project preparation since the
                         specific project sites have not yet been determined. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                         been prepared to guide the implementation of land acquisition during the lifetime of the project.
                         During implementation, land acquisition will be assessed on a sub-project specific basis. When
                         involuntary land acquisition and/or resettlement is confirmed, and specific program areas are known,
                         Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plans will be prepared, according to the guidelines set out by the
                         Involuntary Resettlement Framework, and submitted to the Bank for no objection prior to sub-project
                         financing. Major impacts are not anticipated given that facilities are expected to follow existing
                         rights of way, especially roads; however, irregularities in land titling or rights-of-way may require
                         land acquisition and/or title regularization, particularly along rural roads

                         Screening and scoping of proposed project areas indicates that Indigenous Peoples with the four
                         characteristics outlined in OP/BP 4.10 are not located within the project area, and thus cannot benefit
                         or be adversely affected by the Project. The Indigenous Peoples Policy is therefore not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Program is expected to have positive social impacts by improving access to communications; the
                         development of ICT enabled services, and improved government decentralized service delivery.
                         Particularly, the program is expected to: (i) enable ICT to become a driver for sustainable economic
                         growth; (ii) increase employment opportunities through the development of ICT-based services; (iii)
                         enable the government to use ICT to provide decentralized services; (iv) improved access and quality
                         of ICT services for the population, business, and government; (v) reduce isolation and enhance
                         economic activities in rural areas; and (vi) create additional opportunities for women entrepreneurs to
                         develop ICT-related careers.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                         Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Deployment of terrestrial broadband
                         BP 4.01                                              telecommunications infrastructure will not have
                                                                              significant adverse environmental impacts due to
                                                                              the use of existing cable systems when possible,


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                                         as well as the small footprint of the cable and its
                                                                         positioning along existing roadways where
                                                                         possible. New sections of cable will require
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         environmental management of trenching
                                                                         activities, and/or using existing power poles,
                                                                         ducting or other infrastructure. Construction or
                                                                         upgrading of towers could create impacts from
                                                                         road improvements and/or associated civil works.
                                                                         The project will connect to existing landing points
                                                                         on shore and will install no submarine cables or
                                                                         landing stations. The project is assigned to
                                                                         environmental category B, and an Environmental
                                                                         and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                         laying out the applicable policies and guidelines
                                                                         will be prepare and disclosed in the Dominican
                                                                         Republic. The ESMF is based on the existing
                                                                         CARCIP regional ESMF but adapted to the
                                                                         context of the Dominican Republic and this
                                                                         project. The ESMF also contains environmental
                                                                         management plans (EMPs) to identify, mitigate,
                                                                         manage and offset potential environmental
                                                                         impacts from civil works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Most project activities are not expected to affect
                                                                         natural habitats, especially those involving cables
                                                                         along existing roadways and rehabilitation of
                                                                         towers and structures. However, since the exact
                                                                         scope of the network will only be decided through
                                                                         the network’s bidding process a screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         criterion to avoid negative impacts in Natural
                                                                         Habitats and avoid critical natural habitats has
                                                                         been included in the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            This policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                         activities will not include forest management and
                                                                         that any impacts are likely to be of small scale
                                                                         due to the small foot print of the cable and its
                                                                         positioning along existing roadways where
                                                                         possible.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Any incidental pesticide use for building
                                                                         maintenance may be managed by including it in
                                                                         the appropriate EMPs (e.g. use of licensed and
                                                                         registered service providers for termite
                                                                         treatments, and other incidental use).
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered given that some physical
                         BP 4.11                                         interventions would result in earthworks or
                                                                         excavations and could therefore involve chance
                                                                         finds of physical cultural resources, for which the



                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                                                              he ESMF includes provisions and guidance on the
                                                                              chance finds procedures within the EMP and
                                                                              contracting documents.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered. Screening and
                                                                              scoping of proposed project areas indicates that
                                                                              Indigenous Peoples with the four characteristics
                                                                              outlined in OP/BP 4.10 are not located within the
                                                                              project area, and thus cannot benefit or be
                                                                              adversely affected by the Project. The Indigenous
                                                                              Peoples Policy is therefore not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Small-scale land acquisition is anticipated in the
                            4.12                                              project, therefore OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
                                                                              Resettlement) is triggered and a Resettlement
                                                                              Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared.
                                                                              Major impacts are not anticipated given that
                                                                              facilities are expected to follow existing rights of
                                                                              way, especially roads; however, irregularities in
                                                                              land titling or rights-of-way may require land
                                                                              acquisition and/or title regularization, particularly
                                                                              along rural roads. When involuntary land
                                                                              acquisition and/or resettlement is confirmed,
                                                                              Resettlement Plans will be prepared, prior to sub-
                                                                              project financing
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                              neither support the construction or rehabilitation
                                                                              of dams nor will it support other investments
                                                                              which rely on services of existing dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No               OP 7.50 is not triggered since the project will not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              build any submarine cables.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                            7.60                                              work in such areas as defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominican Republic                                               22-May-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Dominican Republic                                               22-May-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?


                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Elena Gasol Ramos
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                            Date: 26-Jun-2014




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
