                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA9109

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-May-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Sao Tome and Principe             Project ID:    P150828
                                                       Parent         P146877
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     STP Quality Education for All - AF (P150828)
   Parent Project    São Tomé and Príncipe Quality Education for All (P146877)
   Name:
   Task Team         Geraldo Joao Martins
   Leader:
   Estimated         23-May-2014                       Estimated   27-Jun-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTEW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Primary education (50%), Pre-primary education (30%), Public administration-
                     Education (20%)
   Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:         3.50           Total Bank Financing:   3.50
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                              3.50
     Total                                                                                  3.50
   Environmental C - Not Required
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                             Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Development Objective of the proposed operation is to improve the system of in-service
   teacher training and to strengthen the management of human resources in the education sector in
   São Tomé and Príncipe.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The AF will finance activities to maximize the development effectiveness of the Original Project by
scaling up activities supported under the Original Project and by funding a number of new activities.
The benefits of the provision of AF are usually assessed on the basis of the implementation
performance of the parent Project. The Parent Project has just become effective. However, the merit
of this AF should be measured on the benefit that it would bring to strengthen the expected
development effectiveness of the parent Project's. The new proposed activities will better support the
achievement of the PDOs of the original project because it is foreseen that the introduction of
training activities to pre-school, the development of new curricula for pre-schools, the development
of textbooks and pedagogical materials for pre-school and the training of teacher trainers would
obviously strengthen the system of in-service teacher training throughout the project lifecycle, and
ultimately yield the expected results on the ground.

The Original Project – the Education for All Project (Phase II) has two components: Component 1:
Improving the system of in-service teacher training in primary education; and Component 2:
Strengthening management of human resources in the education sector. Component 1 has two inter-
related sub-components: (i) setting up in-service teacher training system; and (ii) building a student
learning assessment in primary education; whereby Component 2 has two sub-components: (i)
strengthening management of human resources in the education sector, and (ii) project management.
There are no changes to the PDO or to the Components under the proposed AF. The AF is expected
to further reinforce support to be provided under the Original Project and consequently scale up its
development effectiveness in a more tangible and sustainable manner. The proposed AF activities
will be as follows:

Component 1: Improving the system of in-service teacher training in primary education

Sub-Component 1.1: Setting up in service teacher training

This sub-component, under the Original Project, consists of training of approximately 400 primary
education teachers out of the existing 667 unqualified teachers in primary education (or about 60
percent of unqualified teachers). These training courses will be coordinated by EFOPE (Escola de
Formação de Professores – the teacher training school) and certification will be awarded upon
completion. The sub-component will also support development of tools for management of training,
including setting up a database for training management; training of MoE staff on the use of the
management tools for teacher training; and cleaning and analysis of training data. Under the AF, this
activity will be scaled up by enrolling an additional 267 primary education teachers as beneficiaries
of training and by adding four new activities as follows:



                                             Page 2 of 6
(a)     In-service training for about 100 pre-school teachers currently working in the system. Those
pre-school teacher will also benefit from the teacher certification system;
(b)     Training of 100 trainers of trainers at the pre-school level;
(c)     Support curricula review and development of key textbooks and pedagogical materials for
teachers and students at the pre-school level. For this purpose, the AF will explore digital content
freely available for educational purposes;
(d)     Purchase of equipment and pedagogical materials for the teacher training school; and
(e)     The AF would allow introduce ICT-based approaches and materials on teacher training,
including specific modules on teacher training on ICT, or how to teach better with ICT tools.

Sub-component 1.2: Developing a learning assessment system

This sub-component, under the Original Project, aims at supporting the development of a system that
will allow administering the first learning assessment test for 6th grade in 2015/2016. By the same
token, an Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) for the 3rd grade will be administered during the
2015/2016 school year. The sub-component will also pilot a small-scale impact evaluation in 20
schools (25 percent of primary education schools) whose teachers will benefit from specific training
and pedagogical tools to improve teaching of reading in early grades of primary education. The pilot
will then compare results of the second EGRA test in the sample of 20 pilot schools with the results
of non- participating schools.
The sub-component will scale up the learning assessment and the impact evaluation activity. A
student learning assessment will be extended to the 4th grade and the impact evaluation on reading
will involve additional 20 schools covering a total number of 40 schools (50 percent of primary
schools in the country). At the time of preparation of the Original Project, learning assessment in the
4th grade was considered and then abandoned because of limited resources. It is also expected that
scaling up the impact evaluation to 40 schools will assure better coverage of schools (rural/urban and
in terms of socio-economic environment reducing disparities, both in terms of gender and
vulnerability, in access to education) and will likely allow for the provision of more consistent data
and information for analysis and comparison.


Component 2: Strengthening management of human resources in the education sector

Sub-component 2.1 Developing an Information Management

The Original Project supports the development of a new EMIS to allow information/data to flow
from the school-level to the central level (MoE) and vice-versa. This will enable the close monitoring
of data and performance and will ensure teacher’s presence in the classrooms and the provision of
appropriate pedagogical support to teachers’ activities. It will be particularly important to ensure a
more effective deployment of teachers among schools so as to reach the intended average of 4.5
hours per day on task. The sub-component also supports improvement in the management practices
through the development of management and pedagogical tools for directors and teachers as well as a
school report card. The roles and responsibilities of inspectors and pedagogical advisors, somewhat
unclear today, will be re-defined and they will be able to access needed training which will
strengthen their capacity to carry out supervision and support tasks close to schools.

The sub-component will be reinforced through the provision of information technology (IT)
connectivity between all primary education schools with the MoE allowing the timely transfer of data
and information on students, teachers, books, etc. The inclusion of resources to fund connectivity to

                                             Page 3 of 6
schools (that would be complementary to what CAB2 is doing) as well as the purchasing of end user
devices (which possibly could cover teachers) and also applications (namely the Education
Management Information System – EMIS) in the proposed AF will contribute to the achievement of
the project development objective. It would also be a valuable complement to the activities already
initiated and financed by the Bank in the CAB2 operation (in the context of designing information
systems, digital content, or remote e-learning solutions. This is in line with the Government’s current
priority for: (i) developing teacher training specifically in ICT matters (and to better teach using ICT)
and (ii) the interest in securing teachers their own devices to access the internet, other educational
materials and applications targeting improved learning.

Because of the complexity of the development of effective EMIS, especially in developing countries,
the AF will explore open source solutions, such as Open EMIS developed by UNESCO which not
only meets the needs of various levels of management and stakeholders, but is also user friendly and
within a reasonable budget.

Sub-component 2.2 Project management

Under the Original Project, the sub-component supports fiduciary management (i.e., financial
management and procurement) of the project, by financing the operating costs associated with
project implementation, including provision of training to relevant staff (considerate of gender and
vulnerability status) and covering the cost of audits. This sub-component will be reinforced with
additional resources (US$100,000) in order to face the expected increased operating costs associated
with the scaling up of a few activities and the introduction of new activities.

The total estimated cost of the AF is US$3.5 million. The following table below summarizes the AF
activities and their estimated costs.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Nationwide in São Tomé and Príncipe.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        No
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No




                                              Page 4 of 6
   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project activities will have no or negligible environmental and social impacts.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     Not expected
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     N/A
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
     on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     N/A
  B. Disclosure Requirements
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies




                                             Page 5 of 6
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Geraldo Joao Martins
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                   Date: 31-May-2014




                                             Page 6 of 6
