                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA8724
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                               Project ID:    P132418
                            Project Name:      Efficient & Sustainable City Bus Services (P132418)
                            Task Team          Nupur Gupta
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Jun-2014                         Estimated   09-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (5%), Gender (5%), Other
                                              urban development (65%), Climate change (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     127.90           Total Bank Financing:                      0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     118.70
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                              9.20
                              Total                                                                                        127.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project's Global Environment Objective (GEO) is to promote environmentally sustainable city
                           bus transport within Indian cities and specifically in the demonstration cities through efficiency and


                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         service improvements.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This proposed project intends to fund the incremental activities aimed to enhance sustainability,
                         energy efficiency, and quality of city bus services, and therefore the potential for GHG emissions
                         reductions from the baseline project.

                         The project comprises the following components:

                         Component 1: Capacity building and Technical Assistance on Policy, Regulatory, Fiscal issues (GEF
                         US$ 0.7M, co-finance US$ 2.0M): As part of this component, policy, regulatory and fiscal
                         constraints will be reviewed at national, state and city levels to promote efficient and high quality
                         city bus services and policy notes developed for discussion and debate among key stakeholders.
                         Capacity building initiatives involving development of knowledge materials, training activities,
                         knowledge sharing through website/newsletters and cross learning events etc. in cutting edge areas
                         aimed at development of the overall urban bus sector in the country shall form part of this
                         component.

                         Component 2A: City Demonstration Projects (GEF US$ 6M, co-finance US$ 113 M): This
                         component shall support physical improvements targeted at modernizing the city bus services in
                         demonstration cities including (i) modern depot equipment for improved maintenance and life of
                         buses, (ii) modern Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS) and Management Information Systems (MIS)
                         - to make the services more user friendly and for improved planning and management of operations
                         to enable optimal use of resources. Four cities have been selected as demonstration pilots. These are
                         Bhopal, Chandigarh, Jaipur and Mira Bhayandar.

                         Component 2B: Capacity Building & Technical Assistance to Demonstration Cities (GEF US$ 2.1m,
                         co-finance US$ 0.92m) : The capacity building and technical assistance component is targeted at
                         supporting the modernization efforts of selected demonstration cities. These shall include to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         following kinds of activities (i) institutional strengthening, capacity building and training, (ii)
                         business planning including route planning and rationalization for better utilization of buses, (iii)
                         marketing and branding, (iv) technical support with private sector participation including
                         mainstreaming of informal sector, (v) vehicle and driver performance management with a view to
                         improving fuel efficiency, (vi) incremental operational expenses.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The candidate cities for demonstration investments are Bhopal (population 1.7 million), Chandigarh
                         (1 million), Jaipur (3 million), and Mira-Bhayander (0.8 million). Mira-Bhayander is part of the
                         Mumbai Metropolitan Region on the west coast of India. Chandigarh is a federally administered high
                         income city that serves as a capital of two north Indian states – Haryana and Punjab. Jaipur is the
                         capital of Rajasthan, the largest state in India. Bhopal is the capital of Madhya Pradesh in Central
                         India and is known for its lake system.

                         The physical improvements under component 2A, targeted at modernizing city bus services in
                         demonstration cities are largely planned to be executed in the existing bus depots and bus stops.
                         However, iIn some cases such physical improvements and installation may be proposed at new sites
                         for bus depots too. In such cases both existing and new sites when identified would require to be
                         screened for any possible impacts on surrounding natural resources as applicable as well as need for


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         resettlement and loss of livelihood etc. For Mira Bhayander, due to its proximity to the coast,
                         mangroves covered areas are located close to two currently identified candidate sites and would
                         require protection/ suitable management measures. In Jaipur, one of the sites has a school located
Public Disclosure Copy




                         close to its entry where increased noise could be an issue to be handled. An environment and social
                         framework prepared for ongoing India Sustainable Urban Transport Project shall be updated to
                         reflect new cities, sub project level activities any additional issues based on the potential sites to be
                         identified during the project preparation.

                         Most of the proposed sites for depots are on land already available with local government. No
                         impacts linked to LA and R&R have been identified with respect to the sub projects (depot sites)
                         screened currently. The screening also confirmed non presence of scheduled tribes close to the sub
                         project locations. However, the likelihood of additional depot sites with impacts on non-titleholders
                         cannot be ruled out. In situations where impacts on non-title holders are anticipated may be identified
                         in future, an Entitlement Framework has been prepared as part of the ESMF to address the impacts.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                         Sangeeta Kumari (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Currently identified activities include
                         BP 4.01                                                construction of bus maintenance infrastructure
                                                                                and installation of passenger information
                                                                                components in bus-stops in cities. This will be
                                                                                city-specific and guided by a common
                                                                                environmental and social management framework
                                                                                (ESMF). This is based on one prepared for the
                                                                                SUTP. It includes a description of overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                environmental conditions in candidate cities, and
                                                                                provides for a generic environmental and social
                                                                                management plan (ESMP) that can be used in
                                                                                case of common activities. It includes a screening
                                                                                matrix to exclude activities with unacceptable
                                                                                levels of impact (such as acquisition of land), and
                                                                                also provides guidance for detailed environmental
                                                                                and social assessments where found necessary.
                                                                                An outline capacity building plan for city officials
                                                                                and an indicative budget are also included in the
                                                                                ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes              While no recognized protected areas are known to
                                                                                be present in the current locations, since some of
                                                                                the areas are in the outskirts of cities, there is a
                                                                                possibility of presence of patches that may act as
                                                                                havens for wildlife, such as mangroves close to
                                                                                some candidate sites in the city of Mira
                                                                                Bhayander. This will be investigated further as
                                                                                project preparation progresses. This will be done



                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                                                                             through secondary data and site visits during
                                                                             preparation of city-specific investment plans.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             No Forests are likely to be impacted by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             project. The project activities are likely to be in
                                                                             urban areas where Forests are unlikely to be
                                                                             found.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project activities do not require use of
                                                                             pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            While no important cultural properties are known
                            BP 4.11                                          to be close to the currently proposed locations,
                                                                             there may be locally important shrines/other
                                                                             resources that may be identified during the
                                                                             ongoing studies. Moreover, chance-finds
                                                                             procedures have been included in the ESMF for
                                                                             reflection in the contract documents for works
                                                                             under the project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             None of the cities have any recognized tribal
                                                                             groups with distinct identity.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            No land acquisition is anticipated in the project
                            4.12                                             nor any involuntary resettlement is identified so
                                                                             far based on the screening checklists prepared by
                                                                             the project cities. However, any additional sub-
                                                                             projects location for depots proposed in future
                                                                             may have their edges/boundaries encroached.
                                                                             This is being assessed as part of project
                                                                             preparation for each city as part of Detailed
                                                                             Project Report preparation. A separate chapter
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             will be provided in the DPR to reflect the benefits
                                                                             and likely negative environmental and social
                                                                             impacts of the project activities. In case need for
                                                                             displacement is identified a sub-project specific
                                                                             Resettlement Action Plan shall be prepared based
                                                                             on the Resettlement Framework provided under
                                                                             the ESMF.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             No dams are involved in the project.

                            Projects on International        No              The project does not affect any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              The candidate cities do not fall in Disputed Areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                           The significant adverse impacts of the project are likely to be confined to the areas close to the
                           proposed depot sites and mostly concentrated within the depot sites. The construction of the depots
                           will require consideration of drainage, and of construction safety. In addition, in locations close to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           or in populated areas can have traffic related issues that would be managed. For example, in one
                           location in Jaipur, the impact on a school close to one of the depot sites would need to be
                           minimized. Mitigation measures like shielding receptors, or redesigning the depot lay out would
                           be adequately considered and documented in the city specific plan. In Mira Bhayander, a city on
                           the west coast, there can be impacts on mangrove plantation close to the sea in some candidate
                           locations. These would be subject to more comprehensive assessment if and when sites are
                           included in the project, and adequate mitigation will be planned for the removal/damage to these.
                           No other large scale significant impacts are expected. There will be permanent change in land-use
                           and drainage patterns where new depots are proposed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Indirect impacts may occur in areas where new operated routes may lead to development of more
                           economic activity or expansion of residential activity. Long term impacts are likely to be positive
                           since the bus depots will have improved facilities to maintain buses at a higher efficiency than
                           without the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Several different sites were considered for development of depots and sites with limited and
                           manageable environmental and social impacts are being developed under the project. Some sites
                           have been pushed into later phases to ensure that the environmental and social impacts are
                           properly assessed and adequate management plans are prepared. Alternative sources of energy to
                           power the depot equipment were considered and in cities like Jaipur, where local conditions are
                           suitable, solar photovoltaic cell as source of electricity have been included in the project. In
                           addition, specification for power equipment includes consideration of energy efficiency, and life
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cycle considerations rather than just capital cost.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The cities (will) have agreed to the ESMF and will be/are preparing their city-specific plans to
                           mitigate adverse environmental and social impacts. They have also carried out screening of the
                           candidate sites already identified to establish the extent of impacts in advance. JCTSL has shared a
                           draft EIA document for their proposed activities, which is currently being reviewed by the Bank
                           and will be finalized by the completion of appraisal and duly disclosed. Other cities are also
                           preparing the EIA/EMP documents based on the ESMF which will be reviewed by the Bank.

                           In line with the ESMF, each city will designate an environmental and social officer for the project
                           who will ensure the implementation of the ESMP and/or EMP/RAP where required. This officer,
                           along with other city officials, will be trained in line with the ESMF to familiarize them to the
                           potential issues. Some of the implementing agencies have prior experience of handling
                           construction, while others like Jaipur and Chandigarh intend to outsource supervision of
                           construction to the respective specialized agencies – RSRTC and Chandigarh PWD respectively.
                           These agencies’ staff will also be briefed on the requirements of the ESMF through the
                           environmental and social officer.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           The key stakeholders for the project are staff of the specialized agency responsible for providing
                           the bus service in each city and people located close to the proposed depot sites. The users of the
                           bus services, and general population of the city are also part of the wider stakeholder group.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESMF and ESMP, as part of the ESMF, are disclosed in the website of the implementing
                           agency in each city. In addition, specific plans for each location will be available in each site.
                           Consultations (will) have be(en) organized in each city to inform the people about the project
                           proposals and their feedback sought on the proposed management measures. These have been
                           taken into account in finalizing the ESMF. In addition, a consultation framework to guide
                           consultations during the implementation phase is also included in the ESMF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            03-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            03-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector            Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated      Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?



                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Nupur Gupta
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 09-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                      Date: 09-Jun-2014




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
