                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC5825

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Senegal                          Project ID:       P133597
                            Project Name:       Senegal Safety Net operation (P133597)
                            Task Team           Aline Coudouel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           30-Jan-2014                      Estimated         29-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTSW                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (80%), Nutrition and food security (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         30.30                Total Bank Financing:        30.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    30.00
                              Rapid Social Response Program                                                   0.30
                              Total                                                                          30.30
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objectives of the proposed Project are to support the establishment of the building blocks for the
                           national safety nets system and to provide targeted cash transfers to the poor and vulnerable
                           population.
                           C. Project Description
                           Creating an effective social safety net system is essential to advance the country’s goal of poverty
                         alleviation. The Government’s objective is to have sound counter-cyclical policies and programs to
                         protect households’ consumption and promote their investments in the human capital of their
                         members. Another objective is to shift from large ineffective subsidies to well-targeted social safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                         net programs. To help the government of Senegal to achieve these goals the proposed Project will
                         have three components:

                         •       Establishment of the tools of the national safety nets system
                         •       Provision of direct cash transfers to poor households
                         •       Strengthening of the national safety nets system’s institutional framework and capacity

                         Component 1: Establishment of the tools of the national safety nets system

                         This component will support the development of the basic operational tools and administrative
                         systems that form the backbone of a national safety nets system. The tools would indeed be used by
                         all programs (to target, identify and select households, and pay transfers) and would provide the basis
                         for greater coordination and reduced overlap or duplication.

                         Activities financed by this component will support:
                         (1)     The development of a Management Information System (MIS)
                         (2)     The consolidation of a unified registry
                         (3)     The development of procedures for Information, Education and Communication (IEC)
                         (4)     The development of procedures for monitoring and evaluation procedures;
                         (5)     The provision of training for actors of the national system at central and regional levels
                         (6)     The provision of technical assistance to design initiatives to increase the productive capacity
                         of households, including through a cash-for-work program.

                         More specifically, regarding the MIS, the objective is to develop a modular computer system that
                         will be capable of producing reports regarding potential beneficiaries, beneficiaries, and program
                         activities; support the financial management of programs; produce the necessary information for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring and evaluation; etc. The key components of the MIS would include, among others, a
                         module to enroll potential beneficiaries in safety net programs; modules to manage transactions
                         (calculation of benefits and payment); modules to support the monitoring and evaluation of
                         interventions; and a module to produce regular administrative reports. While each program will have
                         its specificities that will need to be reflected in the MIS, all the information of the MIS would be
                         consolidated under a larger MIS set up at the level of the National Social Protection Delegation.

                         This component would benefit from the grant resources provided by the Rapid Social Response
                         program under the proposed Project.

                         Component 2 – Provision of direct cash transfers to poor households

                         This component will support the expansion of the coverage of the conditional cash transfer program
                         (Programme National de Bourses de Securité Familiale, PNBSF). The transfers would provide
                         support to families with children and elderly members. It is expected that three types of transfers
                         would be provided, as follows:

                         1.       Direct cash transfer to poor households with children aged 0-5 years. These transfers would
                         aim at increasing the consumption of the poorest households with young children or pregnant
                         women. The proposal is to condition the transfer to the use of health services for the regular
                         monitoring and check-up of children in health centers. Also, the program would organize information
                         campaigns to promote improvements in maternal health, children health, and nutrition in general.
                         The proposed Project would build synergies with the new Results-Based-Finance Health (RBF
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health) intervention. Indeed, the proposed transfer would promote greater demand for services, while
                         the RBF works on improving the supply and quality of services.

                         2.       Direct cash transfer to poor households with children aged 6-12 years. These transfers would
                         build on the newly established program which promotes the welfare of poor households and their
                         investments in the human capital of their school-age children. In this program, transfers are
                         conditional on regular primary school attendance, with a view to promote primary school
                         completion. In addition, information campaigns and accompaniment promote the systematic
                         registration of children in the civil registry, and the completion of regular vaccination schedules. The
                         proposed Project would seek synergies with the recently approved Education Project to improve the
                         accessibility and quality of the education which beneficiary children can receive.

                         3.       Direct cash transfer to poor elderly. These transfers would aim at supporting poor individuals
                         that reach the old age without protection from social security and without independent sources of
                         income. The program would provide a minimum revenue for beneficiaries. In addition, the program
                         would try and promote the provision of health insurance and health care to this population group, and
                         would work with the health authorities implement information campaigns to emphasize the
                         importance of preventive health checks for chronic diseases such as high blood pressure or diabetes
                         among its beneficiaries.

                         This component would likely fund the transfers themselves, as well as the design and implementation
                         of the monitoring and evaluation of the programs. More specifically, the proposed Project would
                         finance key activities to evaluate and to provide timely information regarding the accuracy and
                         impact of the cash transfers to inform program expansion and/or adjustments. Key activities would
                         include (i) annual process and mid-term evaluations; (ii) regular spot checks and community score-
                         cards; (iii) one full impact evaluation, and (iv) annual independent audits of the system and its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components.

                         Component 3 - Strengthening the national safety net system’s institutional framework and capacity

                         The objective of this component is to support the Government in the process of institutionalizing the
                         social safety net system, as part of a national social protection framework. This component will
                         support the system by strengthening the management unit within the DGPSN that will be responsible
                         for the implementation of the multiple components of the system. This would ensure the team is fully
                         operational, and implements the programs and the proposed Project effectively and efficiently, in
                         accordance with the guidelines of the Project documents and implementation manuals and in
                         accordance with financial management and procurement procedures. The component would also
                         finance activities aimed at improving accountability and transparency in the use of Project resources.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will support a program with national coverage. There are not characteristics particularly
                         relevant to safeguard analysis.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         n/a
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      n/a
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Aline Coudouel

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 08-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                                                                                             Date: 09-Jan-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
