INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO51
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Ecuador                    Project ID:   P151439
Project Name:    EC Guayaquil Wastewater Management Project (P151439)
Task Team        Patricia Lopez Martinez
Leader(s):
Estimated        23-Feb-2015                Estimated      15-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (70%), Wastewater Collection and
Transportation (30%)
Theme(s):        Pollution management and environmental health (50%), City-wide Infrastructure
and Service Delivery (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     227.90             Total Bank Financing:   102.50
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         22.90
o         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            102.50
EC European Investment Bank                                     102.50
Total                                                           227.90
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
13.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reach sustainable universal access to
wastewater management services in the Southern districts of the City of Guayaquil. The Project will
therefore improve environmental conditions in Guayaquil's water bodies (the River Guayas and the
Salado Estuary) and bring better livelihood conditions for its residents in selected neighborhoods,


﻿contributing to the reduction of poverty and increase of shared prosperity in the City.
14.    This Project will particularly benefit the residents of "Trinitaria" and "Suburbio Oeste", two
riparian districts of the Estero Salado estuary where sewer mains will be rehabilitated -what will
O
U       contribute to the decontamination of this important environmental asset-, and where poor households
-the vast majority in the area - will enjoy eased conditions to get connected to the sewer network (a
detailed socioeconomic characterization of the beneficiary population in the mentioned riparian
districts will be undertaken during the project preparation phase).
C. Project Description
15. The proposed project would achieve the above mentioned objectives through the implementation
of four main components.
16. Component 1: Household Connections (USD 18 million with USD 2.8 million of IBRD loan
financing). This Component will finance the installation and rehabilitation of household connections
in specific areas within the southern districts of the City of Guayaquil. These districts are equipped
with a dense sewerage collection network which, although requiring rehabilitation of main collectors
to reduce infiltration, reaches and could serve all inhabited areas. Nonetheless, despite having
coverage of almost 100 percent, just 82 percent of the households of the area are currently actually
connected to the system. Most of the remaining 18 percent (around 30,000 families) are poor
households located in "Suburbio Oeste" and "Trinitaria", two riparian district of the "Estero Salado"
estuary, where household toilets discharge directly to the estuary or to reportedly poorly constructed
and maintained pits or septic tanks, which contributes to the degradation of the Estero Salado. These
families have not been connected despite having a sewer passing in front of their homes - and
despite legal mandate to do so - mainly because of the cost of the connection fee, but also because of
technical issues (toilets mostly located at the back of their houses or at a lower level than the
condominial sewer branch) and lack of information about their entitlement to enjoy a social tariff
and/or about the benefits that getting connected would bring them in terms of livelihood
improvement.
0
17. This component of the project aims at increasing effective access to sewerage collection services
in the south districts of Guayaquil to reach a rate of at least around 95% percent. To achieve this
objective, household connection costs -including the cost of required indoor works like piping,
flooring and others - will be partially subsidized and financed by EMAPAG (clients will pay to
EMAPAG the nonsubsidised segment in installments through the water bill). In parallel, a
communication campaign will be launched to inform the beneficiaries about this initiative and its
benefits and to promote improved hygiene and sanitation practices required to ensure the proper
functioning of the condominial sewer system. The design of this component will be developed based
on previous successful experiences led by EMAPAG EP, which managed to increase effective access
to piped sanitation up to 98 percent in other districts of the city with high poverty rates.
18. Component 2: Rehabilitation of Primary Sewerage Network (USD 37 million, 100 percent
financed by IBRD). This Component will finance the rehabilitation of the main collector sewers of
"Las Ranas" and "La Chala" neighborhoods within the "Suburbio Oeste" district, which as stated
above is riparian to the Salado estuary. These main collectors have been identified to require urgent
rehabilitation to reduce wastewater loses and enable their effective collection function. This
component of the Project aims at reducing infiltrations in the south sewerage subsystem, thus
contributing to the reduction of the contamination of the Salado estuary from domestic wastewater.
The magnitude of the infiltration issue is currently illustrated by the following:


﻿Approximately 71 percent of the wastewater collected yearly in the sub-basin of La Chala in
Guayaquil gets lost due to infiltration, which causes groundwater contamination;
 *    The wastewater volume discharged from the south subsystem into Guayas River during the
O
rainy season is 82 percent higher than the volume discharged during the dry season due to rain and
ground water infiltration into the sewerage system, which also increases wastewater pumping and
treatment costs.
*      Some segments of the "Suburbio Oeste" sewer network meant to work as gravity mains get
pressurized during periods of high tide.
19.    Component 3: Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Facilities (USD 161 million, with USD
58.5 of IBRD loan financing). This component will finance the construction of a new wastewater
treatment plant (WWTP), called "Las Esclusas WWTP, and associated pumping and transmission
facilities to treat 100 percent of the wastewater collected in the southern districts of the City of
Guayaquil within the design year of 2030. Wastewater generated in the south subsystem is collected
in two sewer mains: (i) the "Guasmo" sewer main, which conducts an average flow in dry weather of
0.60 m3/s into the "Guasmo H" pump station from where wastewater is pumped directly intothe
Guayas River through a 180 meters long pipeline and an underwater outfall diffuser; and (ii) the
"Parson's Sur" sewer main, which conducts on dry weather 2.10 m3/s into the "La Pradera"
treatment plant, equipped with a mechanized pretreatment, a disinfection system that is out of service
and a underwater outfall diffuser. Therefore, wastewater is currently discharged into the Guayas
River with none or very little treatment, failing to comply with the contaminants concentration
thresholds established in the National Norm on Environmental Quality and Effluent Discharges
(NCADE in its Spanish acronym).
20.    To address this situation, EMAPAG EP plans to construct a new wastewater treatment plant
in the proximity of the current point of discharge of the Guasmo sewer main, which will treat all the
sewerage collected in the south subsystem and will require:
*      The adaptation of the Guasmo H pump station and the construction of a new pipeline to drive
pumped water to the new treatment facility;
*      The decommissioning of La Pradera treatment plant, the construction of a new pumping
station in the premises, and the construction of a pipeline to drive pumped water to the new treatment
facility;
a      *      Construction of a new treatment facility for a design dry and wet flows of 2.7 1/s and 3.51/s.
The facility will be equipped with mechanized pretreatment, chemically enhanced primary treatment
(CEPT), disinfection system, underwater outfall diffuser and hypochlorite production; and
*      Construction of the sludge digester.
21.    Different technological alternatives were analyzed by the consulting firm hired by
EMAPAG to develop the design of the treatment facility and were discussed with the WB team.
These alternatives reviewed included, among others, advanced preliminary treatment, chemically
enhanced primary treatment (advanced primary treatment), and secondary treatment, including
aerobic and anaerobic processes. The CEPT option was retained since it allows to consistently meet
the regulatory authorized limits set for the Total Suspended Solids (TSS), Biochemical Oxygen
Demand (BOD) and all other pollutant concentrations, eases the implementation of effective odor
control measures and it is a technology that has extensively and successfully been adopted worldwide
in municipal wastewater treatment plants of similar size which effluent does not require a complex
treatment process, considering existing effluent quality, effluent quality standards and existing
quality, quality standards and dilution capacity of receiving water body. Las Esclusas treatment


﻿facility is being designed to allow for a secondary treatment system to be incorporated into the
treatment process in the future should it be required.
22.    Component 4: Project management and Administration, including Communication Plan and
O
U       Management of Social, Environmental and Safety Issues (USD 5.4 million with USD 4. 2 million of
IBRD loan financing). This component will finance activities associated with overall Project
management by EMAPAG EP, including project-related audits, monitoring and evaluation,
equipment and training to strengthen implementing entities, as well as individual consultants. It will
include support to EMAPAG EP related to the management of environmental and social issues and
safeguards.
23. The project is expected to also include a Non-lending Technical Assistance Activity to improve
the capacity of EMAPAG to provide better sanitation services to the poor, financed with funds from
the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP). The WSP activity will support technical assistance
directed at the improvement of the mechanisms currently employed by Interagua and EMAPAG to
promote the installation of sewerage household connections among the population of areas that are
already equipped with a sewer network or that will benefit from a network extension or densification
project. These existing mechanisms, which focus on the creation of financial incentives accompanied
with an effective communication campaign, have demonstrated in the past, their usefulness to
achieve close to 100 percent sewer sanitation access rates, but failed to promote among the targeted
population, the sealing of septic tanks and cesspools that should be decommissioned when connected
to the public sewer network. This work is expected to study the reasons behind this failure and
explore the socio-economic characteristics of the households in question and identify bottlenecks
towards an effective closure of existing on-site solutions. EMAPAG is also looking for
unconventional solutions to provide sustainable quality sanitation services to peri-urban communities
where conventional sewer systems are not technically, financially or socially viable. In this context,
the Bank, through the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), will provide technical and financial
support to identify and adapt to the local reality, alternatives that have successfully been
implemented internationally in similar contexts.
0
24. Flood Risk and Climate Change Preparedness: Given that Guayaquil suffers from a significant
flood risk level, an assessment of the resilience of the infrastructure to be built under the Project, and
the incorporation of appropriate flood risk management measures, are expected to be included under
a      the proposed Project and will be discussed with EMAPAG/Interagua during Project preparation. This
assessment will cover any climate change adaptation measures that are deemed necessary. The flood
protection measures can be included in the bidding documents for the contractor that will build the
wastewater treatment plant.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
25. The IBRD financed segment of Guayaquil's "Municipal Program for the Universalization of
Wastewater Management Services" will directly benefit the central and southern districts of
Guayaquil located within the "La Pradera" and "Guasmo" wastewater sewer watersheds. As part of
the scope of this IBRD financed project, a new wastewater treatment facility called "Las Esclusas
WWTP" will be constructed on the southern shore of the Cobina estuary, in the proximity of its
intersection with the Guayas River (Component 3). This new facility will treat all wastewater
collected in the above mentioned wastewater sewer watersheds. The project also contemplates the
construction of a new pumping station in the existing La Pradera treatment plant site -which will be
decommissioned-; the adaptation of the Guasmo H wastewater pumping station; and the construction


﻿of the associated wastewater pipelines to transport collected wastewater to the new treatment facility.
The site selected for the construction of Las Esclusas WWTP -which was identified in the 2004
Municipal Sanitation Master Plan- is an industrial area located at the southern outskirts of the city
near the Guayas River. In the immediate vicinity, there is a thermal power generation plant and a
O
)       large shrimp farm. Treated wastewater will be discharged to the Guayas River through an underwater
outfall diffuser. The Guayas River is affected by several wastewater discharges and other pollution
sources (e.g., storm water runoff) upstream of the Project location with none or very limited
treatment.
26. The household connections (Component 1) are located in the southern districts of the City of
Guayaquil, which already has a dense sewerage collection network with a coverage of almost 100%,
but only 82% of the households are currently actually connected to the system. Most of the
remaining residents (around 30,000 families) are poor households located in "la Trinitaria "and
"Suburbio Oeste" neighborhoods, the latter a riparian district of the "Estero Salado", where
household toilets discharge directly to the estuary or to reportedly poorly constructed and maintained
pits or septic tanks which contributes to the degradation of the Estero Salado.
27. The Component 2 sewer rehabilitation works are aimed at reducing infiltrations in the south
sewerage subsystem by rehabilitating the main collector sewers of "La Chala" and the "Suburbio
Oeste" districts, thus contributing to the reduction of the contamination of the Estero Salado estuary.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
28. EMAPAG will be responsible for managing all environmental and social aspects of the project.
INTERAGUA, the private consortium to which EMPAG has delegated the management of
Guayaquil's drinking water, wastewater and drainage systems, has experience managing wastewater
treatment facilities and its management system is ISO 14001, ISO 18001 and ISO 9001 certified.
EMAPAG has experience managing environmental safeguards associated to multilateral financing
institutions, particularly with Corporacion Andina de Fomento (CAF) and Inter-American
Development Bank (IADB) loans.
0
29. With regards to the management of the sludge generated by the WWTP, depending on working
conditions and on actual contaminants concentrations of the raw wastewater, the treatment process
may generate up to 94 tons per day of primary sludge that would be digested and disposed in the
existing municipal landfill, which is currently handling 4,500 tons of waste per day. An agreement
has already been reached between EMAPAG and the consortium running the landfill, "Las Iguanas",
which has all the required environmental permits to receive this type of waste. The landfill has the
capacity to receive municipal waste, including the expected volume of sludge during the first eight to
ten years of operation of the wastewater treatment facility, based on its current rate of exploitation.
Plans for the future expansion or the construction of a new municipal sanitary landfill are under
discussion between municipal and environmental authorities which will allow the continuation of the
sludge disposal in this manner.
30. Guayaquil's Municipal Directorate for Environmental Affairs (DMA) runs, with EMAPAG's and
Interagua's support and participation, a program to monitor industrial wastewater discharges to the
sewer network, which will allow control of illegal discharges that may affect the future performance
of the "Las Esclusas"WWTP.
31. With regards to social safeguard policies, although financed by EMAPAG, the expropriation
required for land acquisition is primarily the responsibility of the Legal and Cadaster departments of


﻿the Autonomous Decentralized Government (GAD) of Guayaquil. While they have a good deal of
experience with applying local expropriation laws, they do not have experience in the application of
the World Bank's Policy on Involuntary Resettlement. That said, both EMAPAG and the GAD have
agreed to taking the additional measures necessary to conform with the requirements of OP 4.12.
o
32. During Project preparation, an evaluation of institutional capacity of relevant entities will be
finalized and specific actions identified, if/as needed, to improve capacity as part of Component 4
(institutional strengthening project management and administration).
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Carlos Vargas Bejarano (GENDR)
Jose Vicente Zevallos (GSURR)
Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project team proposes that the Project be
OP/BP 4.01                              classified as an Environmental Category A, due to
the type and size of the project, specifically the
construction of a 3.6 cubic meters per second
wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) under
Component 3. The other project works in
Components 1 and 2 have relatively minor potential
impacts and can be mitigated with more standard
measures. The main potential risks relate to potential
environmental and social impacts during
construction of sewer works associated with the
project, potential failure of the WWTP to properly
operate and resultant impacts similar to present
conditions, and failure in proper disposal of sludge
from WWTP. However, the overall expected project
impacts are positive due to the improved water
quality that will be discharged into the Guayas River
and the reduction of untreated wastewater that is
presently leaking from the existing sewer system and
affecting shallow ground and surrounding surface
water bodies, like the "Salado" Estuary.
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) has been developed for the proposed WWTP
(Component 3) in compliance with Ecuador's
environmental regulatory framework. As such, the
Terms of Reference for the ESIA were approved by
the Ministry of Environment in Ecuador (MAE). The
Bank team has reviewed the scope of the ESIA and
found that its technical and scientific rigor is


﻿consistent with the nature of the Project and that the
methodology used for the identification and analysis
of environmental impacts conforms with good
national and international practices. The design and
location of the WWTP included an alternative
analysis in terms of design options and site location.
The final ESIA will also include a description of the
general strategy developed by government entities
that are responsible for water quality in the Guayas
River, with a hydrographic basin approach.
The Bank team has also verified that the expected
effluent quality from the WWTP of Las Esclusas to
be financed under the Project would keep discharge
standards in line with current environmental
regulations in Ecuador. EMAPAG has planned for
expansion of the WWTP to enable secondary
treatment, if it was required by Ecuadorean
environmental regulations further on during the life
of the Project.
The Bank team has conducted two reviews of the
ESIA and given EMAPAG recommendations to
improve the presentation of the environmental and
social aspects of the Project. The last review by the
Bank team was conducted before the publication of
an advanced draft in the Bank's and EMAPAG's
website on December 16, 2014 for public knowledge
and consultation.
An earlier draft of the ESIA was also widely
disseminated locally from September 18 to October
8, 2014 in different Public Information Centers, a
formal Public Audience and informal informative
meetings, following national regulations and Bank
recommendations. In Ecuador, public consultations
are coordinated by a Facilitator appointed by the
MAE. According to Ecuadorean regulations and
Bank environmental standards, concerns and
recommendations from the community must be
considered and addressed by EMAPAG in the ESIA
and the Environmental and Social Management Plan
(EMP). All comments received as a result of the
public consultation process as well the mechanisms
to address them have been included in the ESIA
which was publicly disclosed on December 16, 2014
(pending final report from Facilitator from MAE). Of


﻿the comments received, around 20% were related to
requesting proper maintenance of the sewerage
collection and transportation systems to avoid
blockages and overflows, around 19% were
expressing acceptance and support for the project, a
further 19% were expressing concern about proper
odor control from the wastewater treatment plant,
around 12% expressed concern over ensuring timely
completion of the works and around 8% expressed
concern about inconveniences that could be caused
by rupture of street pavements amongst others. These
concerns by the community are being addressed in
the Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP) which has been prepared by EMAPAG,
differentiating between the construction and
operation phases.
The ESIA has also been reviewed by a panel of
independent qualified national experts as
recommended by the Bank team. The ESIA is
presently being updated to reflect some further
revisions and comments provided by the Bank and
the panel of experts. Any further revisions to the
ESIA will be disclosed in the Bank's and EMAPAG's
website by Project Appraisal.
For works to be constructed under Components 1 and
2 (i.e., sewer connections to residential houses and
rehabilitation of main sewer lines), Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMP) are being
developed also in accordance with Ecuadorian
regulations for environmental licensing and under
ToR reviewed by the Bank team. Overall social
impacts of components 1 & 2 are being assessed
during the preparation of these ESMPs and a survey-
based Beneficiary Assessment which EMAPAG is
currently undertaking, including an assessment of
potential involuntary resettlement impacts,
temporary economic impacts on vendors, small
businesses, shops etc. during the construction/
rehabilitation process amongst others. Final ESMP
drafts will be disclosed in the Bank's and EMAPAG's
website by Project Appraisal and key results of the
assessments will be included in the Appraisal version
of the ISDS.
The Bank is exploring options with EMAPAG to


﻿enhance and promote positive environmental
benefits, such as a more comprehensive water quality
monitoring program for the River Guayas, promoting
the participation of the main users of the river. In
this respect, it has been agreed with EMAPAG that
Component 4 of the Project will include funds to
support the development and establishment of a
water quality monitoring system for the Guayas
River and the Salado Estuary.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD         The Project works to be performed will be located in
urbanized and/or in industrial areas. There are no
protected natural habitats located within or in the
proximity of the project intervention area. All the
project components will have a positive
environmental impact on the Guayas River and the
Salado Estuary. Components 1 and 2 of the project
will have a positive environmental impact on the
Salado Estuary, eliminating an important part of the
urban wastewater discharge to the Estuary that will
instead be led to the WWTP supported by the Project
and discharged to the Guayas River. However the
need to trigger the policy will be further addressed
during project preparation due to uncertainties
related to the potential effects on the project in
Estero Salado, and given that the project could affect
the receiving waters and aquatic habitats dependent
upon them.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The Project works to be performed will be located in
urbanized and/or in industrial areas. There are no
forests nor mangrove swamps located within or in
the immediate proximity of the project intervention
area. The project will not affect forests, forest
dependent communities nor will it involve changes
in the management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The Project does not involve the purchase or use of
any significant quantities of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        During the preparation of the ESIA for Component
OP/BP 4.11                               3, no potential impacts on physical cultural resources
(PCR) were identified. Nonetheless an
archaeological During the preparation of the ESIA
for Component 3, no potential impacts on physical
cultural resources (PCR) were identified.
Nonetheless an archaeological monitoring program
has been developed and will be implemented during
the construction phase and the corresponding
safeguard policy has been triggered as a preventive


﻿measure. The ESMP for Components 2 and 3 will
also include a PCR procedure.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no indigenous peoples present that meet
4.10                                     the criteria defined by the policy in the Project area.
According to the 2010 census, less than 1.4% of the
population of Guayaquil identify themselves as
indigenous. This population is not concentrated in
the Project area, nor does it have a collective
attachment to land in that area, which is used for
modem urban residential or industrial purposes.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The water treatment plant will be located on a site of
BP 4.12                                  40.74 hectares which has been the property of 6
different private owners. Expropriation has been
ongoing since 2011, with four property owners
contesting the original valuations in court (decisions
are still pending). One site hosts a radio antenna for a
local radio station along with the house of an
employee of that station (the value of the structure
and need to resettle the occupant was not taken into
account in the original assessment of the site).
Another site belongs to an aquaculture business. The
remaining sites are unoccupied and have not been
used for either economic or residential purposes. The
client is in the process of preparing a Remedial
Resettlement Action Plan explaining the extent to
which the expropriation process conforms with the
World Bank Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, and
any additional measures required to address gaps
identified. An initial assessment by the task team
suggests that the client has offered replacement cost
as compensation for the land to be acquired by using
market comparators as a basis for valuation. In the
case of component 2, no resettlement impacts are
anticipated as the works will be taking place in
residential neighborhoods with little or no
encroachment on the sidewalks, and using trenchless
technology in order to minimize impacts. The
Remedial Resettlement Action Plan will be reviewed
and approved by the Bank and publicly disclosed by
Appraisal. The funds necessary for finalizing the
pending expropriations are held in trust by the Judge
responsible for adjudicating the individual cases and
will be available to be paid to the PAPs once these
cases have been finalized.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The Project will neither support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
investments which rely on services of existing dams.


﻿Projects on International    No           The Project will not finance activities involving the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      use or potential pollution of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The Project will not finance activities in disputed
BP 7.60                                   areas as defined in the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 22-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The client is in the process of finalizing the Remedial Resettlement Action Plan which should be
completed by January 15 and disclosed before Project Appraisal.
The final version of the ESIA for Component 3 and the ESMP for Components 2 and 3 should be
completed by January 15 and disclosed before Project Appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Patricia Lopez Martinez
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                  Date: 09-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (PMGR)                  Date: 10-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


