                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC8815

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Nepal                             Project ID:      P146344
                            Project Name:       Nepal: Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency (P146344)
                            Task Team           Jie Tang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           29-May-2014                       Estimated        23-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      SASDE                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other Renewable Energy (70%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (15%),
                                                Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (15%)
                            Theme(s):           Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     83.00                       Total Bank Financing:          80.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               3.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     80.00
                              Total                                                                           83.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objectives are to: (i) increase grid power supply through
                           installation of solar power generation facility; and (ii) support NEA to prepare actions for financial
                           performance improvement through distribution system loss reduction and financial restructuring.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project consists of two components: (a) Grid-connected Solar Farm Development, and
                         (b) Distribution System Planning and Loss Reduction. The total cost estimated for the proposed
                         project is US$83 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Grid-connected Solar Farm Development (US$50 million): This component will support design,
                         construction, commissioning, and operation and maintenance (O&M) of a grid connected 20 MW
                         solar farm (without having electricity storage facility) nearby Kathmandu valley to supply electricity
                         directly to NEA’s distribution network. It will include supply, installation, and commissioning of
                         solar power generation equipment and associated 11kV medium voltage (MV) line connecting to the
                         existing substations. Land owned by NEA has been selected for the solar farm and no private land
                         will be involved. NEA has conducted initial load flow and system stability studies, fault level
                         analysis, connection concept design, facility protection design, optimal site selection, environmental
                         and social impact assessments, and bid documents preparation. Technical assistance will be provided
                         to NEA to finalize these technical studies and the bidding document for design, supply, installation
                         and commissioning of the solar farm. O&M services for 5 years from the date of commission,
                         including supply of spare parts, preparation of an O&M manual and training of NEA’s engineers will
                         also be included. An Owner’s Engineer (or individual consultants) will be hired by NEA to assist in
                         construction supervision, acceptance test, commissioning, and reviewing the O&M Manuals.

                         Distribution System Planning and Loss Reduction (US$33 million): This component will support:
                         (a) preparing the Distribution Master Plan (DMP); (b) preparing the Distribution Loss Reduction
                         Master Plan (DLRMP); (c) preparation and implementation of pilot loss reduction projects in
                         selected distribution areas of NEA; and (d) capacity building for distribution system planning at both
                         NEA’s distribution center and corporate levels. The component will help redress the high system
                         losses in the country and enhancing NEA’s capacity in distribution system planning and
                         management.

                         Following recommendations of the DLRMP, investment for system loss reduction will be piloted in
                         two selected distribution areas of the NEA, which may include: (i) replacing conductors of
                         distribution feeders or build new distributions lines to reduce line losses; (ii) adding or replacing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         distribution transformers to maintain voltage levels and reduce transformer losses; and (iii) adding
                         capacitor banks to compensate reactive power to manage voltage levels.

                         The capacity building programs may include: (i) provision of instruments and proven software and
                         training for distribution system loss identification and reduction planning; and (ii) development of a
                         Geographic Information System (GIS) database with information/data of locations and details
                         regarding the NEA’s existing generation, transmission, and distribution facilities (including
                         specifications); grid connected customers (households, industries, commercials, institutional
                         customers, etc.); potential customers in grid-covered areas; potential demands in not grid-covered
                         areas; among others, for distribution system planning. The GIS database is critical for on- and off-
                         grid rural electrification planning, loss reduction planning, and distribution system and customer
                         management.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This component is to construct a grid-connected 20MW solar farm (without having electricity
                         storage facility) in the Kathmandu valley. The solar farms will be built on identified unused land
                         owned by NEA.

                         The grid connected solar project involves little civil works, such as leveling of ground, construction
                           of control buildings, and installation of solar panels and electro-mechanical equipment. A joint field
                           visit of the Bank and NEA teams identified sites for solar farms from unused land owned by NEA,
                           mostly at existing power plants and close to substations of NEA. Potential environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           risks identified initially are listed below. These risks and impacts will be further assessed and
                           mitigation measures will be incorporated during the project preparation.

                           The environmental and social impacts would not be significant and are mostly restricted to the
                           project area and its immediate surroundings. There will be no land acquisition and no impacts on the
                           present land use, including natural habitats. Social screening however will be carried out in the
                           project sites to identify any adverse social impact and presence of indigenous community. A
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and /or Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) will be
                           prepared as appropriate. The project construction will generate noise, dust, and exhaust gases and
                           small quantities of construction waste, solid waste, and sewage. However, these impacts will not be
                           significant as the construction and erection works involves a small number of construction workers.
                           Potential environmental concerns of the solar farms during the operational stage are related to
                           management wastes that may contain glasses, chips and photo-voltaic cells. These impacts will be
                           mitigated/offset by good housekeeping measures, a site specific environment management plan
                           (EMP) that contains clearly defined, contractually agreed mitigation measures and implementation
                           arrangements, linked with construction supervisions are deemed sufficient to address these
                           construction related impacts.

                           A large scale solar farm could be a visual obstacle, and thus this aspect will be considered during
                           preparation of detailed site plan of the solar farm. The candidate project site are neither in visual
                           impact sensitive areas nor overlooked by significantly populated area.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The primary responsibility of coordinating work related to social and environmental safeguards will
                           rest with the Project assisted by the Environment and Social Studies Department (ESSD). The project
                           will establish an Environmental and Social Management Unit (ESMU). The ESMU will be staffed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with specialized social and environment professionals either hired from the marked or on deputation
                           from ESSD. ESSD is staffed with subject specialists and ESSD also hire specialist from market as
                           per the need. ESSD, though, operates from central office; it establishes field offices at every project
                           site headed by senior professional as part of ESMU. ESMU model will be followed as this
                           functioned well for the effective implementation of safeguard measures. ESSD over a period of time
                           has acquired skill and experience to address social and environmental safeguard issues. Currently
                           ESSD is working on several Bank funded projects. An Environmental and Social Specialist each
                           from ESSD will be posted at the project site to monitor the implementation of environmental and
                           social safeguards mitigation measures. The specialists will be responsible for generating monthly
                           progress reports. The midterm and end term evaluation of implementation process will be carried out
                           by an independent agency.

                           Proposed Rehabilitation project will support orientation/training to the site staff.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           Potential concerns during operation include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         management wastes (e.g. glass, chips, photo-
                                                                                                                                 voltaic cells from solar farm), as well as visual
                                                                                                                                 intrusion. Each activity will be subjected to
                                                                                                                                 environmental screening and site specific EMP
                                                                                                                                 prepared to address the relevant environmental
                                                                                                                                 impacts.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       TBD                           This policy remains TBD until the site locations
                                                                                                                                 of the project (including the transmission line)
                                                                                                                                 are more fully determined.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                TBD                           This policy remains TBD until the site locations
                                                                                                                                 of the project (including the transmission line)
                                                                                                                                 are more fully determined.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            Project does not envisage use of pesticide.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           This policy remains TBD until the site locations
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         of the project (including the transmission line)
                                                                                                                                 are more fully determined.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           Social screening will be carried out to identify
                                                                                                                                 presence of indigenous community around the
                                                                                                                                 project site.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The project will use NEA premises and social
                                 4.12                                                                                            screening will be carried out for each of the
                                                                                                                                 identified sites. The sites however are not
                                                                                                                                 known yet. If screening identifies loss of
                                                                                                                                 livelihood or displacement due to project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 intervention, social impact assessment willbe
                                                                                                                                 carried out and resettlement plan will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Project neither support dam construction, nor
                                                                                                                                 depend on existing dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Project does not affect quantity and quality of
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international water body.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Project is not located in disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The solar farms will be built on the unused land of NEA so there will be no fresh land acquisition.
                                      The project, however, will conduct social screening in all the identified candidate sites to (i)
                                      identify encroachment and other encumbrances; (ii) identify presence of indigenous community




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             around the project area. In case of encroachment, resettlement plan will be prepared and
                             implemented and incase of presence of indigenous community an IPP will be prepared.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Jie Tang

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 20-May-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)                               Date: 22-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
