                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8150
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:    P145162
                            Project Name:      Pasture and Livestock Management Improvement Project (P145162)
                            Task Team          Peter Goodman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Apr-2014                       Estimated   22-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSAR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Animal production (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (35%), Rural policies and institutions (30%),
                                              Other environment and natural resources management ( 35%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:                  15.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                15.00
                              Total                                                                                      15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve community based pasture and livestock
                           management in the Project area
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1 Community Based Pasture Management (US$11.44million): Component 1 will involve

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         three sub components: (i) Community Pasture Management and Investment Sub Component; (ii)
                         Strengthening State Pasture Institutions Sub Component; and (iii) Leskhoz Pasture Management Sub
                         Component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •         Community Pasture Management and Investment Sub Component. This will finance:
                         (i)       Legal Support including: Legal training and awareness on pasture legislation for pasture
                         user unions (PUU) and rural communities.
                         (ii) Pasture Boundary Demarcation and Inventorization including: (a) Completion of external pasture
                         boundary demarcation for each PUU, which legally defines the areas under their management; (b)
                         Digitization of registered external boundaries of each PUU, as a basis for community pasture
                         management planning; (c) State level registration of external pasture boundaries previously
                         demarcated and (d) Demarcation of internal pasture areas of each pasture use union as a basis for
                         community pasture management planning, determining land tax and resolving land use disputes.
                         (iii) Strengthening Community Pasture Governance including: (a) Governance assessments, training
                         and advice for PUUs to promote inclusive and transparent decision making; (b) Conflict resolution
                         and training for PUUs; and (c) Capacity building for rayon associations of PUUs on management of
                         inter-pasture committee issues an representation of their member pasture user unions.
                         (iv) Strengthening Community Based Pasture Management including: (a) Community Pasture
                         Management Plan training and advice – this will be achieved by training a pool of local pasture
                         advisors who will be contracted by PUUs pasture committees to assist them with community pasture
                         management planning – the plans cover all aspects of pasture management from pasture quality
                         monitoring, to setting stocking rates, to investments in pasture improvement; (b) Community based
                         mapping; (iv) Public awareness to raise members awareness of the costs and benefits of pasture
                         investments and the basis for setting pasture fees; (c) PUU performance assessments to inform PUU
                         of their strengths and weaknesses and their progress in meeting the objectives of community based
                         pasture management.
                         (v) Pasture, feeding and livestock improvement grants: including grants for PUUs (averaging
                         approximately US$ US$46,500 / PUU) mainly for pasture road, bridge and watering point
                         improvement microprojects (sub projects) but also for stock handling, fodder and feed improvement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and storage or other investments defined in the Project Operating Manual; and repeat training for
                         pasture committees by ARIS in micro-project management.

                         •        Strengthening State Pasture Institutions Sub Component. This will finance:
                         (i)      Pasture Department Capacity Building including: (a) Capacity building for the Pasture
                         Department in national level oversight of pasture management to ensure adherence to the Pasture
                         Law; (b) Employment of young interns to work with the Pasture Department; and (c) Public
                         awareness on pasture reforms.
                         (ii) Rayon Department for Agrarian Development Capacity Building including minor investment in
                         office facilities and inclusion in pasture management related training and public awareness to assist
                         them to support Pasture Department work at rayon level.
                         (iii) Livestock and Pasture Research Institute (LPRI) Capacity Building including: Implementation of
                         selected pasture research projects.

                         •      Leskhoz Pasture Management Sub Component. This will finance development of legal and
                         administrative arrangements for leskhoz pasture management and initial pasture management
                         improvement activities in only 5 locations including:
                         (i)    Legal and administrative support including: (a) Supporting the State Agency for
                         Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) to respond to legal queries and draft legislative
                         amendments on management of leskhoz pastures; (b) Advice to SAEPF and the Pasture Department

                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                         to develop a model administrative agreement between pasture committees and leskhoz that would
                         allow pasture user unions to take responsibility for management of leskhoz pastures, building on
                         existing memoranda of understanding between the two organizations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) An inventory of land use, preparation of land use plans and identification of environmentally
                         sensitive areas, in the five pilots to determine which leskhoz areas would be available for grazing and
                         which areas would require environmental risk mitigation measures
                         (ii) Community pasture management plans (including environmental management plans) in 5
                         locations including: Training and advice for PUUs and leskhoz on inclusion of leskhoz pastures into
                         community pasture management plans including a definition of investment requirements for pasture
                         improvement and environmental management aspects of the plan.
                         (iii) Leskhoz pasture improvement grants to 5 pasture user unions for leskhoz pasture improvement
                         and for environmental protection (such as protecting forests from encroachment from livestock) up to
                         an amount of US$10,000/ pilot.

                         Component 2 Community Based Animal Health and Husbandry Services (US$1.8 million):
                         Component 2 will involve two sub components: (i) Community Based Animal Health and Husbandry
                         Services Sub Component; and (ii) Private Veterinarian Development Sub Component

                         •        Community Based Animal Health and Husbandry Planning and Investment Sub Component:
                         This will finance:
                         (i)       Animal health and husbandry grants to PUUs of US$1000 per PUU to contract a private
                         veterinary services to assist withAHH planning and implementation
                         (ii) Supervision of Private Vet Support to AHH Groups and Training AHH Groups
                         (iii) Disease specific specialist advice provided by expert international consultants to oversee the
                         implementation of national disease control strategies in the Project area

                         Private Veterinarian Development Sub Component: This will finance:

                         (i) Private vet training and professional development - further training of private vets on business
Public Disclosure Copy




                         planning, pharmacology, clinical skills, and disease strategies.
                         (ii) Grants to private vets for equipment, cold chain equipment, drugs and medications and a
                         contribution to the cost of vehicle purchase.
                         (iii) Strengthening rayon associations of private vets , including public awareness of the roles of the
                         associations, advice on legal establishment of rayon associations, and technical assistance and
                         training for rayon associations on organization development, operations and financial planning.
                         (iv) Veterinary student incentive program including internships for 48 young vets to work with
                         public and private vets and scholarships to study veterinary medicine for 4 students.
                         (iv)Veterinary chamber capacity building, to support the Chamber in developing tools for
                         assessment, accreditation and professional development of vets and will fund operating costs of the
                         Chamber for a period of two years.

                         •       Component 3 Project Management (US$1.76million): This will finance overall project
                         management, including coordination of activities by the project partners, work planning, budgeting
                         and financial management, procurement activities, project monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         All community level activities under the Project will be in all aiyl okmotu in Chui Oblast and Talas
                         Oblast in the north of the Kyrgyz Republic .


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Asli Gurkan (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cesar Niculescu (ECSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered because of potential
                         BP 4.01                                      environmental risks which might be associated
                                                                      with the implementation of activities under
                                                                      Component 1 (community and leskhoz pasture
                                                                      investments for pasture roads, bridge and
                                                                      watering point improvement, stock handling,
                                                                      fodder and feed improvement and storage) and
                                                                      Component 2 (providing grants to PUUs to
                                                                      implement animal health and husbandry (AHH)
                                                                      plans including by contracting private vets, and
                                                                      grants to equip private vets). Also, the TA for the
                                                                      preparation of community pasture management
                                                                      plans should be designed in such a way that it
                                                                      ensures environmental compliance of the plans
                                                                      and of the activities which will be triggered by the
                                                                      introduction of those plans. In order to address the
                                                                      impacts which might be caused by the above
                                                                      activities and to identify appropriate mitigation
                                                                      measures as well as implementation arrangements
                                                                      and institutional responsibilities, an
                                                                      Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                      (ESMP) should be prepared for the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes           This policy is triggered because: (i) while many
                                                                      of the low elevation pastures near settlements are
                                                                      heavily grazed and ecologically modified, some
                                                                      (particularly the midland high elevation pastures)
                                                                      are likely to be in natural or only minimally
                                                                      altered condition, representing important
                                                                      grassland and meadow habitats in themselves;
                                                                      and (ii) some of the pastures (particularly the
                                                                      leskhoz pastures) are in the close vicinity of
                                                                      natural forests or national reserves. The ESMP
                                                                      should specify that the Project will include an
                                                                      assessment of the ecological status, potential
                                                                      ecological sensitivity and biodiversity values of
                                                                      specific pasture areas and indicate appropriate
                                                                      mitigation measures to maintain these values.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes           This policy is triggered because of the possibility
                                                                      that some of the community pasture management



                                                              Page 4 of 9
                                                                        plans could involve weed control activities,
                                                                        possibly including the use of herbicides or
                                                                        pesticides (they are unlikely to include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        insecticides), and the support to private vets could
                                                                        include financing for acaricides. No pest
                                                                        management plan will be required but the ESMP
                                                                        will include an assessment of current pasture
                                                                        weed management and pesticide handling
                                                                        practices and, as appropriate, include measures to
                                                                        improve environmental and health protections in
                                                                        pesticide use and to promote an Integrated Pest
                                                                        Management (IPM) approach. The Project design
                                                                        and ESMP include resources and training for
                                                                        PUUs on IPM and safe handling of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           OP 4.12 is not triggered for the Project because it
                         4.12                                           is a community based natural resource
                                                                        management project: (i) In particular, internal
                                                                        pasture boundary demarcation to be financed
                                                                        under the project does not trigger OP4.12 because
                                                                        it involves definition of boundaries between
                                                                        community managed pasture land and private or
                                                                        state land – it does not involve state acquisition of
                                                                        private land; (ii) Furthermore, proposals for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        boundary demarcation will be prepared by
                                                                        community based organizations (pasture working
                                                                        groups) including PUU representatives. (iii) Most
                                                                        boundary demarcation disputes are expected to be
                                                                        resolved at community level. Where disputes
                                                                        cannot be resolved at community level, the final
                                                                        decision on disputes may be made by the state
                                                                        boundary demarcation commission - in this case
                                                                        the state is acting as the arbitrator of last resort to
                                                                        define the borders of community managed pasture
                                                                        land and no state acquisition of land is involved.

                                                                        With regard to microprojects, in cases where the
                                                                        PUU proposes micro-projects involving
                                                                        temporary or permanent acquisition of private
                                                                        land, the PUU would be required to seek the land
                                                                        owners’ agreement and the terms of land
                                                                        acquisition and the land owner must have the
                                                                        right of refusal. This will be clearly stated in the
                                                                        ARIS framework agreement with each PUU.


                                                                Page 5 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental:
                              •       The Project includes support for small civil works for pasture infrastructure
                              •       New grazing practices may affect pasture species composition and biodiversity
                              •       New grazing practices on pastures close to forests and potential for encroachment on
                              forests
                              •       Inclusion of forest fund (leskhoz) pastures, some of which are close to national reserves
                              •       Potential increased use of pesticides for pasture management and fodder production
                              •       Potential risk from disposal of veterinary medicines

                             Social:

                             •        Internal boundary demarcation may lead to societal disputes
                             •        PUU pasture committees fail to allocate pasture rights more equitably. This is includes the
                             risk of pasture committees not allocating pasture rights more equitably in comparison to the
                             pre-2009 pasture law situation, with former large pasture lessees maintaining their domination of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             pastures, creating social tensions.
                             •        There are still existing unresolved 17 disputed cases and conflicts around external
                             boundaries that cause social tensions between pasture user unions and communities. In addition it
                             leads to lower pasture use fee collection rates as neighboring pasture user unions collect fees from
                             pasture users of other PUUs.
                             •        Lack of defined internal boundaries within each PUU leads to cases when pasture users
                             use pasture land of other users thus causing conflicts and social tensions.
                             •        Elite pasture users (in particular those who were large lessees prior to the pasture law) fail
                             to pay due amounts for pasture tickets creating social tensions.
                             •        Weak representation of the interests of various types of pasture users (grazing/ non
                             grazing/ by farm size/ vulnerable groups/ male / female) in the general assembly and PUU pasture
                             committees leading to decisions which do not properly reflect all pasture users needs.
                             •        Weak accountability of the PUU pasture committee and the general assembly to and
                             awareness of: (i) PUU members; (ii) local government (iii) national government leading to a lack
                             of confidence in pasture committees and creating pressure to abandon the principles of the pasture
                             law.
                             •        In most cases women are represented either in the PUU pasture committee or general
                             assembly, they are not excluded from PUU pasture committees meetings or trainings, and can
                             become actively involved in PUU management and administration if they wish.




                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The long term potential impacts are anticipated to be positive, resulting from clearer accountability
Public Disclosure Copy




                           relationships between the PUU pasture committees and pasture users, clear rules and procedures
                           regarding tickets for pastures, more equitable access to pastures, better pasture and veterinary
                           services for beneficiaries of the project in Chui and Talas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental:

                           The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will include procedures for screening
                           the risks of proposed subprojects (pasture feeding and livestock improvement microprojects) and
                           identifying mitigation measures.
                           •        EMPs for sub projects will include annexes with standard environmental clauses and
                           checklists for works contracts and grant agreements
                           •        ARIS, which is responsible for implementing subprojects including civil works has well
                           established environmental monitoring procedures for subprojects.
                           •        Community based pasture management plans to include environmental status assessment,
                           identification of risks and mitigation measures.
                           •        Provision of advice on IPM in relation to pasture and fodder management.
                           •        Preparation of a limited “positive list” of pesticides which would be eligible for financing
                           for field trials/demonstrations
                           •        EMP will include procedures for handling/disposal of materials associated with the
                           veterinary practice, consistent with the WBG EHS Guidelines and WHO guidelines for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management of medical waste.
                           •        PIU to hire environmental monitoring specialist.

                           Social:
                           •        A social assessment was completed in March 2014, as a basis for the social development
                           aspects to the ESMP.
                           •        Based on the above assessment, the team will design tools for (i) improving governance of
                           pasture committees; (ii) improving membership awareness on pasture committees and (iii) conflict
                           resolution for key areas of conflict identified.
                           •        Guidelines for internal pasture boundary demarcations will be prepared during the project
                           (similar to those prepared under the predecessor project AISP) which will define procedures for (i)
                           public disclosure of internal boundary demarcation proposals by pasture working groups
                           (temporary community level groups responsible for preparation proposals on boundary
                           demarcation); (ii) disputes resolution possibly including the use of rayon, oblast and state pasture
                           boundary demarcation commissions.
                           •        Further assessment (following one existing study) of the extent to which public disclosure
                           and dispute resolution procedures were actually implemented in the field for external boundary
                           demarcation under AISP to inform internal boundary demarcation under PMIP.

                           One of the the Project Implementing Agencies – ARIS – has significant experience working on


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           World Bank safeguards policies. They have implemented the first and second phases of the
                           Village Investment Project (a CDD operation) and have managed five Bank-funded projects.
                            ARIS has laid out in detail Guidelines for Environmental Review of Micro-Projects, which will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           also be used for Project. Each sub-project will be reviewed for environmental and social risks in
                           line with the OP4.01.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders of this project are the Government of Kyrgyz Republic, the Pasture Department,
                           Veterinary Chamber, Pasture Committees, and Pasture Users in Chui and Talas oblasts. All these
                           stakeholders has been consulted and opinions taken into account during project identification and
                           preparation. These stakeholders will be consulted during the preparation of social and governance
                           assessments, as well as throughout project implementation. Social assessment will be disclosed
                           prior to appraisal at info shop and in-country.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 14-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              14-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                             14-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The document disclosed was a environmental and social management plan.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?              NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 NA
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The Project does not require a PMP. A pest management framework is included in the
                         Environmental and Social Management Plan.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                    Page 8 of 9
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Peter Goodman
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (SM)                    Date: 15-Apr-2014




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
