                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6466

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mexico                          Project ID:      P145618
                            Project Name:       MEXICO Sustainable Energy Technologies Development for Climate Change
                                                (P145618)
                            Task Team           Todd M. Johnson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       12-Mar-2014                         Estimated        14-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEG                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Climate change

                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        16.88               Total Bank Financing:             0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                            16.88
                              Total                                                                        16.88
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project's Development Objective is to improve the institutional capacity of advanced clean
                           energy (ACE) technology institutions (both public and private) in Mexico, foster the
                           commercialization of ACE technologies by providing financial incentives to the private sector, and in
                           the process reduce GHG emissions.
                           C. Project Description
                         The objective of the project is to improve the institutional capacity of advanced clean energy (ACE)
                         technology institutions (both public and private) in Mexico, foster the commercialization of ACE
                         technologies by providing financial incentives to the private sector, and in the process reduce GHG
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emissions.

                         Component 1: Regional Needs Assessments (RNA) for ACE technologies and Clean Energy
                         Regional Investment Plans (CERIPs). (Funding: GEF US$5 million; SENER US$90 million)
                         The objective of this component is to: (i) conduct RNAs to assess the capacity of academic and
                         research institutions, private enterprises, and sub-national government entities across Mexico; (ii)
                         prepare CERIPs that will aim to boost institutional capabilities to produce clean energy technologies;
                         and (iii) identify promising initiatives that could be considered for financial support by the ACE or
                         the FSE Fund. Together, these initiatives are designed to assess and improve the capacity and means
                         of public and private stakeholders to identify and commercialize ACE technologies that can lead to
                         reductions in GHG emissions.
                         The RNA will be a highly participatory exercise seeking the input of students, researchers, local
                         government institutions, the private sector, and consumer representatives. An RNA will be prepared
                         for each sub-region of Mexico. For each region, specialized consultants will: (i) survey and map the
                         resources and capacities (human, technical, infrastructure, financial) of Mexican universities,
                         research institutions, and clean energy enterprises; (ii) identify the ACE technology needs of
                         enterprises in strategic sectors; (iii) identify each region’s comparative advantage in S&T sectors and
                         in the clean energy value chain; (iv) review the capacities of sub-national government entities to
                         implement policy and regulation conducive to the dissemination of clean energy technologies; and
                         (v) assess financial, regulatory, and policy barriers.
                         The key output of the needs assessment will be a regional investment plan. Each CERIP will (i)
                         identify the investments and strategic actions (curriculum changes, the creation of new incentives,
                         policy reforms) recommended and agreed to have strong potential over the medium-term to boost
                         human capital in S&T and entrepreneurial (finance, business administration, strategy) disciplines
                         critical to commercialize ACE technologies; (ii) identify ACE investments, advanced research
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities, and other initiatives that could be undertaken by the FSE Fund to reduce GHG emissions;
                         and (iii) create a potential pipeline for the ACE Fund, a grant facility for private enterprises in the
                         ACE sector, described below under Component 2. In order to create the ACE Fund project pipeline,
                         the consultants will compile an exhaustive database and capacity assessment of clean energy
                         enterprises, together with private enterprises with ACE technology needs in other sectors across
                         Mexico. They will also raise awareness about the ACE and the FSE Funds to all stakeholders
                         contacted in the preparation of the RNAs, which will help to ensure broad participation.
                         SENER will seek to leverage its CERIP investment by seeking co-financing from other government
                         stakeholders (local and state governments, other federal agencies of the GoM). The CERIP is
                         intended to bring these entities together towards implementing a coherent strategy that can advance
                         clean energy technology commercialization and ultimately to reduce GHG emissions. Investment in
                         CERIPs will begin during the Project implementation period and continue after the Project closes.
                         Component 2: Grants and technical assistance for private enterprises in the ACE sector. (Funding:
                         GEF US$11.05 million: Private sector enterprises: US$3.23 million).
                         Component 2 will finance grants targeting: (i) proof-of-concept stage of development of ACE
                         technologies for SMEs; and (ii) Collaborative Clean Energy Commercialization grants (CCEC)
                         targeting industry-academia collaboration on advanced ACE R&D. In both cases, the grants will
                         target ACE technologies with strong commercialization potential.
                         Component 2 seeks to fill a void in the current public and private financing landscape for early-stage
                         technology commercialization, and to incentivize industry-academia technology development
                         collaboration through a pilot grant program (the “ACE Fund”). The fund will focus on specific
                         technology areas for development where there is both regional demand and a comparative advantage
                         for Mexico. For example, among the technical areas which are a priority for Mexico are energy
Public Disclosure Copy




                         efficiency, geothermal, wind, and solar energy technologies. Over time, the technology focus will be
                         further narrowed and refined by the results of the analysis carried out in Component 1 and promising
                         ideas will be recommended for participation in the ACE Fund competition.
                         The ACE Fund will be administered by an Investment Committee chaired by SENER and composed
                         of individuals with strong expertise in, among other things, early stage technology
                         commercialization, venture capital, applied research, ACE technologies, and concept-to-market
                         strategy.
                         Proposals to the ACE Fund will be first scanned for eligibility and technical merit. The most
                         promising proposals will be recommended to the Investment Committee. Proposals which are not
                         selected for further consideration will receive a detailed explanation for why they were not selected,
                         and access to information on other funding opportunities they may wish to pursue.
                         Subsequently, Investment Committee members will conduct a detailed review of the short-listed
                         proposals. The Investment Committee’s review will consider, inter alia, the proposal’s technical
                         merits; potential to achieve commercial success, and potential to achieve GHG reductions. A site
                         visit and interview with the applicant(s) will be a critical part of the application process. More
                         detailed selection and eligibility criteria will be established in the Project Operational Manual
                         (POM). The Investment Committee will meet on a quarterly basis to vote on grant awards.
                         Applicants not accepted for a matching grant will receive detailed feedback and may be
                         recommended for TA if the Investment Committee believes this could accelerate ACE technology
                         commercialization. In addition, applicants may receive advice on other resources available in the
                         private and public sector which may be of further assistance.
                         Component 2.1: Technical Assistance (Funding GEF: US$1 million: Private sector enterprises: US
                         $180,000). Winning proposals (and selected short-listed candidates) can receive vouchers for
                         technical assistance (TA) either as a stand-alone award, or as part of their overall grant package.
                         Since the TA demands of the applicants and beneficiaries will be unique, the voucher approach will
                         allow grant beneficiaries to purchase TA that is most relevant to their needs. The Investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Committee will provide guidance to the beneficiary on the types of TA that, in their view, are most
                         relevant. TA may include, inter alia, mentoring, legal advice, preparation of business plans, IP
                         protection and monetization, business and market advice, and access to finance. TA recipients will be
                         required to co-finance 15% of the costs of the TA award.
                         Component 2.2: Matching Grants (Funding: GEF US$10.05 million: private sector enterprises: US
                         $3.05 million). The ACE Fund will also provide matching grants for both proof-of-concept and
                         Collaborative Clean Energy Commercialization (CCEC). The terms, eligibility criteria, maximum
                         grant size, application procedures, monitoring criteria, and other features of both the proof-of-
                         concept and the CCEC grant are included in the POM. Where relevant, the Investment Committee
                         will also look for ways to leverage its investment (co-financing by other private financiers and/or
                         commercial banks, other sectoral funds, or the FSE).
                         Because GEF funds are limited, an important objective of Component 2 is to sustain public support
                         for the ACE Fund after the closure of the Project by finding other sources of resources from the
                         public or private sectors. Positive demonstration effects from the program, combined with active
                         policy dialogue, can help to catalyze public support for the initiative after GEF resources are
                         exhausted.
                         Component 3: Project Management. (Funding: GEF US$0.83 million: SENER US$1.5 million).
                         The Project will utilize the existing World Bank Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within SENER
                         to coordinate and manage the Project. This arrangement is preferred in order to increase overall
                         program efficiency, to minimize start-up delays, and to build on SENER’s existing capabilities
                         related to other World Bank operations in Mexico. The GEF will finance the costs of hiring
                         additional personnel with expertise in financial management, procurement, and project management,
                         as well as operating costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will feature a competitive grant program eligible to qualified Mexican applicants. At this
                         point it is not known where such technology developers and entrepreneurs will be located. The
                         project will provide grants to start-up clean energy technology companies, and the size of grants
                         (varied, but on average less than US$500,000 and no more than $2 million) will limit the physical
                         impacts of the prototype technologies. No sub-projects will be financed that could adversely affect
                         indigenous peoples, natural habitats, physical cultural resources and forests or that could cause
                         involuntary resettlement as per OP 4.12.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         In Mexico, the Environmental and Natural Resources Secretariat (SEMARNAT for its acronym in
                         Spanish), the National Water Commission (CONAGUA), the National Forest Commission
                         (CONAFOR), the Natural Protected Areas Commission (CONANP) and the Federal Environmental
                         Protection Attorney Office (PROFEPA), amongst others, are all federal level institutions that have
                         the responsibility for guaranteeing the adequate application of Mexican law regarding environmental
                         impact and pollution control.

                         Concerning environmental legislation, Mexico has accumulated a great number of laws, regulations
                         and statutes that span every single aspect of environmental management. Amongst these, the General
                         Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection Law is the one that will regulate the expected
                         subprojects to be supported by this project.

                         Since 1986 the General Ecological Equilibrium and Environmental Protection Law has established a
                         mandatory Environmental Impact Assessment for every project, whether privately or publicly
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financed. The procedure is detailed and explained in the Rulebook for such Law concerning
                         Environmental Impact and its correlation with the wide existing regulations, and the guidelines for
                         the development of environmental impact assessment carried out in Mexico, are consistent with
                         World Bank operational directives for Environmental Assessment (Safeguard 4.01).

                         The monitoring of the prerequisites on environmental impacts resolutions are guaranteed by the
                         Federal Environmental Protection Agency (PROFEPA) which depends directly upon the
                         SEMARNAT and enforces the environmental legislation for which it has specialized offices in every
                         state. PROFEPA is a 20 year old organization with a noble and effective entrustment, but with very
                         limited resources for operation.

                         The existing SENER PIU has some capacity to manage social and environmental safeguards issues,
                         as it is currently implementing a large number of infrastructure-intensive Projects in the energy
                         sector, such as solar farms for remote communities, as well as wind farms. Since the proposed
                         Project will not finance infrastructure projects, the Bank will provide training to key personnel at
                         SENER, the PIU, and on the investment committee in the proper application of the safeguards
                         instrument for the proposed Project. Additional environmental and/or social consultants will be hired
                         as needed for the Project who are found to be acceptable to the Bank. Personnel will be required to
                         fulfill the following objectives:
                         •         screen potential subprojects for environmental and social risks and impacts
                           •        ensure that sub-borrowers carry out an environmental and social assessment for their
                           respective subproject
                           •        verify that subprojects comply with local laws and are consistent with Bank Safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Policies

                           The safeguards instrument will be an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                           The ESMF is being prepared by SENER, with support from World Bank environmental and social
                           specialists. In practice, the ESMF will be a screening tool to help key personnel to identify which
                           projects to exclude, and for approved projects with some perceived environmental and or social risks,
                           how to manage them.

                           Social: The Project will not finance any sub-projects that impact the rights of indigenous peoples,
                           including their territorial and intellectual property rights. Sub-projects to be financed will be
                           technologies related to energy efficiency and renewable energy that will not use indigenous
                           intellectual property. Rather, the intellectual property is expected to derive from R&D activities in
                           inter alia, the life sciences, industrial and mechanical engineering, thermodynamics, and geology. In
                           addition, sub-projects will not be financed in the territories of indigenous peoples. As such, the risk
                           that sub-projects financed by the ACE Fund infringe upon the territorial and intellectual property
                           rights of indigenous peoples are expected to be minimal.

                           Moreover, it is not very likely that members of indigenous communities, or cooperative
                           organizations, will seek to benefit from the Project by preparing proposals for the ACE Fund. Sub-
                           projects will be selected for support that produce innovation in the advanced clean energy technology
                           sector. As such, it is highly unlikely that indigenous communities will benefit directly from sub-
                           projects in ways that would merit specific outreach approaches or design adjustments to
                           accommodate the needs of these communities.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The early stage of commercial development and
                           BP 4.01                                               the small scale of the technologies supported are
                                                                                 not expected to result in significant negative
                                                                                 environmental impacts, but minor impacts will
                                                                                 be avoided or minimized with the use of an
                                                                                 ESMF.

                                                                                 It is important to note that since there will be an
                                                                                 exclusion list of subprojects and no category A
                                                                                 subprojects will be supported, the potential
                                                                                 subprojects will fall into either B or C
                                                                                 categories. All sub projects will be subject to
                                                                                 screening by SENER. This screening process
                                                                                 will be supported by an ESMF that will be
                                                                developed by a consultant hired by SENER to
                                                                be applied by proponents when they submit to
                                                                SENER their subprojects for evaluation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                possible funding. This consultant will also train
                                                                SENERs designated personnel in the use and
                                                                follow up of this ESMF.

                                                                This ESMF will determine, if any, the legal,
                                                                environmental and social requirements that may
                                                                apply to the subprojects, and compliance
                                                                actions, if any, that will be mandatory for
                                                                project funding. Additionally the ESMF will
                                                                have a specific section to estimate the scope and
                                                                magnitude of expected environmental and social
                                                                impacts if the subproject is to scale up in the
                                                                future (cradle to grave). The team
                                                                environmental and social specialists will
                                                                supervise the proper application of this ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   The project will not finance any activities that
                                                                impact natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The project will not finance any activities that
                                                                impact forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   No sub-projects that require the purchase or
                                                                significant use of pesticides will be supported.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   No sub-projects that may impact physical
                         BP 4.11                                cultural resources will be supported.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The ESMF will screen out sub-projects that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                infringe upon the rights of indigenous peoples,
                                                                including territorial and intellectual property
                                                                rights. It is highly unlikely that indigenous
                                                                peoples will seek benefits from the Project in
                                                                ways that would merit specific outreach
                                                                approaches or design adjustments to
                                                                accommodate the needs of these communities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   The Project will not finance any activities that
                         4.12                                   will require the involuntary taking of land that
                                                                result in physical displacement, loss of assets or
                                                                access to assets or economic displacement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No   The project will not finance the construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of any dams nor will finance
                                                                activities that rely on the operations of existing
                                                                dams.
                         Projects on International         No   The Project will not finance any activities that
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   impact international waterways as defined under
                                                                the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project will not finance any projects in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF will be reviewed, accepted, and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Todd M. Johnson

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 06-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Marisela Montoliu Munoz (SM)                                                                                         Date: 06-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
