                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA7372
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Gambia, The                      Project ID:    P143650
                            Project Name:     Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P143650)
                            Task Team         Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         29-Jan-2014                      Estimated   25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTHW                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (60%), Other social services (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (25%), Nutrition and food security (35%), Child
                                              health (20%), Population and reproductive health (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       8.70           Total Bank Financing:                3.70
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            3.70
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                         5.00
                              Total                                                                                  8.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           A. Proposed Development Objective




                                                                     Page 1 of 6
                         The development objective of the project is to increase the utilization of community nutrition and
                         primary maternal and child health services in selected regions in the Recipient’s territory.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Description
                         To achieve the expected improvement in health and nutrition outcomes, this project will prioritize
                         selected interventions directly linked to the reduction of maternal and child under-nutrition,
                         morbidity and mortality. Interventions will focus on strengthening community structures and the
                         PHC system to enhance the quality and quantity of services by empowering individual women,
                         communities (including community groups) and front line health workers to improve uptake,
                         participation, ownership, caring practices and accountability for maternal and child health and
                         nutrition. This project will support activities aimed at improving service delivery and utilization as
                         well as knowledge and behaviors to improve maternal and child health and nutrition. Innovative
                         aspects of this project are the combined use of RBF approaches on the demand- and supply-sides and
                         at the community and PHC levels to improve health and nutrition outcomes.

                         The proposed project envisages the following components: (1) facilitating community mobilization
                         for social and behavior change; (2) enhancing delivery of PHC services; and (3) building capacity for
                         service delivery and RBF. As such, components 1 and 2 will apply RBF mechanisms to address
                         demand- and supply-side challenges as well as social and behavioral issues for improving maternal
                         and child health and nutrition outcomes, respectively. Component 3 will strengthen overall
                         management capacity (including monitoring and evaluation) of communities, local government and
                         the health system to effectively engage in results-based management. The roll-out of supply-side and
                         demand interventions will be geographically coordinated to ensure operational costs and subsidy
                         payments are kept within reason.
                         Overall, the project design will look as follows:

                         Component 1: Community mobilization for social and behavior change (IDA US$1.06 million;
                         MDFT-HRI US$1.44 million): This component will focus on community-based promotion of key
Public Disclosure Copy




                         family practices (i.e., the 12 family and community practices that promote child survival, growth and
                         development) and health care seeking behaviors for improved maternal, reproductive and child
                         health and nutrition outcomes. Two different RBF mechanisms, combining demand-and supply-side
                         incentives, will be applied:
                         (i) conditional cash transfer (CCT) to individual women to increase demand for health and nutrition
                         services (e.g., antenatal care, delivery care, post-natal care);
                         (ii) conditional cash transfers to communities and support groups (VDCs and VSGs) to increase
                         demand for health and nutrition services through counseling and behavior change communication
                         (BCC) and timely referrals for life-saving health services (e.g., hygiene, sanitation, counseling on
                         infant and young child feeding, delayed first pregnancy and child spacing, referral of pregnant
                         women and children with danger signs to health centers).

                         CCTs will be provided to women for utilizing selected health and nutrition services. Use of the
                         services will be verified by NaNA using health center records and counter-verified by an
                         Independent Verification Agent (IVA) through sample-based verification. Once the data has been
                         verified, payments will be transferred to women by the health centers where the services were
                         provided.

                         VDCs will sign an RBF contract with the RHT. Payments will be quarterly or six-monthly for
                         achieved performance on predefined indicators. NaNA will verify the achievement of results and


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Community-Based Organizations (CBO) will counter-verify a sample of these results through
                         patient-tracing and client satisfaction surveys. The list of incentivized indicators defined by
                         consensus by NaNA and the MOHSW focus primarily on maternal and child health and nutrition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Achievement of BCC targets will be verified through reliability assessment of routine monitoring
                         report and community surveys. In addition, equity criteria will be developed to reward
                         geographically remote communities with larger payment amounts to compensate for the additional
                         cost of mobilizing communities and delivering services. A remoteness criterion will be outlined in
                         the Project Implementation Manual (PIM).

                         VDCs can use their payments for operating costs, community mobilization and performance-based
                         incentives to individual members of the VSGs. VDCs, which act on behalf of their communities, can
                         use the cash for community development activities to attain results and benefit the wellbeing of
                         women and children, according to the Financing Instructions and General Orders by the Government.
                         Altogether, this component will finance results, training and workshops, communication, material
                         and equipment (i.e., startup costs) and operating costs.

                         Component 2: Delivery of selected primary health care services (IDA US$1.62 million; MDTF-HRI
                         $2.18 million): Through performance-based incentives, this component aims to support the delivery
                         of selected nutrition and health care services at primary, and, where needed, referral health care
                         levels. A fee-for-services mechanism which includes quantity and quality payments for a defined
                         package of maternal and child health and nutrition services will be introduced. Health centers will
                         sign an RBF contract with the MOHSW and receive quarterly payments corresponding to their
                         achieved performance based on quantity of services delivered and the quality of those services.
                         Health centers can use their RBF payments for material and equipment, training, consulting services
                         and operating costs, and staff bonuses. The component support social entrepreneurship and local
                         level planning at health facility and community levels. Health providers will invest RBF payments to
                         improve service delivery, motivate staff and develop innovative ways to attract more patients. As
                         part of the RBF contracting cycle, each health provider will develop a business plan which serves as
                         a guide for future investments and use of RBF payments. An equity bonus may be paid to offset the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         extra costs and hardships experienced by health centers in remote areas to deliver services.

                         Health centers can be Government-run or private (not-for-profit). NaNA will verify the achievement
                         of results and CBOs will counter-verify these on a sample basis and at periodic intervals. While
                         performance-based payments to the health centers are made on selected indicators, RHTs will also
                         monitor the adequate delivery of non-incentivized services. Penalties will be applied in the event of
                         incomplete reports on non-incentivized services or disproportionate bias towards incentivized service
                         delivery.

                         Component 3: Capacity building for service delivery and results-based management (IDA US$1.02
                         million; MDTF-HRI $1.38 million): This component will support the implementing entities to set up
                         and implement RBF (including contracting and management) as well as supervise, monitor, evaluate
                         and document the project through: (i) long-term technical assistance; (ii) in-service and on-the-job
                         training and consulting services; and (iii) operational research and learning activities. It will cover
                         the costs of: supervision through RBF contracts with the RHT, the Health Centers and the MDFTs;
                         the verification and community surveys by the IVA and CBOs; the analysis of the data to monitor
                         trends in coverage of services in project districts; and the strategic communication and dissemination
                         of information to all the stakeholders. In the initial phase, the capacity building will prioritize
                         strategic purchasing of RBF services by the Project Implementation Committee (PIC) at national
                         level and implementation of the RBF operational cycle at community and health facility levels by

                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                           VSGs and health facilities. This component will support essential improvement to the community
                           nutrition and health data management systems to enable the roll-out of the RBF mechanism.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The RBF program will be designed to enable learning through operational research, documentation,
                           knowledge management and process and impact evaluations to capture the effect, efficiency and
                           implementation challenges of the program on health and nutrition outcomes, ownership, cost-
                           effectiveness, and other aspects of community mobilization and health system strengthening. The
                           rolling out of process evaluations will be a key feature of the project to strengthen learning from RBF
                           implementation. Finally, this component will cover the operating costs of the program
                           implementation entities, i.e., NaNA, the MOHSW including the RBF Committee, and the IVA.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in selected Regions of the Recipient’s Territory. The selection of
                           Regions will be based on their relative performance on the key nutrition and health outcomes.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (AFTN2)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The components 1 and 2 will lead to more health care interventions and therefore may generate


                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                           more health care waste. As a result, the project triggers the Environmental Assessment policy
                           OP4.01 due to the potential for increased medical waste generation from health facilities and the
                           need for proper management and disposal of this waste. These indirect consequences will not lead
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to any major impacts as they refer to a gradual increase in ongoing activities and can be contained
                           provided the client pays extra attention to this issue. As a result, the Ministry of Health and Social
                           Welfare reviewed and revised their Health Care Medical Waste Management Plan (HCWMP)
                           which was publicly disclosed in-country on January 30, 2014 and in the Infoshop on January 22,
                           2014. Implementation of the HCWMP was discussed and agreed with the client and will be
                           closely monitored during project supervision.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N.A.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N.A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project design incorporates the safe and responsible handling and disposal of medical waste
                           through several measures. Additionally, the quality verification tool, a supervision checklist that
                           will be administered on a quarterly basis, includes verification of medical waste measures by the
                           facility. Indicators of medical waste handling will therefore be monitored in every facility on a
                           regular basis. Poor performance on the facility quality tool score impacts the level of payment a
                           facility service provider will receive, so facilities that perform better on waste management
                           practices receive higher payments. This will act as an incentive to health workers to adopt good
                           waste management practices and ensure staff adheres to the guidelines. The project management
                           team and the Regional Project Implementation Committee play an important role in monitoring
                           this aspect of the program. The World Bank safeguard specialist on the team will provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                           additional guidance when required.

                           The Health Care Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) has been revised, updated and disclosed.
                           The HCWMP was publicly disclosed in country on January 30, 2014 and in the Infoshop on
                           January 22, 2014. Implementation of the HCWMP was discussed and agreed with the client and
                           will be closely monitored during project supervision.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The institutions to be involved in the implementation of this project, i.e., the Ministry of Health
                           and Social Welfare including the Regional Health Teams and Health Facilities, have the capacity
                           to deal with the rather manageable medical waste expected from the facilities to be supported
                           under the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           17-Dec-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        22-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Gambia, The                                                      30-Jan-2014
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 03-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                            Date: 05-Feb-2014




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
