                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6453
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Tuvalu                             Project ID:    P144573
                            Project Name:     Energy Sector Development Project (P144573)
                            Task Team         Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         18-Nov-2014                        Estimated   26-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEEDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (80%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other rural development (50%), Other urban development (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:           9.10             Total Bank Financing:         7.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              7.00
                              Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                                              2.10
                              Total                                                                                    9.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to enhance the energy security of Tuvalu by reducing its
                           dependence on imported fuel for power generation, and improving the efficiency and sustainability
                           of its electricity system.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The proposed project, which is estimated to cost a total of USD 9.1 million, will include the
                         following three components to be implemented by Tuvalu Electricity Corporation (TEC).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Renewable Energy (RE) Investments. Estimated cost: USD 7.4 million. This
                         component will finance the supply and installation of power generation and grid management
                         equipment to increase the contribution of renewable energy in Tuvalu’s hybrid generation system
                         and to reduce diesel generation. The component will include: (i) solar photovoltaics (PV) (about 925
                         kilowatts peak) and wind-power generation (about 200 kilowatts); (ii) batteries, sufficient for the
                         hybrid system’s storage requirements, including the expected energy spillovers from the New
                         Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (NZMFAT) and United Arab Emirates Pacific
                         Partnership Fund / Masdar solar PV systems that are now being built without storage; (iii) battery
                         inverters and an integrated power-control system to provide grid stability, and other ancillary
                         services; and (iv) a satellite-based communications system on Funafuti and three of the seven outer
                         islands to enable TEC—with the support of external contractors and advisors, as needed—to
                         remotely monitor, control and improve the operation and maintenance of its hybrid power system
                         and enhance customer service. The contract for the implementation of the RE subcomponent will be
                         awarded using the Bank’s standard bidding document for Plant Design, Supply and Installation.
                         Bidders will be responsible for the final design of the RE package—including the optimal
                         combination of solar- and wind-power generation and storage—in order to deliver an RE penetration
                         target of about 40 percent, taking into consideration the cost and technical characteristics of the
                         equipment to be supplied and local conditions.

                         Component 2: Energy Efficiency Investments. Estimated cost: USD 1.2 million. This component will
                         complement Component 1 by reducing energy demand and postponing the need for more costly
                         future investments in generation. It will finance: (i) the supply and installation of prepayment meters
                         for all TEC consumers and smart meters in the largest electricity consumers. Besides helping
                         consumers to more effectively manage their electricity use, this investment would help TEC’s
                         demand-side management planning and considerably improve its revenue collection and overall
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial status; and (ii) the implementation of selected energy-efficiency investments and measures
                         in various large energy-consuming sectors that have been identified in energy audits and consultant
                         studies as having the highest potential for electricity savings.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and Project Management Support. Estimated cost: USD 0.5
                         million. This component will finance training courses and other capacity-building activities for TEC
                         and other Government of Tuvalu staff to strengthen their capability to manage and implement the
                         various activities under the Project. A training needs assessment will identify the specific training
                         and skills-enhancement activities. The component will also finance the establishment of an
                         information system to improve TEC business management control and the conduction of technical
                         and energy studies essential to the implementation of some of the Project’s activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Tuvalu is a group of nine inhabited islands (4 reef islands and 5 coral atolls) with a land area of 26
                         km2 and maximum elevation of 4.5 meters. Few atolls are more than 800 meters wide. Roughly half
                         the country's population of some 9,847 lives on the main atoll, Funafuti. On the outer islands three-
                         quarters of the people still live in traditional-style housing. Transport to the Outer Islands is by boat,
                         and may take a week or more for a round trip from Funafuti. Tuvalu is vulnerable to sea level rise,
                         and currently experiences surface flooding in low areas during king tides.



                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         The communications equipment (very small aperture terminal (VSAT) equipment, including a 1.8 or
                         2.4 meter antenna and ancillary equipment) will be installed in three of the outer islands and on
                         Funafuti. The exact location is not currently known, although locations on Government leased land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be prioritized.

                         While choices for electricity generation sites are severely limited by the general lack of available
                         space, the atoll soil characteristics and low elevation, some potential sites have been preliminarily
                         identified for the solar PV and wind-turbine installations. For solar: (i) distributed sites in urban
                         Fogafale, on Funafuti atoll (e.g., near the sports grounds, TEC’s rooftop, a brackish pond near the
                         hog pens that currently receives untreated effluent from the pigs); and (ii) central PV at the northern
                         tip of Fogafale. For wind: (i) distributed sites in the wharf area, and (ii) the northern tip of Fongafale.
                         The solar arrays will be facing north and tilted at an angle of about 20 degrees, at which position they
                         are expected to receive an average solar insolation of about 5.4 kWh/m2/sec. They would be attached
                         to a floating pontoon if located in the pond. More detailed assessments will be carried out during
                         project implementation to select the final sites.

                         Energy efficiency investments will all occur within Government or commercial buildings or sites in
                         Fogafale. Prepayment meters will be installed in all TEC accounts, including residential homes.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GENDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Screening has identified some activities that may
                         BP 4.01                                                have a social or environmental impact. These
                                                                                include the installation of communications
                                                                                infrastructure, solar and wind electricity
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                generation, energy efficiency investments and
                                                                                batteries. Some of these investments will not be
                                                                                confirmed until project implementation.
                                                                                Therefore an Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                                prepared that will provide assessment methods
                                                                                and other tools to apply to activities as they are
                                                                                identified, and prior to implementation. For
                                                                                activities that have already been identified, Codes
                                                                                of Practice have been annexed to the ESMF. The
                                                                                project will ensure that the TOR for the Technical
                                                                                Assistance under Component 3 include, as
                                                                                relevant, safeguards policies considerations and
                                                                                processes for environmental and social safeguard
                                                                                compliance.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No               The project can be designed to avoid investment
                                                                                in areas that may cause adverse impacts on any
                                                                                natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No               There are no forests in the project area of



                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                                                                             influence.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             No use or procurement of pesticides is required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The project can be designed to avoid activities
                            BP 4.11                                          that could impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                                             A Code of Practice for Cultural Heritage
                                                                             (Physical Cultural Resources) forms part of the
                                                                             ESMF and includes chance-find procedures.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no groups of people present in, or have
                                                                             collective attachment to, the project area that
                                                                             meet the criteria of this policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Improvements to the communications system and
                            4.12                                             solar and wind electricity generation equipment
                                                                             will require installation of some physical
                                                                             infrastructure. Although the expected land
                                                                             requirement is very low, some land is likely to be
                                                                             required. Both voluntary land donations and
                                                                             involuntary land acquisition are provided for in
                                                                             the project safeguard documents. The ESMF
                                                                             provides a detailed process for Voluntary Land
                                                                             Donation including assessment against criteria
                                                                             established by the Voluntary Land Donation
                                                                             Protocol in the Environment & Social Instruments
                                                                             for the Pacific. The project Resettlement Policy
                                                                             Framework (RPF) was prepared and disclosed to
                                                                             the public in Tuvalu on August 16, 2013, and to
                                                                             the general public through the World Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             InfoShop website on August 27, 2013 includes
                                                                             the activities for the Tuvalu Aviation Investment
                                                                             Project. The two projects were integrated into the
                                                                             one RPF due to the small nature of impacts for
                                                                             both projects and the ability to consult and
                                                                             disclose to the community at the same time. The
                                                                             RPF provides the detailed steps to be taken when
                                                                             any land is involuntarily acquired.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             This project does not include any dam structures.

                            Projects on International        No              There are no international waterways within the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                             area of influence of the project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              This project is entirely in Tuvalu and there are no
                            7.60                                             disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                          There are no potentially large scale, significant and / or irreversible impacts. The key issues are:

                          1)        The use of land for infrastructure. Land is scarce, particularly land that is considered
Public Disclosure Copy




                          ‘fertile’ or ‘high’ above sea level. There are many competing demands for land. The ESMF and
                          RPF have detailed procedures for site selection and acquisition. Government leased land will be
                          prioritized. The project design is addressing this issue by ensuring that there are multiple purposes
                          to solar structures (such as animal shelters or recreational facilities) or that low value areas could
                          be used (such as floating solar panels on the brackish ponds that currently receive animal effluent).

                          2)      The source of aggregates for construction. There are no sustainable sources of aggregate
                          on the Funafuti atoll. Recycled or imported aggregates will be used on the project, rather than
                          sand or muds mined from beaches or the lagoon.

                          3)      The production of waste. There is no sanitary landfill no Funafuti, and no safe way to
                          dispose of wastes, particularly hazardous wastes. All waste, including infrastructure and
                          equipment such as batteries at the end of their useful life and light bulbs from the energy
                          efficiency upgrades, will be removed from the country for recycling or safe disposal.

                          4)       Social acceptance of pre-pay meters. Consultation and education of consumers will
                          happen through the project consultations, information supplied in the annual tariff review that
                          TEC delivers to all consumers. Educating consumers on how they can reduce their energy
                          consumption and have access to payment/top-up facilities will help encourage them to make the
                          transition. Consumers will be incentivized by TEC providing the equivalent of one month’s
                          electricity use upfront when they transfer to the new system.

                           5)       Improvements to the communications system and solar and wind electricity generation
                           equipment will require installation of some physical infrastructure which will require some small
                           land parcels. The project Resettlement Framework established detailed requirements for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation of Resettlement Plans where involuntary land acquisition is proposed. The ESMF
                           established detailed procedures to be followed if voluntary land donation is proposed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None, other than as described above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Many locations have been assessed for solar and wind electricity generation. The locations are
                           constrained by the lack of ‘spare’ available land. Some roof top solar options have been ruled out
                           because of lack of suitable structures. One solar site has been ruled out because of the need to
                           connect to the Funafuti grid by cable across the reef.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower will use the existing Project Management Unit (PMU) for the Tuvalu Aviation
                           Infrastructure Investment Project, and the PMU will employ a part time Safeguards Advisor under
                           this project. The Safeguards Advisor will assist the PMU and TEC to meet their responsibilities
                           for safeguards. TEC currently has limited capacity to implement the tasks and processes described
                           in the ESMF, RPF and Gender Action Plan, and therefore will require training in the initial phases
                           of the Project and ongoing support by the World Bank task team (along with the support from the


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Safeguards Advisor).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The key stakeholders are electricity consumers. People potentially affected by infrastructure
                           investments have not been identified because the sites are yet to be selected.
                           A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed to the public in Tuvalu on August
                           16, 2013, and to the general public through the World Bank’s InfoShop website on August 27,
                           2013. A draft ESMF was prepared and provided to the Bank in November 2013.

                           A public consultation workshop was held at the Vaiaku Lagi Hotel, Funafuti, on 6 August 2014.
                           The purpose of the workshop was to present information on the project, the RPF, the ESMF and
                           the Tuvalu Gender and Energy Scoping Study. Participants were staff of Government agencies,
                           donor staff, NGO representatives and business owners / managers. A Public Information Bulletin
                           (PIB) was prepared (in English and Tuvaluan) to describe the ESDP and how the environmental
                           and social issues and impacts would be managed. This PIB was distributed to the attendees.
                           English versions of the draft ESMF and final RPF were made available in hard copy. Feedback
                           was generally supportive, although there were many questions about the prepayment system, the
                           affordability, ensuring convenience of purchasing prepay cards, the benefits of avoiding late
                           payment fees and the incentives for being efficient with energy. Participants were also interested
                           in how land would be selected for infrastructure installation, and recommended that low fertility
                           land should be prioritized.

                           The feedback has been incorporated into project design, the Gender Action Plan and the final
                           ESMF. The RPF did not need updating. The PIB was released to the Tuvalu News (Tuvalu Media
                           Corporation) on August 9, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tuvalu                                                           17-Nov-2014
                           Comments: The draft ESMF was disclosed on August 6, 2014. The final ESMF was disclosed on
                                         November 17, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tuvalu                                                           19-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                        Date: 17-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
