INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC9465
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Peru                       Project ID:   P148499
Project Name:    Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)
Task Team        Kristyna Bishop
Leader:
Estimated        20-Feb-2015                Estimated     30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):        Land administration and management (60%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Other
social development (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.50             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                      5.50
Total                                                             5.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective for the Global Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous
Peoples and Local Communities (Global DGM) is to, "strengthen the role of Indigenous Peoples and
Local Communities (IPLCs) in the FIP and other REDD+ programs at local, national and global
levels by supporting capacity building and demand-driven initiatives of IPLCs."
The Project Development Objective for the Peru DGM is to increase land tenure security and


﻿improve local capacity and governance to manage forest related resources in eight key areas in the
Amazon region.
C. Project Description
The Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) is a special initiative under the FIP. It was established at
the request of IPLCs to support their participation in the FIP and other REDD+ strategies and
programs. The basic design for the DGM was defined by representatives of IPLCs from all eight FIP
pilot countries during a two year participatory design and consultation process. The final version of
a      the basic DGM design and foundational documents such as the Framework Operational Guidelines
(FOG) were endorsed by IPLC representatives in October 2011 and September 2013 respectively.
They are available at: https://www.climateinvestmentfunds.org/cif/sites/climateinvestmentfunds.org/
files/i 3-09-12DGMGuidelines-Final.pdf.
In Peru, a National Steering Committee (NSC) composed of ten representatives from the two
national indigenous organizations, The Interethnic Development Association of the Peruvian
Rainforest (AIDESEP) and the National Amazonian Confederation of Peru (CONAP), was
established during a national meeting held in July 2013. The members of the NSC and its Terms of
Reference (Reglamento) were endorsed by the Government of Peru in a letter to the Bank in
September 2013.
The NSC is the Bank's main counterpart for the preparation of the DGM. Consistent with the focus
and components outlined in the FIP Investment Plan, the NSC has proposed the following
components for the Peru DGM: i) Land titling for native communities (approx. $2M) in Loreto
(except Alto Amazonas which is being financed under the FIP), Ucayali (except Atalaya which is
being financed under the FIP), San Martin (except Tarapoto which is being financed under the FIP),
Junin, Pasco, Amazonas and Madre de Dios; ii) Preparation and implementation of community
forestry management plans (approx. $2M) in Loreto, Ucayali, San Martin, Junin, Pasco, Amazonas,
Ayacucho, Hudnuco y Cusco; and iii) Strengthening governance and increasing local capacity
(approx. $1 M) with a focus on indigenous communities and organizations in the Project area. The
general Project area and these activities were prioritized in the FIP Investment Plan as having the
greatest potential impact for reducing deforestation and the highest possibility for social and
environmental co-benefits. The number and exact locations of the sub-projects will be defined prior
to appraisal and the indigenous federations will be responsible for implementation of the sub-
projects. See Annex 3 for a map of the proposed Project area and location of indigenous communities
that are the potential beneficiaries.
A social assessment for the Project will be completed prior to appraisal. The assessment will follow
general Bank practice and will review key areas relevant to the Project design. The report will
include recommendations for specific measures that will be incorporated into the Project's
Operational Manual (OM) such as: (i) mechanisms to ensure that each sub-project receives broad
community support and was developed during a process of free, prior and informed consultation with
the respective communities; (ii) specific procedures to identify and assess potential adverse impacts
and measures to mitigate such impacts for sub-projects; (iii) activities to promote the participation of
women, youth and the elderly in the land titling process , community forestry management plans,
project implementation and other project related benefits; (iv) mechanisms to ensure that local
populations that are not affiliated with the beneficiary indigenous organizations also enjoy the
broader benefits and have some voice in the processes and actions associated with the Project; and
(v) a mechanism to ensure that there is active participation of key stakeholders in project monitoring
and an accessible grievance redress mechanism (GRM).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


﻿The Project will support land titling, community forestry and governance projects in the Peruvian
Amazon region, a biodiversity hotspot that includes approximately 1,500 Indigenous communities.
Specifically, land titling will be supported for Indigenous communities in Loreto (not including High
Amazon areas supported under the FIP), Ucayali (not including Atalaya supported under the FIP),
San Martin (not including Tarapoto supported under the FIP), Junin, Pasco, Amazonas, y Madre de
Dios. Community forestry projects will be supported in Loreto, Ucali, San Martin, Junin, Pasco,
Amazonas, Ayacucho, Hudnuco and Cusco. Governance activities will be supported for indigenous
communities and organizations from throughout these areas.
The Indigenous communities that will directly benefit from financial support from the Project cover
approximately 30% of the Peruvian Amazon. These communities are organized into federations that
in turn are either represented by a regional organization (for those that are members of AIDESEP) or
by a regional coordinator (for those that are members of CONAP). Within these areas, Indigenous
peoples' land tenure varies widely; some communities lack any legal recognition, some communities
have legal recognition but without title, some communities have titles over a much reduced area and
some communities have title over a substantial portion of the areas they traditionally occupied.
Indigenous peoples living in voluntary isolation are also within the Project area and specific
measures will be adopted to ensure that these populations are protected, remain un-contacted and are
not affected by project activities.
The initial stakeholder assessment has identified several other important actors in the Project area: i)
Ribereiio communities (traditional Amazonian communities that are of indigenous descent but do not
currently self-identify as indigenous); ii) Colonos (people from the Andes that have continuously
migrated to the Amazon since the 60s and 70s looking for agricultural land. They have been
identified in Peru's FIP Investment Plan as one of primary drivers of deforestation in the Amazon);
iii) Regional governments; iv) Regional indigenous federations and organizations; v) Large and small
scale natural resource concession owners; and vi) Small scale artisanal miners and loggers. More
information regarding Project stakeholders and potential impacts will be further defined and analyzed
through the social assessment that is currently underway.
o
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Responsibility for safeguard screening, scoping, impact assessment and mitigation and oversight will
rest with three main counterparts: (i) the NSC that will provide overall governance and leadership for
a       the Peru DGM; (ii) the NEA that will have primary fiduciary and safeguard compliance
responsibility during Project implementation; and (iii) the regional indigenous federations and
organizations that will be implementing the subprojects. Each of these counterparts will receive
capacity building to ensure that they fully understand the principles and range of impacts covered by
the Bank's safeguard policies and their responsibilities regarding compliance. For example, sub-grant
recipients will need to have sufficient understanding of safeguard requirements in order to explain
how they will be addressed in their project proposals. The NEA will need to fully understand the
procedures outlined in the Operations Manual and ESMF and have staff with the adequate capacity
to screen, scope and oversee compliance with safeguard policies throughout the subproject portfolio.
The NSC will need to have sufficient understanding to allow for safeguards issues to be fully
integrated into sub-project approval and NEA oversight.
At this stage in project preparation, the NSC is the Bank's main counterpart for the preparation of the
Peru DGM. A basic training on World Bank safeguards was provided to AIDESEP and CONAP and
their respective regional organizations and coordinators (the potential future sub-grant recipients) in
March 2014. Based on this basic training, the proposed safeguards approach for this Project as
outlined in this ISDS was agreed with them regarding policy triggers and safeguard preparation


﻿work. Further training and mechanisms to ensure safeguard compliance will be carried out once the
NEA is selected and the social assessment has been finalized.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
Dianna M. Pizarro (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
afeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         This project is classified as Category B. Given the
OP/BP 4.01                               scope and scale of projects, it is not expected that
significant and irreversible environmental impacts
and risks will be generated. However, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) needs to be prepared as required by OP/BP
4.01 in order to screen, identify, avoid and mitigate
the potential negative environmental and social
impacts associated with lines of activities to be
supported by the DGM grant. This ESMF will
include environmental and social aspects related to
community forestry in the Peruvian Amazon region
as well as critical natural habitats sustained by these
forests.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          This policy is triggered to ensure that all projects
proposed for DGM financing take into account the
conservation of biodiversity and critical natural
habitats, as well as the numerous environmental and
ecosystem services that natural habitats in the
Q)                                                Peruvian Amazon region provide in the larger
context. The ESMF will address issues related to
natural habitats (e.g. flora and fauna), ecosystem
services (e.g. hydrological services) and potential
impacts of the proposed projects.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         Overall, the sub-projects that will be financed by the
DGM are expected to have significant positive
impacts on forest management in indigenous lands
and territories as the main goal of community
forestry activities is to reduce deforestation and
forest degradation, while contributing to the well-
being of forest-dependent indigenous communities.
However, there might be some environmental, health
and safety impacts and some of the sub-projects may
represent risks to forests. The ESMF will provide
the screening criteria as well as mitigation measures.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         This policy could be triggered depending on the final
scope and nature of the community forestry sub-
projects. Reforestation activities, for instance, could


﻿trigger this policy depending on the methods selected
to manage pests. The ESMF will address general
issues related to pest management in community
forestry projects and will include measures to
mitigate associated environmental impacts on health
and natural habitats.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          This policy could be triggered if activities promote
o       OP/BP 4.11                                 actions in areas containing sites recognized as
physical cultural resources (PCR) or that meet the
criteria outlined in the policy. Though it is not
anticipated that the project will have negative
impacts on any such sites, the existence of any such
sites and the corresponding need to trigger this policy
will be determined once the ESMF is completed. If
triggered, the ESMF will include provisions
regarding how to protect known PCR and how to
address chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the overwhelming
4.10                                       majority of the direct beneficiaries are indigenous
peoples per the criteria of the Policy. The Project is
considered a mainstreamed indigenous Project. A
social assessment is currently underway and a
process of free, prior and informed consultation
leading to broad community support will be required
and documented for each subproject. The social
assessment that is currently underway will include at
a minimum: (i) an analysis of the relevant legal
framework; (ii) a stakeholder analysis; (iii) a scoping
and analysis of the Project's potential impacts and
benefits for the different stakeholder groups; and (iv)
recommendations for measures to enhance benefits,
and avoid or mitigate adverse impacts. The social
assessment will take into special consideration the
issues of gender, youth, populations in voluntary
isolation and the non-indigenous forest dependent
communities.
Based on the results of the social assessment,
specific measures will be incorporated into the
Project's OM such as: (i) mechanisms to ensure that
each subproject includes broad community support
and was developed in free, prior and informed
consultation with the respective communities
(through "life planning" or community decree
processes); (ii) specific procedures to identify and
assess potential adverse impacts and measures to
mitigate such impacts; (iii) activities to foment the
participation of women, youth and the elderly in


﻿project planning, implementation and benefits; (iv)
mechanisms to ensure that local populations that are
not affiliated with the beneficiary indigenous
organizations also enjoy the broader benefits and
have some voice in the processes and actions of the
Project; and (v) a mechanism to ensure at a national
and regional level, there is active participation of key
stakeholders in project monitoring and an accessible
grievance redress mechanism (GRM).
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes           During the first mission to Lima in March, it was
BP 4.12                                     agreed to not trigger this Policy as any subproject
that requires the involuntary taking in land will not
be eligible for Project financing. In addition, the
creation or enforcement of regulations for protected
areas that restrict access will not be financed. During
the preparation mission, the Bank explored all the
potential impacts that would be covered under this
Policy with the National Steering Committee and
Regional representatives and it was agreed that any
subproject with these types of impacts would be
deemed ineligible for Project financing. As a result,
the OM and the ESMF will include: (i) screening
criteria to identify subprojects with potential OP 4.12
impacts; (ii) mechanisms to identify and monitor
subprojects for resettlement impacts; and (iii) Bank
supervision and spot checks.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            This safeguard policy was not triggered because the
project will not support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
investments which rely on existing dams.
Projects on International     No            This safeguard policy was not triggered because the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        project will not support activities which affect
o                                                    international waterways.
&        Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This safeguard policy was not triggered because the
BP 7.60                                     project will not support activities in disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Nov-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Social Assessment will begin in July 2014 and end in September 2014. The appraisal stage
ISDS will be completed in September 2014 in order to include the results of the Social
Assessment. The operational arrangements to ensure that the Project design complies with OP
4.10 will be incorporated into the Operations Manual in Sept-Oct of this year.
IV. APPROVALS
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Task Team Leader: Name: Kristyna Bishop
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                Date: 31-Oct-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/   Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)             Date: 09-Dec-2014
Manager:


