                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1167
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Poland                              Project ID:    P147460
                            Project Name:      ODRA-VISTULA FLOOD MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P147460)
                            Task Team          Guy J. Alaerts,Winston Yu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-Feb-2015                         Estimated   02-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1641.00                  Total Bank Financing:       468.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              81.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   182.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      468.00
                              Council of Europe Development Bank                                                         390.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                     260.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                                195.00
                              POLAND Polish ECOFUND                                                                       65.00
                              Total                                                                                     1560.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objectives are to increase access to flood protection for people living in

                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                         selected areas of the Odra and the Upper Vistula river basins and to strengthen the institutional
                         capacity of the government to mitigate floods more effectively.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will build on the lessons learned in the ongoing Odra River Flood Protection
                         Project. The proposed project would help demonstrate new approaches and support alignment with
                         the EU Water Framework Directive (WFD) and Flood Directive--an area where the government is
                         still struggling. To allow an expedient start the proposed project would focus on the “hot spots” in
                         the basins (i.e., the parts that are documented to be most vulnerable) and the “no regret” measures
                         where technical merits are sufficiently clear that no additional studies at basin-scale or approvals are
                         needed and which are listed in Poland’s Updated Master Plans and/or Flood Risk Managements
                         Plans for the River Basins, as well as in the List of investments eligible for EC funding. The national
                         flood strategy and the EU Flood Directive advocate the integration of passive protection of local
                         relevance (mostly, dike construction) with active measures with regional impacts, such as temporary
                         overflow areas and dry polders that create “space for the river” to allow the river expand when in
                         flood pulse. Such combination is usually cost-effective as well as sustainable. Notably, the (re-)
                         creation of such overflow capacity through wetlands can absorb flood waves and at the same time
                         improve environmental values. The Project will, for example, support the rehabilitation of a large
                         wetland upstream of Szczecin on the Lower Odra.

                         The Project would provide three distinct areas with flood management infrastructure and related
                         measures: (i) the Middle and Lower Odra; (ii) the Nysa-Klodzko valley, a medium-sized sub-basin of
                         the Upper Odra; and (iii) the Upper Vistula. The Project would further strengthen the national flood
                         forecasting and operational capability in southern and western Poland, through more advanced
                         equipment and mathematical simulation models that would be able to inform decision-makers faster
                         and more reliably about the need to evacuate and take precautionary measures. The Components,
                         with their specific sub-objectives are proposed as follows:

                         Component 1: Flood Protection of the Middle and Lower Odra (Base cost €446.21 million). This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component aims to enhance protection against summer floods and winter floods to the cities of
                         Szczecin and Słubice, and to the towns of Gryfino as well as other smaller towns along the river. The
                         activities will include the (re)construction of dikes and other bank protective works (revetments,
                         parapets, etc.), dredging in the Odra river as well as in Canals and harbor of Szczecin, and river
                         training works, i.e., the recalibration and (re)construction of groynes and lateral submerged dams in
                         the river, restoring bends and protect banks. In addition, five bridges need to be raised to facilitate
                         safe passage of the ice-breakers underneath, and navigation and mooring facilities expanded. A key
                         activity concerns the revitalization of the Miendzeodrze wetland upstream of Sczcecin harbor to help
                         accommodate water surges and, at the same time, restore some of the ecological and touristic
                         functions of the habitat. Four PIUs will be engaged in the implementation of the works, of which one
                         (RZGW Wroclaw) has already been involved intensively in the on-going Odra River Flood
                         Protection Project. Selected works (e.g. the Slubice protective works) have already received the
                         Environment and Construction Permits and their detail deigns will be readied to start the tendering
                         procedure in the Fall of 2015.

                         Component 2: Flood Protection of the Nysa-Kłodzko Valley (Base cost €239.37 million). This
                         Component will protect Kłodzko town and other smaller valley towns, as well as the city of Bardo at
                         the outlet of valley. The Component will comprise the construction of four mid-sized Dry polders
                         (“active protection”), dike rehabilitation and new construction, and reconstruction of the river
                         alignments and embankments, as well as of bridges and other structures (“passive protection”), to


                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         allow the temporary retention and safe passage of flood waves accompanied by large amounts of
                         debris. In addition, the works will have significant downstream benefits because the four new Dry
                         polders will increase the buffer capacity in the valley which will cause reduction of the crest of peak
Public Disclosure Copy




                         flows in the downstream two reservoirs, and lower the crest along the downstream Nysa river towns
                         as well as the Wrocław conurbation; the Nysa is the main tributary to the Upper Odra. Selected
                         works, e.g., the Dry polders Boboszow and Roztoki Bystrzycki, have already received the
                         Environment and Construction Permits and their detail deigns will be readied to start the tendering
                         procedure in the Fall of 2015.

                         Component 3: Flood Protection of the Upper Vistula (Base cost €201.98 million). This Component
                         intends to protect the Craców and Nowa Huta conurbation and industrial area, the Sandomierz-
                         Tarnobrzeg industrial and agricultural area, and selected towns on tributaries in the sub-basins of the
                         San and Raba rivers. The works comprise the re-construction and extension of dikes and
                         embankments along the Vistula to replace old unreliable dikes, the bank stabilization and
                         strengthening with rip-rap, revetments, etc., and the construction of Dry polders and overflow areas
                         (along the Serafa tributary, and 1 each in the San tributary and the Raba tributary) to increase
                         upstream water retention, and interventions for river training and to adjust existing weirs and
                         barrages to pass larger floodwaves. Through the Component 4 additional support will be provided for
                         the preparation of main parts of the River Basin Management Plan and the Investment Prioritization
                         Plan for the Upper Vistula, applying the methodologies for integrated water resources management
                         to complex investments with large footprint. Selected works, such as the Sandomierz embankments,
                         have already received the Environment and Construction Permits and their detail deigns will be
                         readied to start the tendering procedure in the Fall of 2015.

                         Component 4: Institutional strengthening and Enhanced Forecasting (Base cost €155.80 million).
                         This Component will selectively support the strengthening of institutional capacity in priority areas:
                         (i) Enhancing the emergency preparedness along the main rivers and their tributaries in South and
                         West Poland by enhancing the forecasting and operational water management capacity, (ii)
                         Strengthening the procedures and capacity to prepare river basin management plans and investment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         prioritization plans that are compliant with the EU Water Framework Directive and Flood Directive,
                         (iii) strengthening the impact monitoring, and (iv) enhance the communication capabilities. The
                         assistance to applying integrated water management and investment scenario analysis for river basin
                         management planning and management and investment prioritization will be focused on the Bobr-
                         Kwisa River (in the Lower Odra), and the Upper Vistula part upstream of Cracow (and including the
                         Cracow passage), the San catchment, the Raba catchment, the Wisloka catchment and the Dunajec
                         catchment—key areas of the basin with a complex hydrology and various investment options to be
                         studied. The impact monitoring will take the form of the development of procedures and guidelines
                         for, and the conduct of, surveys for disaggregated analysis of flood impacts and impacts from flood
                         protection, and of citizen engagement; this capability will enhance the government’s capability to
                         target future investments better and decide on cost-effectiveness. In general, the Project will closely
                         monitor the country’s progress in meeting the requirements under the EU WFD and EU FD and it
                         will support institutional reform steps with studies and dialogue. As part of this, funding will be
                         provided to facilitate peer-to-peer dialogue on integrated water resources management with another
                         appropriate EU Member State that is considered to have successfully transposed the EU acquis. A
                         national communication strategy on floods will be developed.

                         The forecasting capability and the establishment of Operation Centers, will be carried out at the
                         RZGWs of Wroclaw and Cracow, and the IMGW-PIB (Cracow Office). The activities comprise the
                         installation of new-generation telemetric weather stations and modernization of the POLRAD

                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         network, expansion and upgrading of the hydrological stations, incorporation of more performing
                         simulation software, and improvement of flash-flood forecasting. The Operations Centers are control
                         rooms that on one hand will mine forecasting data, simulate likely run-off scenarios and support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         early warning and decision support processes for emergency response; and on the other, operate
                         infrastructure such as weirs, reservoirs and dry polders to manage the containment and release of
                         flood-waves.

                         Component 5: Project management and studies (Base cost €41.44 million). This Component will
                         fund notably the PCU operation and TA teams for the PCU and PIUs operation, office equipment
                         and incremental operati ng costs. The studies will, i.a., cover the preparation of follow-up
                         investments and the development of a project-based communication strategy. The TA teams will be
                         recruited starting in Fall 2015.

                         The Project is categorized as environmental category B due to the fact that it will fund only a small
                         proportion of carefully selected investments described in the ESMF that covers the Odra and Vistula
                         River Basins. The proposed Project comprises a selection of first-priority investments and measures
                         that were selected after many years of basin-wide analysis and studies (that started in year 2000),
                         complemented with detailed case-by-case analysis of each selected item.
                         These proposed flood investments and measures were drawn from, and fully embedded in the policy
                         and regulatory documents that are required under the EU Water Framework Directive (WFD),
                         foremost the River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) that are fully compatible with EU
                         requirements. Between 2007 and 2013 the first “generation” of RBMPs for all basins was prepared,
                         integrating water management and environmental objectives, based on year-long extensive public
                         consultation, and drawing in a century of ground observations. While the 2013 Plans were judged
                         “overall not compliant” with the WFD, they do meet many of the specific WFD criteria and Bank
                         requirements. Because investments in basin management comprise small and large items, the EC’s
                         DG Environment agreed in November 2014 upon the submission of new interim Updated Master
                         Plans that a “List 1” of 2, 100 items are acceptable because these are well manageable and not
                         requiring basin-wide analysis, while another 450 items on “List 2” are deemed complex and having a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         large footprint, requiring full basin-wide analysis through an acceptable RBMP, to be done after
                         2015. More information on current status of planning, policy and regulatory developments in respect
                         to River Basin Management Plans is available on http://www.apgw.kzgw.gov.pl/en/news/-/the-river-
                         basin-management-plans-are-ready-for-public-consultations/newsId/7040b75fe40f73cd5b4
                         db4a31a10e0b4 of the National Water Management Authority (KZGW). The summary status of
                         water bodies within Odra and Vistula River Basins is contained in the ESMF.

                         For the Project, a selection of priority investments and measures was agreed upon on the basis of “list
                         1”. The selection was guided, foremost by the locations that had experienced historical records of
                         devastating nature (“hot spots” that are recognized to be particularly vulnerable to floods, yet where
                         mitigation measures would probably be cost-effective without being environmentally or socially
                         complex), by the desire to work in coherent areas, where it would be possible to build on the lessons
                         learned and the institutions developed under the on-going Odra River Flood Protection Project, and
                         where a generally good level of institutional readiness was confirmed. The basic criteria for selection
                         of investments were: prioritization within the context of the RBMPs and comparison of all possible
                         combinations of investments to identify the least-cost and lowest-impact variants; economic analyses
                         to select cost-effective options including a risk-based approach to investments; creating “room for
                         the river” and flood wave retention capacity upstream, rather than constraining river flow by dikes;
                         integration with environmental values and protection of habitats; management plans based on broad
                         consultation with stakeholders; and sustained financing through fee collection and/or transfers from

                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         the national or regional budgets. The Project scope includes less than one quarter of the long list in
                         “List 1” of the EC. Certain proposed investments in “List 1” were excluded from the Project -
                         notably where they would possibly affect vulnerable areas, habitats and/or riverine forests - including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         some Natura 2000 sites (Poland has declared essentially all its vulnerable habitat areas as protected
                         areas). For such investments, more extensive variant analysis will be required. Beside of regular
                         safeguards analyses, the individual selected works and measures were reviewed through
                         mathematical simulation of water flow and flood routing to ascertain that they do not create
                         incremental negative impacts on downstream or upstream communities, and, where possible, to have
                         or enhance the positive impact. It is important to note that the majority of the investments concern
                         rehabilitation and modernization of already existing structures.

                         An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been adopted as appropriate
                         safeguards instrument for Appraisal, since while the sub-project investments have been identified,
                         these have not been yet designed and prepared. In several cases where the locations are clearly
                         identified and design exists, they were found to be old and outdated, thus requiring further review
                         and confirmation. The site-specific EMPs will be successively prepared during next stages of Project
                         implementation, as soon as the locations and basic design details become fully known and confirmed.

                         It is agreed that the Bank safeguards policies would apply to physical works under components 1, 2
                         and 3 as well as to TA activities under component 4. It is further agreed that all Terms of Reference
                         provided under the Project will be fully compliant with the Bank safeguards policies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will provide three distinct areas with flood management infrastructure and related
                         measures: (i) the Middle and Lower Odra; (ii) the Nysa-Klodzko valley, a medium-sized sub-basin of
                         the Upper Odra; and (iii) the Upper Vistula. The population of the regions in the proximity of the
                         proposed works and measures is estimated to be about 19 million, of which it is estimated that about
                         5% is directly exposed to the floods (or: 950,000), and in total about half is exposed to flood-related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts, physically, economically and/or socially.

                         Component 1 is located on Odra around and approximately 100 km upstream from city of Szczecin
                         and include towns of Slubice and Gryfino, as well as number of other settlements. Component 2 is
                         located within Nysa-Klodzko Valley, and include stretch from Klodzko to Bardo. This component
                         also covers the stretch of Nysa River downstream from Valley along its route and to the point of
                         confluence with Odra River. Component 3 is located in area around city of Cracow, the Sandomierz-
                         Tarnobrzeg industrial and agricultural area, and selected towns on tributaries on its sub-basins of the
                         San and Raba. The civil works in these areas will include rehabilitation of various river training
                         works as well as construction of retention basins and dry polders, dredging, rehabilitation of pumps
                         and other mechanical equipment and reconstruction of bridges. At this point details of the program,
                         including precise number and nature of structures is not fully defined. However, within each
                         component there is a number of priority investments that have already been identified. The areas
                         along Odra are known to be environmentally valuable and a number of protected areas exist. The list
                         and location of these areas are presented in ESMF and are known to the designers, and they are not
                         likely to be seriously at risk of the works and the flood infrastructure. Rehabilitation of the existing
                         and design of new structures will be undertaken in full compliance with EMF and Polish national
                         legislation.

                         Some of the works under consideration would involve the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure in


                                                                      Page 5 of 14
                         mostly government-owned lands located in sparsely populated peri-urban and rural areas (e.g.,
                         rehabilitation of existing dikes and groynes). In these cases the impacts will occur mostly on existing
                         footprint and those related to land acquisition would be limited. However, other interventions under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consideration, such as construction of new structures and dry polders, particularly in the Nysa-
                         Kłodzko Valley and some locations in the Upper Vistula could involve new footprint and more
                         salient impacts that will be identified and addressed through the RAPs.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jorge E. Villegas (GSURR)
                         Nikola Ille (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment         Yes             In order to assess the possible environmental and
                         OP/BP 4.01                                       social impacts of the proposed project and plan to
                                                                          mitigate possible negative environmental impacts of
                                                                          proposed investments, the Borrower has prepared
                                                                          and disclosed an Environmental and Social
                                                                          Management Framework (ESMF) for the Odra and
                                                                          Vistula River Basins. However, the prepared ESMF
                                                                          discusses possible impacts of up to 600 measures that
                                                                          were drawn from, and fully embedded in the policy
                                                                          and regulatory documents that are required under the
                                                                          EU Water Framework Directive (WFD), and the
                                                                          River Basin Management Plans (RBMPs) that are
                                                                          fully compatible with EU requirements. As such, the
                                                                          ESMF is considering a significantly broader impacts
                                                                          and goes beyond the limited invests that will be
                                                                          funded under the Project. For the Project, a selection
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          of priority investments and measures was agreed
                                                                          upon on the basis of “list 1”, which includes
                                                                          investments and locations that had experienced
                                                                          historical records of devastating nature, yet where
                                                                          mitigation measures would be cost-effective without
                                                                          being environmentally or socially complex. Beside
                                                                          the basin-scale ESMF, separate site-specific
                                                                          Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be
                                                                          prepared for all identified investments in due course.
                                                                          At the first instance, the EMPs are being prepared for
                                                                          the investments which will start in 2015 - Protection
                                                                          of the town of Slubice (Comp. 1), Construction of
                                                                          Dry Polders Boboszow and Szalejow Gorny (Comp.
                                                                          2) and Protection of Sandomierz (Comp. 3) – and
                                                                          these are expected to be prepared by September
                                                                          2015.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      Yes             Based on available information, the Project will have
                                                                          significant positive environmental impacts in terms
                                                                          of protecting floodplains and aquatic ecosystems.



                                                                      Page 6 of 14
                                                            At the same time, the main potential threats while
                                                            executing the project-specific types of activities are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            related to change of water regime and consequently
                                                            impact on flora and fauna in the periodically-flooded
                                                            areas, which, if not properly managed, could create
                                                            significant changes to local habitats. However,
                                                            application of selection criteria related to each
                                                            particular investment to be funded under the Project,
                                                            as described above, and exclusion of those that may
                                                            have larger than low or negligible impact will ensure
                                                            that this risk will not materialize.

                                                            The greatest majority of identified activities will be
                                                            undertaken outside the nature protected areas, which
                                                            is particularly true for components 1 and 3. However,
                                                            in some cases the activities will be implemented
                                                            partly or completely within the areas of specific
                                                            nature protected regime - and besides strictly
                                                            applying selection criteria for those activities, a
                                                            special emphasis in EMPs will be paid to reducing
                                                            and mitigating potential negative impacts, which will
                                                            chiefly be felt during the construction phase. The
                                                            activities in nature protected areas will be limited to
                                                            restoration of the existing linear flood defense
                                                            infrastructure and, in small number of cases, to local
                                                            dredging aiming to restore the natural flow of water.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            The Project will also finance construction of several
                                                            overflow areas - dry polders. Since the specific
                                                            locations of these are presently being finalized, the
                                                            Project will, beside ensuring application of selection
                                                            criteria again during the feasibility design stage
                                                            require for each of the polders to be carefully
                                                            evaluated in both positioning, sizing and impacts, to
                                                            ensure that possible adverse effects are minimized
                                                            and adequately mitigated. Overflow areas and/or
                                                            polders with main or major negative impacts will be
                                                            assigned to other funding in the future after
                                                            appropriate further studies.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        No       The policy is not triggered as the Project will not
                                                            fund any activities related to forest management and/
                                                            or exploitation. The impact on riverine forests is
                                                            covered in ESMF as part of the compliance with
                                                            OP4.01 and under OP 4.04.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   No       N/A




                                                        Page 7 of 14
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes       Although the physical cultural resources are not
                         OP/BP 4.11                               expected to be encountered on river training works in
                                                                  floodplains, near and within the cities of Cracow,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  Sandomierz and Slubice the works will be carried out
                                                                  near the protected cultural heritage buildings.
                                                                  Additionally, rehabilitation of embankments in these
                                                                  and other cities will likely result in chance finds.
                                                                  Appropriate provisions for archeology investigation
                                                                  and rescue works near these buildings, and for
                                                                  chance finds have been included in ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No        The policy is not triggered.
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes       The project’s key potential adverse social impacts
                         BP 4.12                                  relate to land acquisition that could lead to physical
                                                                  and economic displacement. Some of the works
                                                                  involve rehabilitation of existing infrastructure (e.g.,
                                                                  rehabilitation of existing dikes and groynes) will
                                                                  have limited adverse social impacts. Other
                                                                  interventions under consideration, such as
                                                                  construction of new structures and dry polders,
                                                                  particularly in the Nysa-Kłodzka Valley and some
                                                                  locations in the Upper Vistula, would require land
                                                                  acquisition involving economic displacement (e.g.,
                                                                  from agricultural lands) and resettlement of rural
                                                                  households. Accordingly, the Borrower has prepared
                                                                  a Land Acquisition & Resettlement Policy
                                                                  Framework (LA&RPF) for the whole project. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  LA&RPF is based on Polish regulations, the WB’s
                                                                  policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and
                                                                  lessons learned from the Odra Flood Protection
                                                                  Project. The LA&RPF was disclosed locally for
                                                                  consultation with relevant stakeholders. For those
                                                                  sub-projects that are defined and are expected to be
                                                                  built during the first 12 month of project
                                                                  implementation, and for which land acquisition is
                                                                  required, the Client will prepare and disclose site-
                                                                  specific Land Acquisition & Resettlement Action
                                                                  Plans (LA&RAPs) following the parameters defined
                                                                  in the LA&RPF and in line with Polish regulations
                                                                  and WB’s OP 4.12.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      Yes       Although the final selection of polders to be
                                                                  rehabilitated or executed has not been made for all
                                                                  Components, it is known that some of the polders
                                                                  will include construction of dams and weirs. Further,
                                                                  it is likely that at least 2 of the polders-reservoirs in
                                                                  the Nysa-Klodzko Valley (e.g., Roztoki Bystrzycki



                                                              Page 8 of 14
                                                               and Boboszow) in Component 2, (and, potentially,
                                                               Dobczyce (in Component 3 -- TBC) will include
                                                               dams/embankments higher than 15 meters and with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               capacity over 5 million cubic meters. Due to this
                                                               fact, the Project Coordination Unit retained the
                                                               independent panel of dam experts that already exists
                                                               on the Bank funded Odra River Basin Management
                                                               Project, and expands its Terms of Reference
                                                               accordingly. The Panel of Experts have already
                                                               started review of feasibility studies (where existing),
                                                               conceptual designs and other available
                                                               documentation. The Panel will be retained and will
                                                               continue working on the Project during its duration.
                                                               Design of all polders to be funded under the Project
                                                               will be prepared in full compliance with the Safety of
                                                               Dams policy.
                         Projects on International   Yes       About 160km of the Odra’s 854km of total length is
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  the so-called Border Odra (a sparsely populated part
                                                               of the Lower Odra) which is shared by Poland and
                                                               Germany. The Odra river basin measures
                                                               122,000km2, of which 90% lies on Polish territory,
                                                               and 5% each on German and Czech territory. The
                                                               Vistula river is quite different. It lies for about 95%
                                                               inside Polish territory and the riparian countries
                                                               Slovakia, Ukraine and Byelorus comprise only minor
                                                               portions of the upper watersheds of certain
                                                               tributaries; thus there are no downstream
                                                               externalities. Based on LEG recommendation, all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               riparian countries to the Odra and Vistula rivers were
                                                               notified. A Polish-German Government Commission
                                                               for Cross-Border Cooperation is active at Ministerial
                                                               level, with involvement of, on the Polish side the
                                                               Vojevodes, and on the German side, the Länder
                                                               representatives. In parallel, the trilateral Odra River
                                                               Commission addresses the technical aspects of the
                                                               river issues of common interest. The Odra
                                                               Commission has agreed on the technical
                                                               specifications of flood protection along the Border
                                                               Odra. For the project’s purposes, the Polish
                                                               government issued in September 2014 a Notification
                                                               to the riparians to inform them of the project. By
                                                               January 31, 2015, the stated deadline for responses,
                                                               Germany, Czech Republic, Byelorus and Ukraine
                                                               have not submitted objections, while Slovakia sent a
                                                               letter supporting the project but requesting
                                                               information sharing in case there would be works on
                                                               the upper part of the Dunajec (however, the Project is



                                                           Page 9 of 14
                                                                             not planning to be active in that sub-basin).
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The theoretical range of potential impacts of Project-funded activities is large and depends upon
                              the nature of any particular works, their localization and/or presence of protected areas in their
                              vicinity. However, the most significant impacts of works, if not executed within due care, relate to
                              change of water regime and hydrologic parameters, and/or change of water quality as a result of
                              use of various materials and chemicals. The works could also have impact on the surrounding
                              protected areas, including flora and fauna. Some negative impact could also be felt in ground-
                              water quality, although on a localized scale. The expected environmental impacts could be related
                              to handling of construction material, construction waste, and the health and safety of workers and
                              general population that need to be close to the construction area.

                              However, during the Project preparation it has been agreed that the Project-funded activities will
                              comprise only of part of those investments as listed on “List 1” in the Updated Master-Plan, as
                              approved by EC’s DG Environment (see above) - that have low negative impact, neutral or
                              positive impact. The Project-funded investments will be further selected based on several selection
                              criteria, among other: (i) creating “room for the river” and floodwave retention capacity upstream,
                              rather than constraining river flow by dikes; (ii) investments that can ensure integration with
                              environmental values and protection of habitats; (iii) ones that are part of the management plans
                              based on broad consultation with stakeholders. The specific investments, although belonging to
                              “List 1”, were excluded from the Project financing if they would possibly affect vulnerable areas,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              habitats and/or riverine forests - including some Natura 2000 sites.

                              Mitigation of potentially negative impacts related to Project-funded activities will be undertaken
                              by (i) strict compliance with the national legislation in area of health, safety and environmental
                              protection; (ii) strict enforcement of all conditions contained in the water, construction and
                              environmental permits – that will be issued by the relevant national authorities; (iii) compliance
                              with the Bank policies as defined in the Project-related documents, including ESMF, RPF and
                              legal agreements; (iv) design and implementation of site/contract-specific EMPs, in line with the
                              Bank OPs and national legislation.

                              Provided that mitigation of potential negative impacts is undertaken as described above, it is
                              estimated that the Project will have neutral to positive overall impact and will contribute to
                              restoration of favorable environmental conditions, particularly in areas subject to restoration of the
                              flood plains and bank stabilization/dredging.

                              No large, significant or potentially irreversible environmental impacts have been identified, nor are
                              they expected during the execution of the Project related civil work activities.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                        Page 10 of 14
                          Potential long-term impacts could relate to change of land use in case of construction of dry
                          polders and possible resettlement activities. However, these are expected to be of a rather small-
                          scale if mitigated and managed by applying the Bank and national safeguards policies. On the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          other side, the positive impacts of the Project will lead to reduced flood risk for over 950 thousand
                          people that are currently under a direct risk.

                           Environmental and social mitigation measures and safeguard reviews have been put into place to
                           minimize any other adverse impacts from the Project-related activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Current situation in the Odra and Vistula River Basins and the Project area has been analyzed as a
                           part of ESMF, and a number of alternatives considered for each of the Project components. These
                           alternatives included options from “no activities” to “soft”/biological activities only to “hard
                           construction activities” and mixture of “soft” and “hard” measures. While in the urban areas, due
                           to lack of space available, there were very few options than to raise and strengthen the existing
                           infrastructure, in other areas application of dredging, widening of the river bed, rehabilitation of
                           groynes, construction of dry polders and other measures were also recommended to be applied on
                           case-by-case basis. The final decisions will be made bearing in mind multi-functional criteria, that
                           included, among others, the following parameters applied to water probability of 1% (flood level 1
                           in 100 years): Reduction of value of potential losses within the reach; Reduction of risk for people
                           within the reach; Area of land impacted; Value/number of protected public structures; Impact on
                           protected areas - national parks, natural reserves, Natura 2000 sites; Impact on national and
                           regional ecological corridors; Capital expenditures.

                           Selection of the Project-funded activities/infrastructure, as explained above, and application of
                           further criteria to investments contained within the “List 1” will ensure that potential adverse
                           impacts are already low or negligible. Application of the guidance notes as described in ESMF and
                           subsequent design and implementation of environmental management and mitigation plans in each
Public Disclosure Copy




                           particular case will provide further minimization and/or avoidance of adverse environmental
                           impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Adequate environmental and social assessment and management activities will be implemented by
                           the Borrower. Poland has a robust national framework on environmental and social management
                           and additionally there is a good track record from the previous Odra Project in relation to the
                           commitment and capacity of the Borrower to implement the required environmental and social
                           measures in line with local requirements and the WB safeguards. The Project will build on already
                           existing capacity of the Odra River Basin Project, and a number of experienced staff currently
                           working on it will be gradually transferred to Odra/Vistula Project – including experienced
                           environmental and social staff. During the first year of Project implementation the additional
                           training will be provided by the Bank for PIU and consultant’s staff to further increase their
                           capacity, although most of the capacity building is expected to be undertaken by local “on-the-job”
                           training and mentoring by Borrower’s staff already experienced in application of Bank safeguards
                           policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Framework level instruments (ESMF and RPF) have been disclosed for consultation with


                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                           relevant stakeholders at the national and regional levels, including relevant NGOs. The sub-project
                           level instruments such as EMPs and RAPs will be disclosed locally and directly affected people
                           will be consulted.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Feb-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        11-Feb-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Poland                                                             09-Feb-2015
                           Comments: The EMF has been posted on the Info boards of the World Bank Office as well as on
                                         websites of the Ministry of Environment and PCU.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        12-Dec-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Feb-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Poland                                                             13-Feb-2015
                           Comments: The Polish version of the LA&RPF was posted on the Info boards of the World Bank
                                         Office as well as on websites of the Ministry of Environment and PCU.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          property?

                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Guy J. Alaerts,Winston Yu
                            Approved By


                                                                       Page 13 of 14
                         Regional Safeguards   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)           Date: 18-Feb-2015
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/     Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)   Date: 18-Feb-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 14 of 14
