                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC5833

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:       P127869
                            Project Name:      YinXi Railway (P127869)
                            Task Team          Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Jun-2014                      Estimated         25-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Railways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     9231.00               Total Bank Financing:             200.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    9031.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Total                                                                       9231.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to improve direct rail connectivity for passengers and
                           businesses located along the corridor between Yinchuan in Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region and
                           Xi’an in Shaanxi Province, through Gansu Province.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will support the construction of a new double-track electrified railway line and
                           related railway stations for providing both passenger and freight services. The new line will form an
                         important link in the railway network serving Ningxia, Gansu and Shaanxi Provinces and China’s
                         western region. It is part of the rapid rail network under the MTLRN plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A project pre-feasibility study has been carried out which includes a review of various alternatives
                         for the type of line and for alignments. The description is based on the pre-feasibility study. The
                         overall alignment seeks to connect areas of higher population density (about 19 million people along
                         the corridor) and those offering good economic development potential. The current recommended
                         alignment was chosen to avoid areas with poor geology, environmentally and culturally sensitive
                         locations, water bodies, wetlands, natural reserves, wild life and wild plant areas. Measures are
                         planned to protect the ecological environment and ensure soil and water conservation, in order to
                         control the water and soil loss, along with land restoration. The currently recommended alignment
                         seeks to minimize the need for cultivated land acquisition, the impact on built-up areas and the need
                         for resettlement.

                         The proposed railway will provide a direct link from Yinchuan to Xi’an, and serve the Wuzhong area
                         in Ningxia, the Qingyang area in Gansu and the Xianyang area in Shaanxi. The line will include 29
                         stations (with 21 handling passengers), spaced on average every 27 km allowing for good
                         accessibility along the entire line for people and goods. The total distance from Yinchuan to Xi’an
                         (for passengers) and Xinfengzhen (freight terminal east of Xi’an) is estimated as 609 km and 650 km
                         respectively. The line will comprise :

                         a.      534 km of double track between Yinchuan and Qian County, mostly new construction except
                         for duplication of existing lines between Yinchuan South and Yongning (30 km) and Ning County
                         South to Yadian station (6 km); this will carry both passenger as well as freight trains.
                         b.      92 km of double track and 16 km of single track between Qian County and Hezhai stations to
                         be used by freight trains.

                         The line will be designed with a maximum speed of 160 kph for locomotive hauled passenger trains
                         and 200 kph for EMU trains. The maximum speed for freight trains would be 120 kph. It will be built
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for an axle load of 23 tons, with clearances suitable for single stack container trains. At least three
                         spurs connecting to coal mines are proposed at Tianshuibao, Huanxian and Hesheng.

                         The line will have 232 bridges with a cumulative length of about 191 km and 29 tunnels with a
                         cumulative length of 101 km; about 45 percent of the railway will thus be on bridges or in tunnels, a
                         level consistent with recently supported World Bank projects. The longest tunnel (Yongshouliang) is
                         expected to be 18.9 km long, while the longest bridge, between Dulicun and Hezhai on the freight
                         track, will be 10.5 km long. Some of the above parameters may change during the Feasibility Study
                         and Preliminary Engineering for the project.

                         The project cost is estimated to be RMB 57 billion (US$ 9.2 billion) at an average of about RMB
                         88.8 million (US$14.3 million) per main line kilometer, a relatively high cost for a mixed-use line
                         due to the mountainous terrain. Construction is expected to commence in early 2015 with a
                         construction period of about 66 months. Like the last five China Railways projects, the Bank loan is
                         expected to finance goods and equipment, probably consisting of signalling, electrification, bridge
                         beams, concrete sleepers and track fittings. In addition the project may finance technical assistance
                         components.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The proposed Yinchuan – Xi’an railway line will pass through Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region,
                           Gansu and Shaanxi Province in the central region of China. The railway line will traverse a variety of
                           terrains consisting of Yellow River alluvial plain, semi-desert areas, loess gully region, loess plateau
Public Disclosure Copy




                           area and Wei River terrace area. The topography of the project area is mostly semi-desert and loess
                           plateau area, which is prone to soil erosion, especially for loess gully region. The arid climate in the
                           region also makes the surface vegetation restoration and reclamation very difficult once disturbed.
                           Therefore, soil erosion and slope stability will warrant special attention. The line will have about 45
                           percent bridges and tunnels, to significantly reduce its footprint and disturbance of land surface.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed project is the 18th Bank-funded railway project. It underlined the long lasting
                           cooperation between Ministry of Railway (now as China Railway Corporation, CRC) and the Bank
                           since 1984. Previous experience indicates sustained commitment from CRC on the Bank's
                           safeguards policies and a satisfactory track-record on implementation. CRC has developed good
                           environmental and social safeguards capacity within its regime to implement, supervise and monitor
                           both the environmental and social safeguards for railway construction projects. The Project
                           Preparation Group (PG) has extensive experience of environmental and social safeguards following
                           domestic procedures and requirements.. CRC will work with the PG to prepare safeguards
                           instruments that are aligned with World Bank policies. CRC will engage independent social and
                           environmental monitoring consultant to monitor the implementation of safeguards instruments.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Songling Yao (EASCS)
                           Peishen Wang (EASCS)
                           Ning Yang (EASCS)
                           Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The proposed project is a new construction of a
                           BP 4.01                                               railway line, which is a Category A project due
                                                                                 to its scale of the civil works and potential
                                                                                 environmental and social impact. Full
                                                                                 Environmental Impact Assessment and
                                                                                 Environmental Management Plan will be
                                                                                 developed.

                                                                                 Based on preliminary information available in
                                                                                 pre-feasibility study and field visit, the key
                                                                                 environmental safeguards concerns for EIA/
                                                                                 EMP preparation include the following:
                                                                                 -        Alternative Analysis. The EIA report
                                                                                 will include a dedicated chapter for alternative
                                                                                 analysis. It will address the various alternative
                                                                                 alignments options that have been studied
                                                                                 during pre-feasibility and latterly feasibility
                                                                                 study stages, including the “no-project? scenario
                         analysis. Comprehensive comparison from
                         environmental, social, technical and economic
                         perspective will be conducted and documented
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the EIA report, and full justification of the
                         final selection be provided.
                         -        Physical cultural resources. The EIA
                         will document the screening process of the
                         cultural resources survey which will include
                         literature search, consultation with local cultural
                         resources authorities, field survey and
                         consultation with local communities. A physical
                         cultural resources and paleontological
                         investigation will be conducted during EIA
                         preparation by professional (licensed)
                         archeological institute, whose findings and
                         protection measures (if applicable) will be
                         incorporated into the EIA and EMP, and
                         reflected in PAD-stage ISDS. Special attention
                         will also be given to those buildings or physical
                         resources that are not officially designated as
                         protected cultural resources, but still present
                         special historical values from social, cultural or
                         religious perspective to local communities.
                         These, if identified, will be treated as cultural
                         resources as well according to the Bank policies
                         and warrant adequate consultation and
                         mitigation measures.
                         -        Soil erosion. The topography of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project area is mostly semi-desert and loess
                         plateau area, which is prone to soil erosion,
                         especially for loess gully region. The arid
                         climate in the region also makes the surface
                         vegetation restoration and reclamation very
                         difficult once disturbed. Therefore, soil erosion
                         including slope stability will be a major
                         environmental issue for the project. A dedicated
                         Soil Erosion Control Plan will be developed as
                         part of the EIA and EMP.
                         -        Nature reserve. Though the current
                         alignment avoids all other environmental
                         sensitive sites identified, it will traverse through
                         the Cuipingshan Mountain Nature Reserve via a
                         19km tunnel. According to current plan, the
                         tunnel entrance is located inside (at the edge) of
                         the nature reserve boundary, while the exit
                         portal is outside the reserve boundary. Special
                         assessment of impact on the nature reserve
                         needs to be conducted for flora and fauna, and
                         necessary mitigation measures or compensation
                         measures to be developed in the EMP. Adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultation with reserve management authority
                         will be conducted, and approval from relevant
                         authority must be secured.
                         -        Cumulative impacts. The proposed
                         railway is expected to significantly contribute to
                         the resources industry development in Qingyang
                         area, especially coal mines, thus have potential
                         indirect environmental impacts to the region. A
                         number of other transport improvements are
                         also expected. Such indirect cumulative impacts
                         will be addressed in the EIA report. It is noted
                         that Plan EIAs (or SEA) have been developed
                         and approved by Ministry of Environmental
                         Protection/local EPBs for the oil field and coal
                         mine development plans in the region. The EIA
                         will summarize these SEA, the plans (when
                         available) for other transport project leading to
                         greater cumulative impacts, cumulative impacts
                         and land use plan impacts around stations where
                         such plan are available, and make
                         recommendations to cover indirect impacts
                         through actions at a project level.

                         -         Social impact. The EIA report will pay
                         adequate attention on social impacts . These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include local road traffic disturbance and safety;
                         construction nuisance (dust, noise, waste etc.);
                         social disturbance of influx of construction
                         labors in terms of cultural impact, social
                         stability, STD/HIV/AIDS concerns; impact on
                         community livelihood such as irrigation facility,
                         access to farmland or grazing areas; ; vulnerable
                         people’s access to the railway and station
                         facilities; community severance impact etc. The
                         key findings and measures from Resettlement
                         Action Plan and Social Assessment reports will
                         also be summarized and included as an integral
                         part of the social impact assessment.
                         -         Other construction and operation related
                         issues. These include access roads, borrow/
                         disposal sites, beam casting and mixing plants,
                         camp management, dust, waste management,
                         water and groundwater impact, noise and
                         vibration, electro-magnetic radiation impact,
                         resettlement sites and resettlement activities and
                         ancillary facilities etc.
                         -        Public consultation and information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disclosure. At least two rounds of public
                         consultation are required as per Bank’s
                         Operational Policy 4.01 Environmental
                         Assessment, i.e. (1) early stage of EA
                         preparation; (2) when draft EIA is available.
                         The consultation will be conducted in a
                         meaningful way, i.e. both formal and informal
                         meetings and interviews with the target groups,
                         information dissemination campaigns through
                         fliers, posters, and radio announcements; and
                         questionnaire survey. The EIA will summarizes
                         for each round: (i) the dates and venues of
                         consultation events; (ii) the organizations or
                         stakeholder groups consulted; (iii) the main
                         comments provided, particularly regarding the
                         perceived adequacy of mitigation and
                         monitoring measures; (iv) how the comments
                         and recommendations were or were not taken
                         into account in finalizing project designs. Once
                         the draft EIA is available, the full report will be
                         disclosed to the public (e.g. through websites of
                         local government) with announcement in local
                         media. The draft EA documents will be
                         submitted to the Bank for InfoShop disclosure
                         prior to project appraisal mission.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Environmental Management Plan
                         (EMP). A stand-alone EMP will to be
                         developed. The EMP will serve as a key
                         instrument to guide the implementation of
                         mitigation measures during project
                         implementation, i.e. an implementation manual
                         for the project owner, contractors and
                         supervision engineers, as well as for the Bank
                         supervision mission. It is agreed that a set of
                         standard Environmental Code of Practice
                         (ECOP) for railway construction be developed
                         as part of the EMP based on lessons and good
                         practices from previous railway projects. This
                         includes construction worker management
                         plans, control of run-offs, control of blasting
                         new natural reserves. The ECOP can be readily
                         incorporated into bidding documents and used
                         as environmental manual for railway
                         construction. Independent environmental
                                                                 monitoring will take place during construction.

                                                                 The final EA documents expected to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 submitted to the Bank include the following, in
                                                                 both Chinese and English:
                                                                   -      A full Environmental Impact
                                                                 Assessment Report;
                                                                   -      A stand-alone Environmental
                                                                 Management Plan;
                                                                   -      An EA Executive Summary.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   This policy is triggered. An ecological and
                                                                 biodiversity study will be conducted along the
                                                                 alignment, with special focus on the
                                                                 Cuipingshan Mountain Nature Reserve where
                                                                 the alignment will traverse through by a 18.9km
                                                                 tunnel. Assessment of impact on the nature
                                                                 reserve will be conducted for flora and fauna,
                                                                 and necessary mitigation measures will be
                                                                 developed in EMP. Adequate consultation will
                                                                 be conducted with reserve management
                                                                 authority.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project alignment traverse an area with little
                                                                 forestry resources, and is unlikely to cause
                                                                 significant impact on forest. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not involve procurement of
                                                                 pesticide or have any impact on pest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 management practice. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.
                                                                 Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The currently proposed alignment avoids all
                         BP 4.11                                 known cultural resources. A detailed physical
                                                                 cultural and paleontological resources
                                                                 investigation will be conducted by professional
                                                                 (licensed) archeological institute during EIA
                                                                 preparation, which will further confirm the
                                                                 existence/no existence of any cultural resources
                                                                 within the scope of impact of the project.
                                                                 Regardless findings of such investigation,
                                                                 chance-find procedures will be included in the
                                                                 EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   Yin-Xi Railway Project is to go through
                                                                 Ningxia, Gansu and Shaanxi provinces in
                                                                 Western China. The identification mission was
                                                                 informed that a few Hui minority villages/
                                                                 communities are located in the area. Generally
                                                                the Hui people are seen as a religious minority,
                                                                not indigenous peoples under the terms of Bank
                                                                4.10. Due to currently limited information on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                ethnic minority people issue, a decision on
                                                                whether or not the policy of OP 4.10 is triggered
                                                                will be taken only based on the coming Social
                                                                Assessment, which also cover other social
                                                                issues as defined in the OP 4.01. Consultations
                                                                will be taken in these minority communities
                                                                during the social assessment process and their
                                                                opinions and needs will be collected and
                                                                reflected in the project design.

                                                                An EMDPF and/or an EMDP will be prepared if
                                                                IP was clearly found in the project areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Land acquisition and construction, especially in
                         4.12                                   the station areas will cause resettlement with
                                                                thousands of people affected by roughly a few
                                                                thousand hectares of land to be acquired
                                                                permanently or temporarily. This includes land
                                                                acquisition along the alignment and house
                                                                demolition mainly in urban areas of Yinchuan
                                                                and Qingyang cities, for the construction of
                                                                train stations and rail facilities. The project is to
                                                                pass through a relatively low populated area,
                                                                and to be built with 45 percent of tunnels and
                                                                bridges so as to minimize land acquisition and
                                                                resettlement. A RAP with a RPF will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                prepared to address the resettlement and other
                                                                related social issues. It will include a review of
                                                                affected people’s livelihood restoration, benefit
                                                                sharing with local people in terms of
                                                                employment during construction and operation,
                                                                preferential measures for poor and vulnerable
                                                                people, access to train stations for poor
                                                                communities/people. The RAP will clarify
                                                                distinctions between communal land state land
                                                                and other in a manner that recognizes livelihood
                                                                related usage for each type.

                                                                Resettlement will need to be carefully managed
                                                                with proper institutional arrangements. From
                                                                early beginning of project preparation, the CRC
                                                                should ensure a resettlement office for each
                                                                section in each province and each railway
                                                                company which will take charge of this project
                                                                railway construction, with dedicated staff in
                                                                                                                                 each office under the leadership of an appointed
                                                                                                                                 director. Further, an experienced external social
                                                                                                                                 consultant/team should be selected to prepare a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 RAP/SA and ensure a good quality work and
                                                                                                                                 technical support to the social dimensions of the
                                                                                                                                 project design, with support from the First
                                                                                                                                 Railway Survey & Design Institute (FSDI). This
                                                                                                                                 institute is independent from CRC, and is also
                                                                                                                                 designated to provide technical support to CRC
                                                                                                                                 on safeguards aspects given its advantages of
                                                                                                                                 local networks, survey technology equipment
                                                                                                                                 and access to data in the railway system. But
                                                                                                                                 this institute has little experience in preparing
                                                                                                                                 RAP and SA in the past. The FSDI needs
                                                                                                                                 intensive training and hands-on coaching during
                                                                                                                                 the process of social assessment and safeguards
                                                                                                                                 management. Training on social assessment and
                                                                                                                                 safeguards has been planned for the FSDI
                                                                                                                                 before it starts working together with the
                                                                                                                                 consulting team in preparing for social
                                                                                                                                 safeguards instruments.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                                                                                                                 involve any dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            involve any international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The policy is not triggered. The project will not
                                 7.60                                                                                            involve any disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Aug-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      EA, EMP, EA Summary, SA: Start in October 2013, draft by December 2013, Final by April 15,
                                      2014
                                      RAP, RPF: Start in October 2013, draft by December 2013, Final by April 15, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 20-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 21-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
