                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6390

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Brazil                           Project ID:      P129342
                            Project Name:       Piaui: Pillars of Growth and Social Inclusion Project (P129342)
                            Task Team           Michael Drabble
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           22-Oct-2015                      Estimated        21-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GED04                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Secondary education (50%), Health (20%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                                forestry sector (10%), General public administration secto r (10%), General
                                                water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Education for all (50%), Health system performance (20%), Public expenditure,
                                                financial management and procurement (10%), Rural poli cies and institutions
                                                (10%), Rural services and infrastructure (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:   1133.69                      Total Bank Financing:        120.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     1013.69
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         120.00
                              Total                                                                        1133.69
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           17.      The objective of the Project is to support the Government of Piaui to achieve: (i) equitable,
                           inclusive and environmentally sustainable human and economic development in Piauí; and, (ii) more
                           efficient and effective public management in these areas.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed Sector-wide Approach (SWAp) Investment Loan in the amount of US$120 million to
                         the GoPi would finance Eligible Expenditures Programs (EEPs) under Component 1 and Technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assistance under Component 2 aimed at reducing vulnerability, particularly in rural areas, by making
                         economic and human development more equitable, inclusive and environmentally sustainable. EEPs
                         and Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs) would target interventions and results in the following
                         areas: (i) income generation for poor rural farmers; (ii) access, improvement of learning environment
                         and retention in secondary education; (iii) access to healthcare for patients with chronic non
                         communicable diseases; and (iv) strengthening of public sector management. An integrated
                         approach among the aforementioned areas is crucial to foster social and productive inclusion in Piauí
                         and, consequently, to break the poverty cycle. This SWAp complements and leverages policy and
                         institutional reforms enacted by the GoPi in the “Piauí Green Growth and Inclusion DPL” (“DPL 1”)
                         completed in 2012 and the “Piauí Inclusive Production for Sustainable Development DPL” (“DPL
                         2”) under preparation. The development objectives and sectors included in the proposed SWAp and
                         DPL 2 are fully aligned.

                         Component 1: Equitable, inclusive and environmentally sustainable human and economic
                         development (estimated total cost: US$400 million; Bank: US$105 million)

                         Sub-component 1.1 Promote Income Generation for Poor Rural Farmers. Provision of support for the
                         implementation of EEPs and DLIs, including programs to: (i) strengthen integrated land tenure
                         regularization and land administration by (1) expanding the regularization (i.e.: joined land tenure
                         and environmental regularization) of agricultural land occupation in the state for both small, medium
                         and large farmers as well as Quilombola communities; and (2) hiring contractual services for geo-
                         referencing, cartographic and titling processes; (ii) promote employment and income growth in rural
                         areas by (1) assisting small rural producers to engage more effectively in profitable businesses
                         through PROGERE ; and (2) fostering a transition towards more sustainable agricultural practices;
                         and (iii) improve access to water resources by (1) financing the State Registry of Water Users
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (CEARH); (2) identifying the distribution of water resources within the state and at different periods
                         versus demand; and (3) designing and implementing action plans to minimize the effects of draught,
                         which particularly impact the most vulnerable groups.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Improve Access, Learning Environment and Retention in SE. Provision of
                         support for the implementation of EEPs and DLIs, including programs to: (i) increase access in SE
                         through support for the expansion of: 1.) SE distance learning program and 2.) STE; and, (ii)
                         improve learning environment and retention in SE through support for the expansion of: 1.) full-time
                         school; 2.) learning acceleration programs in both FE and SE; and; 3.) the “Live More” scholarship
                         (“Bolsa Mais Viver”).

                         Sub-Component 1.3: Expand access to healthcare for patients with chronic diseases. Provision of
                         support for the implementation of EEPs, including programs to: (i) expand targeted screening to
                         identify patients with chronic diseases; (ii) develop and implement State protocols for diagnosis and
                         treatment chronic diseases; (iii) train FHT in the management of patients with chronic diseases; (iv)
                         develop and deliver technical support to primary health care teams in the management and
                         prevention of chronic diseases; (v) create five specialized centers focusing on exams and
                         consultations for patients with chronic diseases; and, (vi) provide incentives for performance to PHC
                         teams.
                           Component 2: More efficient and effective public management through cross-sectoral technical
                           assistance (Estimated total cost: US$15 million; Bank: US$15 million). This component would
                           provide technical assistance to strengthen the Borrower’s public management in the following areas:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (i) integrated land tenure regularization and land administration to increase capacity for supervision
                           and management of information and data regarding land; (ii) support for studies and evaluations, as
                           well as the implementation of monitoring systems and support for program beneficiaries to guarantee
                           employment and income growth in rural areas; (iii) support for studies and establishment of
                           monitoring systems to improve educational evaluation and policy-based evidence in the choice of
                           key interventions implemented under Sub-component 1.2. One suggested activity would be the
                           carrying out of diagnostic and preparation of a state teacher professional development plan to palliate
                           for the lack of a teacher policy and training plan for teachers, school directors and education
                           administrators; (iv) support for health diagnoses and evaluation and administration focused on
                           neglected and chronic non communicable diseases; and, (v) support for establishment of monitoring
                           systems and capacity building for improved public sector management, including financial
                           management and procurement (See Annex 5 for a tentative list of proposed activities for each sector).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           State of Piaui

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The State of Piauí has some experience with Bank Safeguards and has at its disposal the gamut of
                           state environmental agencies to analyze, monitor and supervise environmental safeguards. During
                           preparation the institutional capacity of state agencies involved with the implementation of the
                           different components of the project will be assessed by the team, which will also define a strategy for
                           strengthening the institutional capacity of these agencies as necessary.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ernesto Sanchez-Triana (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Given the nature and scale of proposed investments
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      in environmental regularization, and in the health and
                                                                           education sectors, which should not have significant
                                                                           adverse impacts, a category B is proposed.
                                                                           As currently described, the proposed project consists
                                                                           of an eligible expenditures program in the health,
                                                                           education, water management and rural development
                                                                           sectors that involve strengthening sector procedures
                                                                           and carrying out civil works in urban (adaptation of
                                                                           existing buildings or construction of new annexes)
                                                                           and rural (improve access to water resources)
                                                                           settings and technical assistance for strengthening
                                                                           public sector management in education, health, rural
                                                                           development, public administration and environment
                         (including mainly the regularization of rural land
                         tenure and water resource management). Based on
                         the preliminary assessments undertaken, the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is expected to have an overall positive impact on the
                         environment as it seeks to promote the
                         environmental compliance of rural properties
                         through the regularization of land tenure and
                         implementation of the rural environmental cadaster,
                         which requires landholders to define legal reserves
                         and permanent protection areas within rural
                         properties, recuperating vegetative cover when
                         necessary. Additionally, rural development activities
                         will support the dissemination of production
                         practices that are more environmentally sustainable.

                         The proposed project will also carry out civil works
                         to adapt, expand or build school buildings and health
                         units. The impact of these works should be small and
                         localized, in urban areas, and are expected to occur
                         in land currently owned and occupied by the state
                         education and health agencies.

                         As no specific project activities are expected to be
                         defined prior to appraisal, the client will prepare an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) which will include environmental and social
                         assessments, to provide guidance on potential issues
                         that could arise during Project implementation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mitigation measures, including measures to be taken
                         to avoid potential social conflict that could result
                         from project activities. The ESMF will include an
                         Environmental Management Plan and an
                         Environmental Manual for Civil Works, which
                         should also include guidance on proper building
                         adaptations for adequate management of health care
                         waste. The ESMF will also include an analysis of
                         any economic or social impact project activities,
                         including Technical Assistance, might have on
                         vulnerable groups, traditional communities or poor
                         rural communities.

                         The ESMF will include:
                         i)       the existing environmental and social
                         baseline conditions of the affected areas and
                         communities (area of influence within state of Piaui)
                         - with special focus on the assessment of the three
                         social groups that are claiming for recognition of
                                                             their indigenous identity;
                                                             ii)      the full range of the proposed infrastructure
                                                             interventions and agriculture production activities;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             iii)     screening criteria for sub-projects;
                                                             iv)      environmental management tools and
                                                             mitigation measures applicable during the design,
                                                             construction and operations of the sub-projects;
                                                             v)       an assessment of the potential social and
                                                             environmental impacts of the activities proposed
                                                             under the technical assistance component in order to
                                                             define the approach needed for considering
                                                             environmental and social aspects within the TA;
                                                             vi)      screening provisions for evaluating potential
                                                             impacts on Physical Cultural Resources;
                                                             vii) the criteria for documenting voluntary land
                                                             donations;
                                                             viii)    the results of the public consultation on the
                                                             draft of the ESMF;
                                                             ix)      the legal provisions;
                                                             x)       the institutional provisions – which is a
                                                             particularly important issue, given the limited
                                                             institutional capacity for environmental and social
                                                             management and the multiplicity of sectors involved.
                                                             The ESMF report will be submitted to the Bank by
                                                             appraisal stage, and will be disclosed and
                                                             disseminated through the executing agencies
                                                             websites, and will be consulted with key
                                                             stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Activities under the proposed Project should lead to
                                                             positive impacts on natural habitats, such as their
                                                             conservation and recovery in private properties.
                                                             Thus, OP 4.04 is triggered and the ESMF will
                                                             include criteria and necessary management measures
                                                             to insure that potential impacts on sensitive
                                                             biodiversity areas are taken into account, and
                                                             guidance on the proper restoration of sensitive
                                                             habitats, including for the improvement or
                                                             preservation of natural corridors when possible
                                                             The screening mechanisms of the ESMF will ensure
                                                             that activities that result in significant conversion or
                                                             degradation of critical habitats would not be eligible
                                                             and that those that do have some impact will have
                                                             mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This Project will contribute to the conservation of the
                                                             Cerrado and Caatinga biomes in private landholdings
                                                             in the state of Piauí. It is expected to have a positive
                                                             impact by promoting the restoration and/or
                                                             preservation of Legal Reserves and Permanent
                                                             Preservation Areas in private lands, in compliance
                                                             with the Brazilian Forest Code, through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             implementation of the rural environmental cadaster.
                                                             The ESMF to be prepared should consider the
                                                             requirements of OB/BP 4.36 whenever restoration
                                                             activities are being planned, and include guidance on
                                                             the use of native species. It will also include
                                                             screening mechanisms to ensure that investments
                                                             under the Technical Assistance Component which
                                                             could affect the management of forests or the welfare
                                                             of forest dependent communities are properly
                                                             assessed and that measures are included to ensure
                                                             that any adverse impacts (if any) on forests be
                                                             mitigated.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   Although the project will not support the purchase or
                                                             increased use of pesticides and other agricultural
                                                             chemicals as defined under the policy, some of the
                                                             agricultural activities selected for project support
                                                             may make use of these substances. The ESMF under
                                                             preparation will assess these activities and define
                                                             guidance for reducing the environmental impact of
                                                             using pesticides according to the principles of OP
                                                             4.09, and suggest incentive measures for the
                                                             adoption of Integrated Pest Management and agro-
                                                             ecological practices where possible. It will also
                                                             assess whether pesticides will be used as part of
                                                             construction works and make the corresponding
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             recommendations according to OP 4.09.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   Some sub-project investments could result in
                         OP/BP 4.11                          physical interventions with small earthworks
                                                             involving the chance finds of physical cultural
                                                             resources. The ESMF will include specific screening
                                                             provisions for evaluating potential impacts on
                                                             cultural resources and will provide specific guidance
                                                             on the chance finds procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No    The team has conducted a screening exercise and
                         4.10                                determined that in the project areas there are no
                                                             indigenous peoples that fulfill the four characteristics
                                                             of the Indigenous Peoples Operational Policy. In the
                                                             state of Piauí, there are three social groups that are
                                                             currently claiming recognition of their Indigenous
                                                             Identities (they call themselves as the Cariri, the
                                                             Codó-Cabeludo and the Tabajara peoples), but they
                                                             do not fulfill the four criteria set by OP 4.10 to
                                                             identify Indigenous peoples: (a) despite of the self-
                                                             identification as members of a distinct indigenous
                                                              cultural group, they are not recognized by others as
                                                              indigenous peoples; (b) they hold no collective
                                                              attachment to geographically distinct habitats or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              ancestral territories in the project area and to the
                                                              natural resources in these habitats and territories; (c)
                                                              they do not hold customary cultural, economic,
                                                              social, or political institutions that are separate from
                                                              those of the dominant society and culture; and (d)
                                                              they do not keep an indigenous language different
                                                              from the official language of the country or region.
                                                              The Social Assessment of the project – to be part of
                                                              the project s ESMF – will include a section focusing
                                                              on these three groups to verify the degree of
                                                              vulnerability they face and the barriers they
                                                              encounter in accessing public policies and programs
                                                              and, subsequently, the team will consider if they
                                                              require a distinct treatment for social inclusion
                                                              purposes.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered because some activities under
                         BP 4.12                              Sub-component 1.2 aiming to promote employment
                                                              and income growth in rural areas may require land
                                                              acquisition and have adverse impacts related with
                                                              involuntary resettlement. As these activities cannot
                                                              be known during project preparation, an Involuntary
                                                              Resettlement Framework will be prepared by the
                                                              client. The Involuntary Resettlement Framework will
                                                              address all cases in which land acquisition is related
                                                              with (i) activities that cannot technically be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              implemented in another location, (ii) the affected
                                                              households do not willingly agree to donate land or
                                                              assets for the community sub-project without
                                                              compensation, or (iii) the criteria for “voluntary asset
                                                              donation” are not met. The criteria for documenting
                                                              voluntary land donations currently discussed to be
                                                              included under the RPF are also included in the
                                                              ESMF as part of the broader screening exercise.
                                                              The client will carry out a screening exercise to
                                                              assess land tenure and land occupation issues related
                                                              with the areas needed for civil works related with the
                                                              construction of five specialized health centers
                                                              focusing on exams and consultations for patients
                                                              with chronic diseases (Sub-component 1.5). This
                                                              exercise will identify if the civil works will require
                                                              or not involuntary land taking with potentially
                                                              adverse impacts related with involuntary
                                                              resettlement. If involuntary land taking will take
                                                              place, then OP 4.12 will be triggered and the
                         required Involuntary Resettlement Plans or
                         Abbreviated Resettlement Plans will be prepared by
                         the client before appraisal and in compliance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.12 principles and guidelines.
                         The team will also assess whether activities related
                         with land titling may require or not the involuntary
                         taking of land by the state. Initially, activities to be
                         supported will include solely the regularization and
                         titling of state owned lands that (a) have been
                         traditionally occupied by poor rural people,
                         Quilombola and other traditional communities and
                         (b) have been occupied in “good faith” by
                         agricultural developers in the Cerrado biome. Being
                         this as it may and as OP 4.12 “does not apply to
                         disputes between private parties in land titling
                         projects,” the team will request that the client
                         undertakes a social assessment and implement
                         measures to minimize and mitigate adverse social
                         impacts related with land titling, especially those
                         affecting poor and vulnerable groups (OP 4.12,
                         Footnote # 8). If land titling activities may require
                         the involuntary taking of lands by the state and as
                         these areas will certainly not be identified prior to
                         appraisal, then the team will require that the client
                         prepare an Involuntary Resettlement Framework in
                         compliance with the OP 4.12.
                         It is worth noticing that involuntary physical and/or
                         economic displacement is not envisaged as part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities related with environmental regularization
                         and, therefore, OP 4.12 may not be applied to them
                         because of two reasons that shall be taken into
                         consideration:
                         a)        Although it could be conceived that private
                         landholders may face enhanced application of
                         existing legislation as a result of the regularization
                         process that might impact their livelihood, such
                         restrictions will occur on private land, will not be
                         connected to the creation of legally designated parks
                         or protected areas and, therefore, their impacts would
                         fall under the Bank's EA policy (OP 4.01).
                         b)        OP 4.12 does not apply to regulations of
                         natural resources on a regional level carried out with
                         the purpose of promoting their sustainability (OP
                         4.12, Footnote # 8).
                         If there be need of applying the policy to the land
                         regularization component (in the unlikely event there
                         was need of involuntary land acquisition), the
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework under preparation to
                                                                                                                        address the issues under Sub-Component 1.1 will be
                                                                                                                        expanded and updated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy is not triggered since the project will not
                                                                                                                        finance any dams nor will it rely on the operations of
                                                                                                                        existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         This policy is not triggered since the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   affect any international waterways as defined under
                                                                                                                        the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                work in any disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                                                                        policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared:

                                      B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                                      stage ISDS: Not applicable

                                      C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. Not
                                      applicable The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael Drabble
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                                                                                 Date: 30-Nov-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Reema Nayar (PMGR)                                                                                                     Date: 30-Nov-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
