INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR9707
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:    25-Aug-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:                 Mongolia          Project ID:           P122320
Project Name:            Ulaanbaatar Clean Air Project (P122320)
Task Team Leader:        Gailius J. Draugelis
Estimated Board Date:    03-Apr-2012
Managing Unit:           GEEDR
Sector(s):               Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (83%), Housing construction (7%),
Sub-national government administration (5%), Public administration-
Energy and mining (5%)
Theme(s):                Pollution management and environmental health (73%), Urban Economic
Development (9%), Environmental policies and institutions (6%), Urban
services and housing for the 'poor (6%), Urban planning and housing
policy (6%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00  No
(Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Project Financing Data (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   21.89                 Total Bank Financing:  15.00
Financing Gap:        0.00
Financing Source                                                            Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             6.89
International Development Association (IDA)                                    15.00
Total                                                                          21.89
Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
Is this a Repeater project? No
Is this a Transferred    No
project?


﻿2. Current Project Development Objectives
The development objective (PDO) is to enable consumers in ger areas to access heating appliances
producing less particulate matter emissions and to further develop selected medium-term particulate
matter abatement measures in Ulaanbaatar in coordination with development partners.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Not applicable.
3. Project Description
The Project comprises the following components: (A) Ger Area Particulate Matter Mitigation,
addressing pollution from household heating in ger areas; (B) Particulate Matter Mitigation in Central
Ulaanbaatar; (C) Public Awareness Raising, Program Coordination and Project Management. The many
initiatives started by donor programs, including those of the World Bank, are likely to run into
constraints to sustaining programs, many of which would be unanticipated, given the new ground that is
being broken in this sector. The Bank's project is intended to support the Government to fill these gaps,
in particular as it continues to focus on macro-economic recovery. The project is also intended to pave
the way for a second generation of investments relating to expanding access to more modem, efficient
and environmentally friendly heating options and reducing dust where there are significant co-benefits
but which would not be picked up by the Government or donors without appropriate preparation.
The scope of the components has not changed since the approval of the Project:
Component A. Ger Area Particulate Matter Mitigation. The objective of this component is to
implement short term mitigation measures, specifically a stove replacement program and a low pressure
boiler replacement program, by providing capital subsidies, financed from the IDA credit, to households
to partially bring down the capital costs of eligible stoves and low pressure boilers. Associated technical
assistance is also included in the component.
Component B: Central Ulaanbaatar Particulate Matter Mitigation: The Component has four
sub-components as described below.
Sub-component (B l) Mitigation of Fugitive Dust from lack of City Greening. This sub-component is
supporting (a) preparation of a feasibility study assessing current greening programs of the city and
evaluation of options to seed grass and other greenery for the purpose of reducing dust throughout the
city and development of recommendations to improve greening; (b) preparation of a pilot project,
including support for bid document preparation, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of the pilot;
and (c) investment support for the supply and installation of grass and other eligible plants/trees on a
pilot basis.
Sub-component (B2) Mitigation of dust from Power Plant Emissions and Ash Ponds. This
sub-component is supporting a feasibility study for: (a) the installation of improved emission controls in
Ulaanbaatar"s combined heat and power plants; and (b) the mitigation of dust from power plant ash
ponds, studying their environmental impacts and recommending cost effective solutions.
Sub-component (B3) District Heating Feasibility Study and Knowledge Building. This sub-component
is supporting: (a) a feasibility study for the rehabilitation and sustainable expansion of district heating in
Ulaanbaatar; and (b) complementary training, including international training, on district heating policy,
regulation and management.


﻿Sub-component (B4) Affordable Housing Policy Technical Assistance. This sub-component is
supporting: (a) an assessment of current policies, laws and practices for affordable housing provision in
UB, evaluate effectiveness toward meeting policy objectives, and introduce lessons from international
experience on affordable housing; and (b) development of an affordable housing strategy for UB City
from which policies and programs can be identified.
Component C. Public Awareness Raising, Program Coordination and Project Management. In addition
to project management support, this component will build capacity in the MUB to more systematically
collect information on air pollution programs, and use that information to strengthen coordination
efforts and for dissemination of public information through this enhanced program monitoring
capability. It has three subcomponents:
Subcomponent (Cl) Air Quality Monitoring and Analysis. The component plans to support: (a)
equipment for air quality monitoring and analysis, including for the Ulaanbaatar Air Quality Agency;
and (b) training, including international training, in urban air quality analysis and management to UB
municipality. This sub-component is coordinating with an ongoing Japan International Cooperation
Agency (JICA) air quality capacity building project.
Sub-component (C2) Program Coordination Support. This sub-component supports: (a) consultants to
assist UB city"s air pollution program coordination efforts, including to (i) maintain links with
stakeholders, (ii) collect, synthesize and archive information on air quality for use by decision makers
and the public, and (iii) provide support to various air quality working groups or coordination
mechanisms that UB participates in (or leads) to improve effectiveness and sharing of information; and
(b) training, including international training, on air quality management and policy making, to gain
knowledge on various approaches and common difficulties associated with air quality improvement
programs.
Sub-component (C3): Project Management, Public Awareness, and Monitoring and Evaluation. This
sub-component is supporting the hiring of a PR firm to assist the UBCAP PMU with developing a
communications program for the project and a management fee for the Project Management Unit.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
Ulaanbaatar (UB), Mongolia's capital city, is located in the foothill of the Khentii Mountain range, at an
elevation of 1,350 m, along the Tuul River and in valleys of its tributaries- the Tolgoit, the Selbe, and the
Uliastai. UB's climate is continental, with very cold and dry winters with limited snowfall, and short
summers (June-August). The temperature is below zero from November through May. The annual
precipitation is 250mm, of which 94% falls from April to October.
Under Project Component B 1, the specific locations for city greening were not selected at the time of
project approval. During implementation, the Tasganii Ovoo location was selected for the
demonstration project, which includes two sites:
*  Site 1: 1.7ha on the hill of Tasganii Ovoo; which is located in the centre of Ulaanbaatar city,
Chingeltei District, khoroo 5.
*  Site 2: 305m x 2.5m green lanes along the main road located down to Tasganii Ovoo, west side.
The Ovoo of Tasganii hill has high religious significance and is a part of the cultural heritage of
Ulaanbaatar. Thus the selection triggers OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) in accordance with
paragraph 5b "any project located in, or in the vicinity of, a physical cultural resources site recognized
by the borrower".


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Bernard Baratz ( GFMDR)
Jun Zeng ( GURDR)
6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered?  Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01  Yes         The proposed project will have positive
environmental benefits from a reduction
in PM emissions. The project will provide
significant stimulus to the introduction of
clean stove and low pressure boiler
technologies, replacing existing stoves.
It is expected that the replaced stoves
(bought back and removed from use) will
be sold as scrap metal at scrap metal
recycling centers (one located in Darkhan
municipality in Mongolia). Domestic
manufacturers have limited capacity so
the new stoves are sourced internationally
as well.
The temporary environmental impacts
directly generated from the project are
currently anticipated in the (a) renovation
of the laboratory building to
accommodate testing facilities for low
pressure boilers; and (b) planting of trees,
grass and other eligible plants/trees in UB
on a pilot basis to mitigate fugitive dust
from a lack of city greening.
In addition, the project is also supporting
a number of feasibility studies, namely:
(a) a Power Plant Emissions Control
Strategy to (i) improve emission controls
in Ulaanbaatar's three power plants and to
(ii) improve mitigation of dust from
power plant ash ponds, studying their
environmental impacts and
recommending cost effective solutions;
(b) district heating rehabilitation and
expansion opportunities.
The project was prepared in accordance
with the previously disclosed ISDS. A
Safeguards Report was prepared and
disclosed locally. An EMP was
prepared for the city greening pilot as
discussed in this ISDS for project
restructuring.


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No           The project does not involve activities
that will impact natural habitats or be
located in areas which may have critical
natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No           The project does not involve activities in
forested areas nor
conversion/degradation of critical forest
areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09              No           The project does not anticipate promotion
of the use of pesticides nor procurement
of pesticides. It it is unlikely that
herbicides would be used for land
preparation for re-vegetation activities.
However, Guidelines on good practices
and precautions regarding pesticide use,
if needed, for the city greening pilot will
be prepared. The Guidelines shall be
referred to in the TOR of the feasibility
study which shall screen recommended
re-vegetation measures for potential
triggers of OP 4.09.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11  Yes       During implementation, the Tasganii
Ovoo location was selected for the
demonstration project under Project
Component B 1. The Ovoo of Tasganii
hill has a high religious significance and
is a part of the cultural heritage of
Ulaanbaatar. Thus, the selection triggers
OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) in
accordance with paragraph 5b "any
project located in, or in the vicinity of, a
physical cultural resources site
recognized by the borrower".
An Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) is required specifically to address
potential impacts on the physical cultural
resources within this component. A
public consultation on the demonstration
project for city greening that includes the
Ovoo on Tsaganii hill location was held
on July 18, 2014. Based on the
comments/suggestions received at the
public consultation, the EMP was
finalized and publicly disclosed on
August 12, 2014 on the Project
Management Unit's website
(http://www.tisip.mn/101-main/news/483
-environmental-and-social-safeguards). It
was also disclosed in the Mongolian


﻿language on the PMU website
(www.usip.mn) and UB municipal
website (www.baigal.ub.gov.mn) on
August 18, 2014 as well as on websites
www.ulaanbaatar.mn and
www.ubservice.mn on August 20, 2014.
The demonstration project is designed to
avoid adverse impacts on cultural
property. The EMP, satisfactory to the
Bank, includes mechanisms to mitigate
any potential adverse impacts on cultural
.__   -property.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No          The project will operate in the Ger Areas
and parts of central Ulaanbaatar where no
indigenous peoples have been identified
by previous Bank projects. The Bank's
previous urban projects in UB operating
in Ger areas and Ulaanbaatar, (USIP 1, 2
and 3) did not identify indigenous
peoples as defined in the Bank's OP/BP
4.10. The latest determination was made
on June 30, 2010 by the Safeguards
Screening for USIP3.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12  No          The project consists mostly of subgrants,
studies and technical assistance which
will not cause any involuntary
resettlement as defined in the Bank's
OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
Component A:
Community-based product centers
established for the distribution of project
supported clean stove technologies will
be set up by a separate commercial bank
(XacBank). These centers are the
traditional tents themselves and may
require temporary land acquisition in ger
districts. However, the temporary use of
land for the centers will be on voluntary
basis and if needed the Xac Bank will
lease land from the land-owners if the
owners agree to do so.
The emission laboratory was set up in
August 2010 under the ADB project. The
Bank's support of the laboratory
renovation might need additional land for
its expansion. The Team confirmed that
the additional land taken for expansion


﻿will be government owned and no
involuntary resettlement will be caused
for this purpose.
Component B:
Subcomponent (B 1) piloting the
city-greening activities will involve small
scale of civil works. The city greening
pilot is on municipal land and within
Twithin the right-of-way of existing
urban streets within Central Ulaanbaatar
and no land taking is needed.
Subcomponent (B3) will finance
feasibility study for the rehabilitation and
sustainable expansion of district heating
in Ulaanbaatar. Downstream impact of
the FS might involve temporary land
taking during heating pipeline system
construction. The Team confirmed that
all pipeline construction will be along the
existing city roads and no involuntary
land taking will be needed.
Component C: No involuntary land
taking is needed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No           The project will not include activities
involving any dams as defined in the
policy.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No      The project components do not involve
7.50                                              international waterways as defined in the
policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60  No         The project is not located in any known
area of territorial dispute.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Potential environmental impacts associated with the project are currently anticipated in the (a)
operation of the laboratory to test cook stoves and low pressure boilers; (b) planting of trees, grass and
other eligible plants/trees in UB on a pilot basis to mitigate fugitive dust from a lack of city greening,
and (c) upstream and downstream issues regarding the subsidy and promotion of new stoves, including:
management of scrap metals from the old replaced stoves, and domestic stove fabrication facilities.
In addition, the project will also support a number of feasibility studies, namely: (a) a Power Plant
Emissions Control Strategy to (i) improve emission controls in Ulaanbaatar's three power plants and to
(ii) improve mitigation of dust from power plant ash ponds, studying their environmental impacts and


﻿recommending cost effective solutions; (b) district heating rehabilitation and expansion opportunities.
There could be potential environmental issues associated with the recommended investments resulting
from preparation of the feasibility studies.
The restructured project triggers additional safeguard policy Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11,
as the Tasganii Ovoo location was selected for the project component B2-city greening, which has a
high religious significance and is a part of the cultural heritage of Ulaanbaatar.
Potential environmental impacts of the demonstration project consist of those associated with the
movement of machines, materials and men (noise, dust, nonhazardous waste disposal etc.). There may
be minor excavations, so the issue of "chance find procedures" is also relevant. Also, although the ovoo
is a movable structure, the project will not displace or replace it by any other structure.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project is based on dialogue conducted through the Bank#s Economic and Sector Work on
evaluating urban air pollution, health impacts and mitigation options, an ADB supported pilot project
examining the stove subsidy mechanism, and ongoing outputs from the East Asia and Pacific Region
Clean Stove Initiative, a Bank-executed Trust Fund AAA generously supported by the Australian
Government. The project has selected measures where gaps have been identified to ensure feasible
short term measures have the best chance of successful implementation and medium term measures have
time for preparation. The project was designed as the optimum selection of mitigation strategies to
reduce one of the worst air quality situations in the world.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A safeguards report was prepared by the Borrower to address all the potential environmental and social
aspects of the project discussed above (see Section II A 1). The report was reviewed and accepted by the
World Bank prior to Board Approval. As noted above, the UBCAP Project Management Unit of the
Municipality of Ulaanbaatar has satisfactorily implemented the project thus far and is in compliance
with safeguards measures listed in the safeguards report. The capacity of this PMU has not changed
since the approval of the Project and is assessed as adequate to manage safeguards requirements,
including the additional ones listed in the EMP for the city greening pilot.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Safeguards Report was publicly disclosed on July 16,2011, on the PIU website. Interviews of stove
producers and users were conducted jointly between the Bank team and the PIU during the preparation
of the rapid assessment of upstream and downstream impacts of development of new stoves and
discarding of old stoves. The project has a feedback mechanism through (a) quality assurance; (b)
consultations with stove suppliers; (c) interactions through sales with users that incorporates lessons
learned in project design for the stoves switching component.
A public consultation on the demonstration project for city greening that includes the Ovoo on Tsaganii
hill location was held on July 18,2014. Based on the comments/suggestions received at the public
consultation, the EMP was finalized and publicly disclosed in English on August 12, 2014 and in
Mongolian on August 18, 2014 on the Project Management Unit's website (www.usip.mn). The EMP


﻿was also disclosed in Mongolian in multiple websites www.ulaanbaatar.mn and www.ubservice.mn on
August 20, 2014. The demonstration project is design to avoid adverse impacts on cultural property.
The EMP, satisfactory to the Bank, includes mechanisms to mitigate any potential adverse impacts on
cultural property.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                                  25-Aug-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the
EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mongolia                                                         12-Aug-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents Is not expected, please explain why:
Potential environmental issues associated with the Tsaganii Ovoo greening subproject, which triggered
the Physical Cultural Resources policy, have been adequately addressed in a separate EMP, which was
disclosed on August 12, 2014.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? Yes [X I  No  I ]  NA I I
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager Yes  I 1  No [X I  NA I I
(PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the Yes [ X I  No I I  NA I I
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? Yes [ x I  No I ]  NA I I
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X]  No I I  NA [ I
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Yes (.X I  No I I  NA I I
Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place Yes [X I  No I I  NA I I
in a form and language that are understandable and accessible to
project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X]  No I I  NA [ ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the Yes [X]  No [ I  NA I I
project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include  Yes (XI  No [ I NA [ ]
the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to
safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with  Yes I XI  No I ]  NA I I
the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project
legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:          Name: Gailius J. Draugelis
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard              Date:y2/2014
Practice Manager/Manager:  Name: Julia M. Fraser              Date: 9/3/2014


