INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8610
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Pacific Islands            Project ID:   P147839
Project Name:    Pacific Resilience Program (P147839)
Task Team        Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Mar-2015                Estimated      19-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Flood protection (60%), Public administration- Financial Sector (40%)
Theme(s):        Natural disaster management (60%), Climate change (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       8.96             Total Bank Financing:     7.96
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                       7.96
Special Climate Change Fund                                       1.00
Total                                                             8.96
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
9.     The objective of the regional program is to strengthen (i) disaster early warning and
preparedness, and (ii) improve the post disaster response capacity of the participating countries.
C. Project Description
Component 1: Strengthening Early Warning and Preparedness


﻿1.     The objective of this component is to increase the resilience of the participating Phase I
countries and the Pacific region as a whole to natural hazards such as cyclones, coastal/riverine
flooding, volcanic eruptions, tsunamis and earthquakes by improving the quality of forecasting and
warning services as well as disaster preparedness. This component has two sub-components: (i) Sub-
U       component 1.1 - Investments in Early Warning and Preparedness in Phase I countries. Activities
under this sub-component will be implemented at a national level; and (ii) Sub-component 1.2 -
Regional TA to Support Impact Forecasting and Preparedness for Response. This sub-component
will be regionally implemented by SPC.
Component 2: Mainstreaming Risk Reduction and Resilient Investments
2.     The objective of this Component is to support a multi-sectoral planning process for
integrating climate and disaster risk and resilience into development. This component is divided into
two sub-components: (i) Sub-component 2.1 - Risk reduction and resilient investment planning and
preparation. Activities under this sub-component will be nationally implemented; and (ii) Sub-
component 2.2 - Regional tools and advisory services to support planning and preparation of
investment. This sub-component will be regionally implemented by SPC.
Component 3: Disaster Risk Financing
3.     The objective of this component is to strengthen the financial resilience of the participating
PICs to disaster events by enabling them to secure access to immediate liquidity post disaster for
low, medium and high risk events. Accordingly, this component will support the development and
implementation of an integrated disaster risk financing strategy that provides an optimal combination
of risk retention (for high frequency, low severity events) and risk transfer (for low frequency, high
severity events) for participating countries (see Figure 1, Annex 2). This will include both national
instruments and regional instruments, and will build on the PCRAFI pilot insurance scheme, which is
reaching the third and final year and has previously been funded by Japan. This component is
divided into two sub-components as follows: (i) Sub-component 3.1 - Disaster risk financing tools.
Activities under this sub-component will be nationally implemented; and (ii) Sub-component 3.2 -
Development of Mutual Insurance Fund. This sub-component will be regionally implemented by
PIFS.
o      Component 4: Project and Program Management
4.     The objective of this component is to provide efficient and effective implementation support
to the Projects in each country, including staff, operating costs, monitoring and evaluation, and the
cost of audits. It will also provide efficient regional coordination of the different country Projects
and the implementation of activities that will be executed at the regional level as well as high level
coordination of climate and disaster resilient projects and initiatives in the Pacific. This component
includes the following sub-components: (i) Sub-component 4.1 - Project Management. Activities
under this sub-component will be nationally implemented; and (ii) Sub-component 4.2 - Regional
Program Management and Coordination. Activities under this sub-component will be implemented
at a regional level by PIFS and SPC.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
5.  The project is a regional project for the Pacific Region. Countries that will be participating in
Phase I include Samoa, Tonga, Vanuatu and the Republic of Marshall Islands for Component 3.2.


﻿The overall environmental impact of the Program is expected to be positive, and none of the eligible
investments on the menu of options include activities that would generate significant risk or
irreversible adverse environmental/social impacts. The main environmental and/or social impacts for
eligible activities would be minor impacts from the construction and rehabilitation of small-scale
O
U       infrastructure (e.g. buildings for national disaster management or meteorological offices). The scale
and likelihood of adverse impacts arising from these activities is limited, and the types of mitigation
activities are well-known and proven. An ESMF will ensure that any potential adverse
environmental impacts that are generated as a result of the project are identified, and appropriate
safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid, minimize, mitigate and, in such cases where there are
residual impacts, offset there impacts.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
6.     Country specific activities under all four components will be implemented by a designated
entity within the relevant Ministries of Finance, and/or environmental ministries with inputs from the
National Disaster Management Agencies, Meteorological and Hydrological Agencies, and the
Ministries in charge of Works. These agencies have already been exposed to WB safeguards
procedures through existing DRM/CCA projects and initiatives. However, there is relatively weak
implementation capacity for some of the implementation agencies in the Phase I countries, in
particular due to limited human resources. This risk will be mitigated through the participation of the
Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) in the Program. SPC has demonstrated capacity, and
will provide real-time support to backstop participating countries where needed, including for
Safeguard policies. The country level project leads/coordinators will also be supported by a Regional
Project Management and Coordination Unit (PRMCU), and significant training and human
development will be provided to relevant staff through various aspects of the Program. The World
Bank will maintain a close dialogue with the regional coordinator and country level leads/
coordinators and ensure regular and intensive implementation support/missions which provide
support for Safeguards when needed.
7.     In addition, prior to commencement of Project Implementation, the PREP will provide funds
for social and environmental safeguards support and oversight as needed, including (if required)
funds for a suitable qualified individual who will support the PMU for each participating Phase I
country.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This policy is triggered because sub-projects
OP/BP 4.01                              involving civil works (Component 1) and entry level
investments in resilience such as retrofitting public
buildings (Component 2) may generate negative
environmental or social impacts. Similarly, future
subprojects developed under Components 3 (i.e., the
CERC) may have environmental and social
interactions. An ESMF will be the key safeguard


﻿instrument and will contain guidance on preparation
of environmental and social impact assessments and
associated safeguards documents. To this end, an
ESMF has been prepared in accordance with the PIC
guidelines and templates. The ESMF will be
disclosed locally and at the Infoshop prior to
appraisal of the Program.
o       Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         Program activities are not expected to involve
significant loss or degradation of natural habitats,
however this policy has been triggered as a
precaution since specific sites and activities are not
yet known.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         The Program will not support any civil works that
encroach or adversely impact upon forests. However
this policy is triggered as a precaution because
limited incidental forest clearing may occur during
civil works.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The Program does not involve procurement or use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         The Program is not expected to finance any civil
OP/BP 4.11                               works that could significantly affect Physical
Cultural Resources (i.e. these subprojects will be
screened out). However building refurbishment may
include retrofitting of historical buildings, and civil
works may involve chance finds of historically or
culturally important resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         Of the 7 or more countries that have been identified
4.10                                     for inclusion in Phase I and potential inclusion in
Phase II (RMI, Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu for Phase
I and potentially Fiji, FSM, and the Solomon Islands
for Phase II), only the Solomon Islands would
ordinarily trigger OP 4.10. It is proposed to trigger
OP 4.10 on a precautionary approach as it assists in
informing SPC as the Regional Implementing
Agency that IP issues may need to be managed
during the course of project implementation. The
ES SIP details the required approach to engage with
IP on relevant subprojects.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Although it is expected that the majority of Program
BP 4.12                                  activities will be undertaken on state-owned or
Crown land, there is potential for certain project
activities (e.g. construction of monitoring stations,
post-disaster reconstruction) to encroach on
customary or private lands. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) has been incorporated into the
Program's ESMF.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            The Program does not involve dams.
Projects on International     No            The Program does not involve international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           Any Program activities in areas that may be disputed
O
BP 7.60                                     will be ineligible.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Nov-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF will be disclosed locally and via Infoshop during February 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name:                                             Date:
Practice Manager/       Name:                                             Date:
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


