                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC9797

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Montenegro                        Project ID:       P149743
                            Project Name:       Revenue Administration Reform (P149743)
                            Task Team           David Michael Nummy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Oct-2014                       Estimated         02-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GGODR                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Tax policy and administration (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00                 Total Bank Financing:             20.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           20.00
                              Total                                                                           20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objectives are to increase the effectiveness and efficiency of collection of tax and
                           social contribution revenues, to increase compliance, and to reduce the burden on taxpayers to
                           comply.

                           The long-term vision is a tax administration that operateswith streamlined risk-based business
                           processes that contribute to the efficient collection of taxes and social contributions that are owed
                           from all sources of economic activity. Increased compliance will generate a more robust revenue
                         stream to provide essential services to citizens and the modernized tax administration will improve
                         the business environment by reducing the burden on compliance on taxpayers, increase the country’s
                         competitiveness, and attract foreign investment. Currently, Montenegro ranks 86th in the ease of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         paying taxes in the 2014 Doing Business rankings, down one ranking from last year. Modernization
                         will also support the country’s goal for EU accession and economic integration with EU member
                         states.
                         C. Project Description
                         1.       The proposed project would seek to improve the institutional arrangements and management
                         systems to take full advantage of a highly automated, low-discretion, risk-based system. The project
                         will entail an investment over a period of five years to achieve the stated government objectives,
                         including the related organizational restructuring and the development, management, and
                         infrastructure changes necessary for optimal deployment of an integrated automation system. The
                         project would include financial and technical support for revenue collection methodologies and
                         procedures; information technology and other technological infrastructure; training and technical
                         assistance to underpin MTA’s management decisions on organization structure and capacity of the
                         tax audit; and operational systems refinements necessary to ensure that the economy reaps the full
                         benefits of the investment. The new IT System (ITS) financed under the project would provide for
                         electronic interaction with taxpayers as well as link to other systems that share data with MTA,
                         including Treasury, Customs, Pension Fund, and Health Fund. Measurement of intermediate
                         outcomes will be integrated into the project in order to provide relevant and timely feedback as to the
                         progress of the project.
                         Component 1. Change Management. This component would support the major institutional change
                         envisioned under the project and ensure that all changes that take place in the MTA are based on a
                         common understanding of the reasons for change. The changes will be carried out using established
                         change management approaches that seek to build commitment of all staff in the change process.
                         The component would finance international consultants on change management, change management
                         training, and the development of an internal communications strategy.
                         Component 2. Institutional Development. The component will develop a modern organization and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management structure, instill a strategic orientation to optimize the HQ and regional structure of
                         MTA to increase MTA’s effectiveness, and strengthen capacity of the tax audit and human resource
                         management through targeted professional training and technical assistance. This component will
                         also improve the analytical capacity required to support strategic management of MTA and support
                         an improved legal framework and appeals process. A major element of this component will be
                         professionalizing the MTA workforce with targeted training on the increasingly complex transactions
                         occurring in the Montenegrin economy, familiarization with international accounting concepts and
                         practices, and upgrade of IT skills.
                         Component 3: Increasing Operational Effectiveness and Efficiency. This component would: (i)
                         support the recasting of operational functions within the MTA headquarters and regional offices to
                         adopt modern tax administration practices, which will assist in increasing taxpayer compliance
                         behavior; (ii) acquire an integrated tax system from a commercial tax software vendor, which will
                         then be customized to reflect the tax and social legislation of Montenegro; (iii) acquire the required
                         hardware to operationalize the ITS and its integrated risk management, document management and
                         data warehouse functions; (iv) provide appropriate training to the users of the ITS; and (v) establish a
                         backup disaster recovery system. The new ITS would provide support for all business functions,
                         including user management, registration, returns processing, accounting, payment processing,
                         enforcement, objections and appeals, audit, risk assessment, reporting, work flow, data warehouse
                         and business intelligence tools, a document management system, and a taxpayer portal.
                         Component 4: Taxpayer Services and Communication. This component will finance activities to
                               modernize taxpayer services; create mechanisms for transparency and accountability, such as
                               consultative panel and community surveys to ensure fair community input; modernize the call center
                               to provide advanced services to taxpayers; promote community understanding of revenue laws,
Public Disclosure Copy




                               procedures, and rights and obligations of taxpayers; promote taxpayer efficiency through
                               simplification and provision of electronic services and strengthen external and internal
                               communication.
                               Component 5: Project Management. This component will strengthen MTA’s capacityto ensure
                               timely and quality project implementation in accordance with World Bank guidelines. The
                               component will administer the procurement of: (i) national and international consultants to support
                               procurement, including experts in IT procurement, financial management, and project audit; (ii)
                               project management and procurement training; and (iii) operational expenditures associated with
                               implementation of the project.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)


                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Agnes I. Kiss (OPSOR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No                            No Civil Works included in the project.
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Jul-2014


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             There are no safeguards triggered by this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: David Michael Nummy

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                         Date: 18-Jul-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager:   Name: David S. Bernstein (PMGR)                    Date: 18-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
