                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA9808
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Haiti                               Project ID:    P148970
                            Project Name:       HT Sustainable Rural and Small Towns Water and Sanitation Project (P148970)
                            Task Team           Jean-Martin Brault
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           02-Mar-2015                         Estimated   26-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWADR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sanitation (16%), Water supply (46%), Public administration- Water, sanitation
                                              and flood protection (36%), Health (2%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (62%), Decentralization (36%), Other
                                              communicable diseases (2%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                     50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                      50.00
                              Total                                                                                          50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed objectives of the Project are: (i) to increase access to improved water supply and
                           sanitation in targeted rural areas and small towns in zones affected by cholera; (ii) to strengthen the
                           water and sanitation service delivery mechanism at the deconcentrated level; and (iii) support the
                           Recipient's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Emergency, as needed.

                                                                         Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building and Project Management.
                         (a)       Strengthening DINEPA’s capacity to develop and manage a national programming
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mechanism for deconcentrated WSS service delivery in rural areas and small towns, including: (i)
                         establishing a national baseline of WSS coverage and services (disaggregated by sex) and a
                         monitoring mechanism to update and use data for decision-making and planning; (ii) developing a
                         road map for universal access by 2030; (iii) developing a Medium Term Expenditure Framework
                         (MTEF) for the WSS sector; (iv) developing a 3-year rolling consolidated Program Budget; (v)
                         establishing a WSS sector coordination and joint performance mechanism to operationalize the
                         Program Budget review process; (vi) defining a fecal sludge management service chain for rural
                         areas and small towns , including assessing the involvement of the private sector in the service chain
                         and helping define models for its implementation; and (vii) defining an institutional space, strategy
                         and action plan for citizen engagement and gender mainstreaming that can provide a platform for
                         beneficiaries’ voice and participatory project management.
                         (b)       Strengthening the fiduciary, sanitation and social mobilization capacity of selected OREPAs.
                         Social mobilization capacity strengthening would include behavioral change, gender mainstreaming
                         and participatory monitoring through formal and non-formal beneficiary assessments; and financing
                         the operating costs associated with the management of WSS assets and personnel in selected
                         OREPAs, URDs and TEPACs. For this subcomponent, sector FTPs have agreed to use a common
                         capacity building plan based on ongoing assessments of DINEPA’s deconcentrated structures, and
                         provide complementary financing of operating costs throughout the country, while jointly defining a
                         long-term sustainable financing plan for DINEPA.
                         (c)       Strengthening the local stakeholders in rural and small towns to improve WSS service
                         delivery sustainability through: (i) the carrying out of training in business plan preparation and access
                         to financing for local operators (OPs and CAEPAs); (ii) the carrying out of training in the
                         management and monitoring of rural and small town water supply systems and public sanitation
                         facilities for OPs; (iii) the provision of sub-grants for the financing of toolkits and start-up funds for
                         OPs to, inter alia, hire personnel and buy spare parts; (iv) the financing of water meters to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installed by water supply OPs; (v) the piloting water source protection schemes with existing OPs;
                         and (vi) capacity building for community-based monitoring of WSS service delivery, including
                         ensuring women’s representation in CAEPAs and community-based oversight bodies.
                         (d)       Supporting the establishment of a joint monitoring mechanism between Haiti and the DR to
                         respond to trans-boundary pandemics and outbreaks of water- and excreta-related diseases, as part of
                         an island-wide strategy. The Project will sponsor a diagnosis of the disease surveillance capabilities
                         on both sides of the border and look into other bi-national experiences to support the establishment of
                         a binational surveillance strategy. The Project will also build on workshops and study tours financed
                         under the previous Bank operation between DINEPA and its counterpart in the DR, the National
                         Water and Sewerage Institute (INAPA).
                         (e)       Supporting project management, monitoring and evaluation by enabling DINEPA to deliver
                         its project implementation responsibilities at the central and regional levels, including complying
                         with Bank fiduciary procedures, safeguards, and monitoring and evaluation, while improving its
                         capacity to engage in dialogue with its clients. It will also contribute to the acquisition of equipment
                         and DINEPA’s operating costs related to project implementation.

                         Component 2: Water Supply and Sanitation.
                         (a)      Increasing access to safe water and sanitation at the local level, through: (i) identifying
                         priority works, developing preliminary and detailed engineering designs, conducting supervision of
                         works and social mobilization activities, as well as carrying out construction and rehabilitation of


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         water systems in the selected localities in a participatory manner; (ii) carrying out small repairs and
                         expansions of water supply networks to consolidate access to safe water in localities of the previous
                         EPAR Program; (iii) implementing household-level sanitation activities consisting of a gender-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sensitive community-based total sanitation approach (called ACAT in Haiti), sanitation marketing,
                         hygiene promotion and behavior change communication;
                         (b)     Increasing access to safe water and sanitation in schools, health facilities and public spaces
                         through: (i) developing and implementing water supply solutions in the selected institutions; (ii)
                         constructing latrine blocks for these institutions and public spaces. Equal access of public spaces by
                         women will be ensured and monitored periodically through overall beneficiary assessments, and
                         adequate provisions for Menstrual Hygiene Management will be included; and (iii) establishing a
                         sustainable management and maintenance model with the participation of the stakeholders involved.

                         Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response. Due to the high risk of a catastrophic event in Haiti
                         and the fact that cholera still poses a significant challenge, the proposed project includes a
                         provisional component for Contingent Emergency Response (CER), designed as a mechanism for
                         rapid response in the event of an eligible emergency, subject to the request of the GoH (e.g.
                         hurricanes, floods, cholera outbreaks, etc.). Such components, which include triggers and conditions
                         for the use of funds, are included in most investment projects in Haiti in keeping with the
                         recommendations of the 2011 World Development Report on Conflict, Security and Development
                         and with the operational experience acquired in Haiti since the 2010 earthquake. If not disbursed 24
                         months before the closing date, the allocated amount will be reallocated to finance activities under
                         other project components.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The localities will be selected among: (i) priority communes that have posted the highest cholera
                         incidence rate in the last three dry seasons, with specific focus on the Centre department; (ii)
                         communes along the border with the DR, with specific focus on the Centre department; and (iii)
                         communes of the South Region in which the previous EPAR Program intervened. One particular
Public Disclosure Copy




                         zone where population dynamics and communicable diseases such as cholera can create strong
                         externalities is the border area between Haiti and the DR. The border area is both strategic and
                         vulnerable: it witnesses movement from migrants, workers and cross-border service users, hosts bi-
                         national markets, and includes some of the poorest areas in both countries, with poverty rates as high
                         as 79 percent in the Nord-Est department of Haiti and 83 percent in the province of Elías Piña in the
                         DR. Immigration officials also monitor daily border crossings of workers providing services to the
                         Dominican population (approximately 500 people daily into Dajabón, and 200 into Pedernales, for
                         example), as well as of people looking to gain access to basic health services and, to a lesser extent,
                         education. This is the area where the project will take place, as well as nationally in Haiti in places
                         deemed to be at risk to cholera. These localities have not yet been chosen.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Felipe Jacome (GSURR)
                         Nyaneba E. Nkrumah (GENDR)
                         Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The project is rated a Category B given that the proposed
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      project intervention (small-medium scale civil works for


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         construction of new and rehabilitated water systems ) are
                         not likely to result in significant negative impacts. This is
                         mainly due to the small/medium scale of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interventions, their dispersed locations and the nature of
                         the potential impacts, which are easily identifiable, mostly
                         temporary and easily mitigated with known management
                         techniques). The project will be processed under OP
                         10.00, Para 12 and BP 10.00, paragraph 53 (Exceptional
                         Arrangements in Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance
                         or Capacity Constraints), deferring the development of
                         safeguards instruments to the Project implementation
                         stage, when localities to benefit from water and sanitation
                         interventions will have been identified. Project documents
                         will include an action plan addressing the application of
                         environmental and social policies.

                         Component 1 relates largely to capacity building and
                         training and will not cause any environmental impact.

                         Component 2:
                         Water supply: activities will result in environmental
                         impacts because the activities focus on the construction of
                         piped water schemes, mainly sourced from underground
                         mountain streams that reach the surface at key points on
                         higher ground. The works will focus on protecting the
                         water source (fencing, etc), installing some pump
                         mechanism where gravity is not adequate to ensure flows
                         and building a distribution system so that the water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reaches the communities. In terms of safeguards, there
                         are four key issues related to this type of water collection
                         and distribution:

                         (i) One key issue in water and sanitation projects,
                         particularly those that use a sub-surface or spring source,
                         is ensuring the sustainability of the supply. In these areas
                         where the project will be, the sustainability of the source
                         is unknown although community members know whether
                         the source is perennial and whether flows remain
                         adequate throughout the year. There is however an
                         essential difference between collecting water at a stream
                         point (which requires the excessive use of labor) and
                         collection of water at a faucet steps from the house or
                         water collection point. The key point being that the draw
                         on the water is going to increase exponentially. It would
                         be important to regulate the use of the water and avoid
                         waste to ensure the sustainability of the supply source.
                         This was an observed problem in the last project, where



                          Page 4 of 13
                         neither the community members nor the operators were
                         adequately trained in water conservation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) a key lesson learned from the last water and sanitation
                         project is that finding quality contractors is essential to the
                         success of the project. The quality of the works has to be
                         sound to avoid leaks, both in the distribution system and
                         at the end points. The leaks and unchecked flows in the
                         network cause (a) soil erosion and (b) public health
                         problems such as exposure to malaria, due to mosquito
                         larvae proliferation in areas where there is pooled water.
                         The environmental specialist and the TTL must ensure
                         that the quality of the works is good and that there is
                         adequate drainage, particularly around the water taps/
                         faucets, and that the aprons around the systems are well
                         constructed and the waste water is able to drain
                         completely into the subsurface soil.

                         (iii) Another key lesson learned is that the contractor/
                         engineer must provide drawings in his bid to demonstrate
                         how this drainage issue will be addressed. This will be a
                         part of the bidding documents and the requirements of the
                         project prior to selection.

                         (iv) In addition, the community needs to be trained on
                         how to maintain the end use points to ensure that taps are
                         not left running, so as to result in poor drainage problems.
                         In the previous project, the training did not come early
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enough and communities expected the faucets to be on 24
                         hours a day because natural streams run 24 hrs a day.
                         Training on the use of faucets and a system of use needs
                         to commence prior to the installation of the system that
                         focuses on water conservation as well as maintenance
                         issues. A visit to other sites where the system is well run
                         and well established will help improve the level of
                         receptivity.

                         Sanitation: The key issue with the installation of latrines
                         relates to (i) the type of latrines (flush with a piped
                         system, pit latrines, etc), (ii) the construction of latrines in
                         areas where the water table is high and (iii) the proximity
                         between the latrines and any water system such as
                         streams, rivers, etc. With pit type latrines, key issues
                         related to the disposal of the material after the pit is full.
                         The ESMF will outline the various options for waste
                         disposal for the different types of latrines to be built. This
                         is particularly important for latrine blocks. The ESMF



                          Page 5 of 13
                                                        will also outline the minimum distance required between
                                                        the latrines and any water bodies as well as the types of
                                                        systems to be built in areas where there is a high water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        table. The recommendations from the ESMF will be
                                                        reflected in the bidding documents and the contractors/
                                                        engineers need to respond to these issues in their
                                                        documents. The ESMF will include a short description of
                                                        the type of biodiversity found in the areas under the
                                                        project's influence, but will not include any study. A
                                                        more detailed site specific assessment will be found in the
                                                        EMP.

                                                        An ESMF will be the basic document that will be
                                                        required, particularly because the sites are generally
                                                        unknown. It will focus on the negative environmental
                                                        impacts related to construction of the water system (water
                                                        quality testing and maintenance, contamination of water
                                                        during the construction, solid waste management, dust
                                                        control, erosion control, etc) and propose mitigation
                                                        measures. The ESMF will also outline the type of
                                                        training curriculum that should be included in the
                                                        community training. It is also recommended that a survey
                                                        of participants on their knowledge of the water system
                                                        and its use be given prior to and after the training. The
                                                        ESMF will include all outreach and discussions with
                                                        communities in the affected areas and include the
                                                        institutional provisions for preparing and implementing
                                                        the ESMF. The ESMF will be prepared, consulted and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        disclosed no later than one month from project
                                                        effectiveness.

                                                        A generic EMP that specifically covers the water supply
                                                        system and the faucet system will be completed prior to
                                                        construction. A similar generic EMP for the sanitation/
                                                        toilets will also be completed. These EMPs will be 5
                                                        pages or less, and will outline the basic engineering, the
                                                        drainage, the distances and flows as well as related
                                                        negative impacts and mitigation measures (for the water
                                                        supply system) and a similar one for the sanitation
                                                        systems which addresses the negative impacts, mitigation
                                                        measures and the basic engineering design of the system
                                                        in low and high water table areas.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The streams that will be used to provide the water are part
                         4.04                           of an ecosystem. Normally, the point source is protected
                                                        under the project but the rest of the water is left so that
                                                        animals can access this water. However, the pumping
                                                        system may increase or decrease water flows and speeds



                                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                        and this may have an impact on aquatic life. At appraisal,
                                                        an assessment will be made to determine if residual
                                                        stream flows (outside the pumped system) are impacted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        by the pumping mechanism. At this stage, it is assumed,
                                                        out of caution, that natural habitats may be minimally
                                                        impacted till the EMP is complete. The ESMF, however,
                                                        will include a screening mechanism to ensure that impacts
                                                        on aquatic life are mitigated. Depending on the type of
                                                        species identified, this may include searching for alternate
                                                        sites that have less of an impact on the aquatic life.

                                                        The project will also support a fecal sludge management
                                                        system. This is important when one is building latrines.
                                                        Quite apart from issues relating to the placement of these
                                                        latrines (e.g.,ensuring that ground water cannot be
                                                        contaminated, etc) it is important that the ESMF examine
                                                        and articulate a) a process for sludge removal; b) its
                                                        processing and c) its final disposal. This is important to
                                                        ensure, particularly in Cholera sensitive areas, that
                                                        potential infections are not spread. The ESMF consultant
                                                        will work with Government to outline the procedures that
                                                        need to be followed to ensure a high level of health and
                                                        human safety.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes    This policy will be triggered as a precaution. This is
                                                        because not all the sites are known and although most of
                                                        the known sites do not have natural forests, it is possible
                                                        in unknown areas. Certainly, there may be some
                                                        vegetation around the water sources that will need to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        cleared to construct fencing around the point source. The
                                                        ESMF will include screening mechanisms to ensure that
                                                        any small scale impacts on forests are mitigated through
                                                        measures defined as part of the broader approach on
                                                        natural habitats.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     This policy is not triggered given that this project will not
                                                        finance the procurement or significant use of any
                                                        pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural       No     There are no physical cultural resources nor extensive sub
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           surface digging. However, a provision will be included in
                                                        the ESMF for the management of chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    There are no indigenous people in the project's area of
                         BP 4.10                        influence.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The Project is processed under OP 10.00, Para 12 and BP
                         OP/BP 4.12                     10.00, paragraph 53 (Exceptional Arrangements in
                                                        Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity
                                                        Constraints), allowing for the development of safeguards
                                                        instruments to be deferred to the Project implementation



                                                         Page 7 of 13
                         stage. Nevertheless, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (RPF) was prepared and a Safeguards Action Plan
                         addressing the application of environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         policies was developed. The RPF reflects the lessons of
                         the sector-wide approach to Involuntary Resettlement that
                         was recently piloted at DINEPA with support from the
                         Inter-American Development Bank.

                         As the exact location of WSS works to be financed under
                         the Project is dependent on the completion of related
                         ongoing socio-economic and technical studies financed
                         with the project preparation advance (PPA), an RPF was
                         prepared. This will allow DINEPA to screen subprojects
                         when their location is determined and thus ensure their
                         consistency with OP 4.12. The RPF will be consulted and
                         disclosed before the Project is submitted for Board
                         approval.

                         Given the nature and size of the anticipated WSS works,
                         as described in sections III.A and VI.B, it is unlikely that
                         project interventions will require physical relocation of
                         beneficiaries, but land acquisition may be required. In the
                         previous rural water supply projects in Haiti, the
                         construction of water supply systems had been conditional
                         on communities accepting the principle of paying for
                         water by the volume consumed and donating the land
                         necessary for the protection of springwater collection
                         points, standposts, kiosks and water reservoirs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In order to ensure that people are not negatively affected
                         by the impacts of the Project and guarantee the protection
                         of potentially vulnerable people, the Project will carry out
                         a screening process to ensure that all these donations are
                         effectively voluntary, and not resulting of communal
                         pressure. The social team at DINEPA will have to pay
                         particular attention to ensure that landowners understand
                         the implications of land donations, particularly where low
                         levels of literacy are. Furthermore, the Project will not
                         allow land donations for site-specific infrastructure.
                         Adequate documentation of the screening process would
                         need to be presented before the commencement of the
                         works. The RPF as well as the Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF) will provide guidance
                         on the screening process as well as on acquisition and
                         compensation guidelines. In the scenario that the
                         screening tool identifies that the donation was not
                         effectively voluntary, the principles of OP4.12 and



                          Page 8 of 13
                                                           described in the RPF will apply. The screening tool
                                                           included in the RPF and ESMF will exclude any activity
                                                           that will require physical relocation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           The RPF will reflect the following principles:
                                                            - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the client will
                                                           need to ensure that the sites, boundaries and ownerships
                                                           of the relevant land plots are clearly identified and
                                                           confirmed using a community-based mapping exercise
                                                           that goes beyond simply checking for legal title.
                                                           - In case resettlement or land acquisition is required,
                                                           agreement on the compensation scheme and its payment
                                                           or realization will be settled prior to the commencement
                                                           of that particular sub-project.
                                                           - In case the protection of water sources and immediate
                                                           perimeters would result in adverse impacts on the
                                                           livelihoods of the affected persons, a plan of action would
                                                           be agreed upon in consultation with project beneficiaries
                                                           to assist them in mitigating these impacts.

                                                           Consultation in the affected areas will include outreach to
                                                           main stakeholders and the affected communities to the
                                                           extent possible, given that many sites will be unknown by
                                                           project effectiveness.

                                                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated
                                                           Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be
                                                           prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to commencement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           of the works in accordance with the policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
                         4.37                              finance the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
                                                           it rely on the operation of existing dams.
                         Projects on International   Yes   The Project will finance water supply schemes in the
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              Centre Department of Haiti which borders the DR and
                                                           along which the two countries share a portion of the
                                                           Artibonite River as well as of the Artibonite
                                                           Transboundary Aquifer. Both are considered international
                                                           waterways for purposes of OP 7.50.

                                                           The Project will only finance ongoing schemes, involving
                                                           additions or alterations that require rehabilitation,
                                                           construction, or other changes that: (i) will not adversely
                                                           change the quality or quantity of water flows to the
                                                           Dominican Republic; and (ii) will not be adversely
                                                           affected by the Dominican Republic's possible water use.
                                                           The Project thus falls under the exception to notification
                                                           requirement under OP 7.50. Appropriate assessments of


                                                            Page 9 of 13
                                                                        the localized environmental impacts will be conducted as
                                                                        part of the preparation process of each investment to be
                                                                        supported under the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No              This policy is not triggered because the project is not in a
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            disputed area

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Component 1 relates largely to capacity building and training and will not cause any social or
                              environmental impacts.

                              Component 2:
                              - Water supply activities could result in some negative environmental and social impacts. The
                              activities focus on the construction of piped water schemes, mainly sourced from underground
                              mountain streams that reach the surface at key points on higher ground. The works will focus on i)
                              protecting the water source (fencing, etc), ii) installing some pump mechanism where gravity is
                              not adequate to ensure flows and iii) building a distribution system so that the water reaches the
                              communities. However, in terms of safeguards, project impacts are largely highly localized and are
                              not likely to result in significant negative impacts. The impacts are likely to be easily identifiable,
                              mostly temporary and easily mitigated with known management techniques. Possible
                              environmental impacts include contamination of the water source by the works occurring around
                              it, depletion of the water source since it will now be readily accessible to most members of the
                              community, waste disposal, and health and human safety concerns. An assessment of the impacts
                              and associated mitigation measures will be detailed in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              - Sanitation activities could result in some negative environmental impacts. The activities focus on
                              constructing latrine blocks for public schools and public spaces (markets, beaches, etc.). With
                              communal latrines, it is important to ensure that the construction is sound and does not impact the
                              water table and that waste disposal mechanisms are best practice in terms of health, particularly as
                              this is a cholera project. Management of these areas is also a key concern given that lack of
                              management could actually increase the cholera risk. It is important therefore, that the project
                              develops a detailed training and hand-washing program for users and implement it prior to the end
                              of the project. An assessment of the impacts and associated mitigation measures will be detailed in
                              the ESMF.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project uses an existing water source that locals use for free. Converting this resource to a
                              payment for service (more accessible water) will likely result in some social issues related to
                              willingness to pay, quality of service for fees and general acceptability, particularly if prices are
                              increased without limit which can result in limited access to water, instead of an increase in
                              accessibility. A plan of action to mitigate these potential negative social impacts will be agreed
                              upon in direct consultation with beneficiaries. In terms of the environment, the only long-term
                              impact is the issue of maintaining the system of pipes and regular disinfection to ensure continued
                              improvements in the water quality.


                                                                         Page 10 of 13
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           In terms of the environmental impacts, some options were considered including a free service.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           However, payment for service does allow for regular maintenance as well as upgrades to the
                           system whereas a free service would not be sustainable in the long term.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower will recruit and use an environmental specialist to ensure supervision of the EMP
                           implementation through regular site visits to the area.

                          The project's social mobilization teams, under the supervision of DINEPA’s social specialists, will
                          address involuntary resettlement issues during the site selection process for water systems. In
                          previous projects of this kind in Haiti, land needed for project infrastructure was acquired through
                          voluntary donation. In this project, voluntary donation is deemed acceptable for non-site specific
                          infrastructure. The teams will carry out a screening process specified in the RPF and ESMF to
                          ensure that all these donations are effectively voluntary, and not resulting of communal pressure.
                          Such screening process would include private domiciliary visits, the elaboration of a socio-
                          economic profile of the owners of the land to be donated, an analysis of the profile to ensure that
                          the donation does not represent a significant loss of land or income, identification of alternative
                          sites, and documentation of the consultation process. DINEPA´s social mobilization teams will
                          have to pay particular attention to ensure that landowners are fully aware of the implications of
                          their donations, particularly given possible low levels of literacy. For site-specific works (such as
                          protection of water sources or expansion/rehabilitation of existing infrastructure) OP 4.12 and the
                          RPF would indeed apply and all losses of land or income would have to be compensated.

                           An assessment of the capacity of DINEPA for safeguards management will be made during
                           preparation and recommendations to strengthen the capacity will be made, as necessary. The
                           diagnostic will include information about staffing, capacity building needs and whether the agency
Public Disclosure Copy




                           has appropriate procedures for screening/assessing environmental impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The expected number of direct project beneficiaries is estimated at 300,000 people, comprising
                           150,000 people who will gain access to improved water sources through household connections
                           and kiosks, 50,000 people who will benefit from improved sanitation through community-led total
                           sanitation campaigns, sanitation marketing and the construction of latrines in public institutions
                           and spaces, as well as 100,000 people who will benefit from small repairs and expansions.
                           Additionally, due to the regional impact of project activities, it is expected that the proposed
                           operation will have positive spill-over effects on the population of the DR.

                          In terms of Government stakeholders, these include DINEPA (National Water and Sanitation
                          Directorate); the Technical Department (DT), through which a project team led by the project
                          coordinator would be responsible for (i) overall project coordination, including reporting and
                          monitoring of the results framework and of safeguards, quality control of technical aspects of
                          procurement and (ii) managing Component 2 (Water Supply) and 1 (Project Management) of the
                          proposed project; the DMR (DINEPA's Rural Division) which would support the management of
                          Component 1 (Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building), in close collaboration with the
                          DT and the Strategic Orientation and Institutional Strengthening Unit under the Director’s office;


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           and DINEPA's Sanitation Department, responsible for Component 2 (Sanitation).

                           Stakeholder consultations will be held with Government agencies and NGOs operating in the area
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as well as direct project beneficiaries. As part of the ESMF preparation, there will be detailed
                           discussion with communities in focal groups. Their comments, questions and concerns will be
                           outlined in the ESMF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Sep-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                            30-Sep-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                            15-May-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jean-Martin Brault
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                              Date: 16-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (PMGR)                         Date: 16-Apr-2015
                            Manager:

                                                                       Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
