                             INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                     APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1O76
o



    Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2014
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Dec-2014
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
       1. Basic Project Data

       Country:            Lebanon                               Project ID:    P152646
       Project Name:       Emergency Primary Healthcare Restoration Project (P 152646)
       Task Team          Nadwa Rafeh
       Leader:
       Estimated       17-Nov-2014                               Estimated   30-Jan-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                           Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GHNDR                                      Lending        Investment Project Financing
                                                                 Instrument:
       Sector(s):          Health (70%), Public administration- Health (30%)
       Theme(s):           Health system performance (50%), Other social protection and risk management
                           (10%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases (20%), Ch ild health (20%)
       Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
       8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:           21.00                  Total Bank Financing:            0.00
       Financing Gap:                  0.00
          Financing Source                                                                            Amount
          Borrower                                                                                       6.00
         Lebanon Syrian Crisis Trust Fund                                                               15.00
         Total                                                                                          21.00
       Environmental C - Not Required
       Category:
       Is this a          No
       Repeater
       project?

       2. Project Development Objective(s)
      The objective of the project is to restore access to essential healthcare services for poor Lebanese
      affected by the influx of Syrian refugees.
       3. Project Description
      The project comprises of three components: (i) provision of the essential healthcare package to

                                                    Page 1 of4
    eligible poor beneficiaries; (ii) readiness and capacity building of contracted primary healthcare
    centers; and (iii) project outreach, management and monitoring.

    Component 1: Provision of the Essential Healthcare Package (US$9.15 million). This component
0
    subsidizes a package of essential healthcare services to 150,696 out of the 290,240 poor Lebanese
    identified by the National Poverty Targeting Program (NPTP) as living below the poverty line. The
    NPTP is based on a PMT targeting mechanism that ensures that the most vulnerable groups within
    the population would be reached. Priority in the selection of beneficiaries is given to those living in
    areas most affected by the Syrian crisis. Six evidence-based packages will be provided under this
    project (i) three age specific and gender wellness packages (ages 0-18, females 19 years and above,
    males 19 years and above), (ii) two care packages for the two common NCDs in Lebanon: diabetes
    and hypertension, and (iii) a reproductive health package focusing on pre and post-natal care.
    Eligible beneficiaries will be covered for the following: (i) screening, preventive, and health
    promotion visits, (ii) clinical and diagnostic tests (iii) prenatal and post care visits, (iv) consultation
    visits for the treatment of diabetes and hypertension, and (v) prescription medications. The essential
    healthcare package will be provided to beneficiaries through MoPH contracted Primary Health Care
    Centers (PHCCs) and outpatient departments (OPD) of public hospitals. Contracted PHCCs will be
    responsible to provide beneficiaries with services within the package while the outpatient department
    of public hospitals will provide clinical and diagnostic tests, if not available at the PHCCs.

    Component 2: Readiness and Capacity Building of Primary Health Care Centers (US$2.85 million).
    This component will finance preparation and scaling-up the capabilities of the contracted PHCCs for
    the implementation of the program. It will also finance technical assistance and training for
    upgrading the skills of personnel of contracted health centers through short refresher courses to help
    them cope with additional load and immediate needs of beneficiaries. Capacity building will include
    training in the essential healthcare services guidelines, M&E, reporting and accounting requirements.

    Component 3: Project Outreach, Management and Monitoring (US$1.85 million). The objective of
    this component is to (i) ensure an effective and efficient administration, regulation, and
    implementation of the project; (ii) improve the effectiveness of the MOPH in contracting with
    PHCCs; (iii) rigorous monitoring and performance assessment of the project outputs and objectives.
    The focus will be mainly to: (a) help establish and support the Program Management Unit (PMU) in
    the MoPH; (b) provide technical assistance in the development and management of contracts with
    PHCCs; (c) update and maintain the Health Information System; (d) initiate rigorous monitoring and
    assessment of the program through setting the baseline indicators, collecting the data and setting the
    parameters for evaluation; (e) improving the grievance and redress mechanism for improved
    efficiency and transparency; and (f) outreach campaign and development of communication activities
    to inform the public and beneficiary population about their health rights and services provided at the
    PHCCs in their areas.
     4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
    analysis (if known)
    This project will subsidize a package of essential healthcare services to 150,696 out of the 290,240
    poor Lebanese identified by the NPTP. Priority will be given to those beneficiaries living in areas
    most affected by the Syrian crisis.
     5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
    John R. Butler (GSURR)
    Chaogang Wang (GSURR)


                                                   Page 2 of4
      Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (GENDR)

       6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
       Environmental Assessment OP/        No              This is a Category C project given that it will not
       BP 4.01                                             involve any physical investments and will have
                                                           minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. As
                                                           such, none of the Bank's safeguard policies will
                                                           be triggered and thus, no EA is required.
       Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

       Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

       Pest Management OP 4.09             No

       Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
       BP 4.11
       Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

       Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
       4.12
       Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

       Projects on International           No
       Waterways OP/BP 7.50
       Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
       7.60
O
    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
      A. Summary of Key SafeguardIssues
       1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
         and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
        No safeguard issues and impacts associated with the project are envisaged.
       2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
         in the project area:
        No potential indirect safeguard impacts are anticipated due to any future activities in the project
        area.
       3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
         impacts.
        Not applicable.
       4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
         assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
        Not applicable.
       5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
          on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                    Page 3 of4
        Not applicable.
      B. Disclosure Requirements
       If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
       respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
       Audit/or EMP.
       If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
       N/A. OP 4.01 is not triggered and thus, no EA is needed.
      C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
       The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
        Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
        World Bank's Infoshop?
        Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
        place in a form and language that are understandable and
        accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
       All Safeguard Policies
        Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
        responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
        measures related to safeguard policies?
        Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ x ]
        in the project cost?
        Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X ]
        include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
        related to safeguard policies?
        Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [ X]
        with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
C
U       the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS
       Task Team Leader:        Name: Nadwa Rafeh
       Approved By
       Practice Manager/        Name: Enis Baris (PMGR)                         Date: 16-Dec-2014
       Manager:




                                                   Page 4 of4
