                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC7623

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Micronesia, Federated States of Project ID:        P148560
                            Project Name:       Energy Sector Development (P148560)
                            Task Team           Roberto Gabriel Aiello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           19-Mar-2014                      Estimated         29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASNS                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        13.90                Total Bank Financing:              13.90
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                      13.90
                              Total                                                                          13.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objectives are to improve the efficiency and reliability of electricity
                           supply, and strengthen the planning and technical capacities at the state power utilities and the
                           national Government.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project, with an estimated cost of US$13.9 million, will include the following three
                           components:
                         Component 1: Improvement in technical performance of the state utilities (IDA US$9.0 million).
                         This component will support fuel savings through improved fuel efficiency of power generation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increased penetration of renewable energy sources, loss reduction, reliability increases, and
                         performance improvement activities and maintenance plans for the four utilities, including key
                         investments in equipment needed to increase revenues and reduce energy losses.

                         Component 2: National and state energy planning (IDA US$3.4 million). This component will
                         finance the preparation of Energy Master Plans for the four FSM states and the development of a
                         National Energy Sector Master Plan. These plans would follow a ‘whole-of-sector’ approach for
                         assessing the energy needs. They would confirm the power infrastructure investments needed in the
                         first five years and reflect the results of grid stability analysis to identify reinforcements to the grid
                         required to ensure that potential new projects are properly integrated to the systems. The plans would
                         also reflect the results of feasibility studies and environmental and social impact assessments of the
                         top priority projects. Feasibility and other project specific studies to be undertaken under this
                         component will be selected based on criteria that will include technical, financial, social and
                         environmental impacts, as well as their contribution to NEP’s goals of increasing energy efficiency
                         and the share of renewable energy in the nation’s overall energy supply. The preparation of the
                         Master Plans will use other studies that have been undertaken or are planned in the sector, such as the
                         least cost plans to be prepared by ADB for Pohnpei and Chuuk, as inputs.

                         Component 3: Technical assistance and project management (IDA US$1.5 million). This component
                         will build the capacity of the Energy Division of the NDRD and the Association of Micronesian
                         Utilities (AMU) for: (i) sector data collection, statistics, and development of an information
                         management system, (ii) benchmarking of the utilities, and (iii) implementing the NEP. This
                         component will broaden the dialogue on important matters affecting the energy sector, including
                         developing a utilities reform program to improve sustainability of their operations. This dialogue and
                         reform program will be developed in close consultation with other development partners to avoid
                         overlap, and to leverage existing initiatives in that space.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will also support the overall coordination, management and monitoring functions of
                         the project carried out by the Energy Division of the NDRD in its role as Implementing Agency.
                         Furthermore, it will finance project implementation costs, including technical assistance (individuals
                         or firms), consultant fees (including a project implementation officer, a technical specialist, a finance
                         officer, a procurement advisor and a safeguards advisor), meetings of the Steering and Technical
                         committees, production of reports and other documentation or reference materials, studies,
                         workshops, training, and limited goods and equipment.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 and Component 2 have different safeguards issues and different approaches to
                         safeguards:

                         Component 1 investments are known and detailed in the project concept. They are based on a
                         recently completed assessment of the state utilities’ technical performance and the priorities
                         identified in the State Action Plans under the National Energy Policy. The ESDP will fund the
                         following investments (all within power station footprints except street light upgrades and
                         installation of prepaid meters) and provide technical assistance to the utilities for improving their
                         technical performance and implementing maintenance plans:
                         Pohnpei:
                         Replacement of 2 gensets to improve reliability and fuel efficiency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kosrae:
                         (i) Acquisition and installation of an additional, new genset of 1.2MW to improve fuel efficiency and
                         reliability.
                         (ii) Fuel injection services in all gensets, energy audits and improvements to reduce consumption of
                         power station internal services.

                         Chuuk:
                         (i) Acquisition and installation of 200kW of grid connected photovoltaic generation at the power
                         station site and on government buildings.
                         (ii) Upgrade to more efficient street public lighting system by replacing light bulbs.

                         Yap:
                         (i) Acquisition and installation of capacitor banks and temperature compensated digital fuel meters.
                         (ii) Prepaid meters for 95% of 1800 customers.
                         (iii) A major overhaul of two gensets and acquisition and installation of new radiators.

                         There will be no investments funded under Component 2, but the Energy Master Plans will prepare a
                         program of downstream investments. Feasibility studies for priority investments will include the
                         preparation of safeguards instruments so that the projects are ‘investment ready’. The location of
                         downstream projects that may be identified and prioritized under the Master Plans is not yet known.
                         As an indication, technical studies and/or investment projects which are listed as priorities in the
                         State Energy Action Plans and which have potential environmental or social impacts include:
                         •       Grid connected solar PV on public buildings;
                         •       Hybridizing existing generation facilities with solar or wind power; studies for additional
                         application in un-electrified areas;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Sea wave power 4 MW plant construction;
                         •       Ocean technology/wave energy studies;
                         •       Waste oil-diesel blend pilot project;
                         •       Hydro plant refurbishment and assessment of expansion potential, including possible river
                         diversion;
                         •       Mini- and micro-hydro feasibility study reassessment;
                         •       Wind mapping; and
                         •       Solid waste, sewage and biomass studies.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Borrower is a relatively new Bank partner. This is the Bank’s first project with the country in
                         this sector. The Division of Energy, in the National Department of Resources and Development has
                         a single staff member. The project design incorporates measures to provide and build capacity to
                         ensure implementation of safeguards provisions. This includes:
                         •        Providing funding for the Implementing Agency to engage a part time safeguards advisor to
                         assist with the implementation and monitoring of the safeguards requirements of the project. Key
                         tasks will be to: conduct training on World Bank safeguards policies and the safeguards documents
                         with the implementing agency and state utilities and the members of the Association of Micronesian
                         Utilities (a technical committee on the project); integrate the EMP and ESMF requirements into the
                         Project Implementation Manual; integrate safeguards documents into TOR and contracts for all
                           suppliers and consultants, reviewing and commenting on bid responses to TOR, reviewing and
                           commenting on the safeguards components of the Master Planning process (including any safeguards
                           documents prepared), assist with consultation strategies, and otherwise assist the implementing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agency to implement and supervise actions under the safeguard documents.
                           •        Ensuring that the terms of reference for the Master Planning component requires a competent
                           consultant to carry out strategic assessment of environmental and social issues and opportunities as
                           part of the planning process, and to integrate safeguard provisions into the five Master Plans and
                           feasibility studies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Beverly Ann McLean (EASNS)
                           Penelope Ruth Ferguson (EASIS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Component 1 will involve the replacement and
                           BP 4.01                                             upgrade of equipment within the existing power
                                                                               station footprints. Impacts will be manageable
                                                                               using routine mitigation measures common to
                                                                               the industry. An Environmental Management
                                                                               Plan (EMP) will be prepared for Component 1.
                                                                               The Master Planning process under Component
                                                                               2 will lead to downstream investments. The
                                                                               location, nature and scale of these investments
                                                                               are currently unknown. An Environmental and
                                                                               Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                               prepared to inform the studies, screen the
                                                                               downstream investments for environment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               social impacts and outputs for the Master
                                                                               Planning process, capacity building and training.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             No natural habitats will be significantly
                                                                               degraded or converted for this project, however
                                                                               there is a possibility that they could be at risk
                                                                               from downstream investments identified under
                                                                               the master plan. The ESMF will have provision
                                                                               for screening the investments for impacts on
                                                                               natural habitats and measures to mitigate these
                                                                               impacts.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes             The project is not envisaged to affect forests but
                                                                               the downstream investments emerging from the
                                                                               master plan may have impacts once
                                                                               implemented. The ESMF will include provision
                                                                               for screening impacts of downstream
                                                                               investments on forests, including mitigating
                                                                               measures.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            There will be no pest management or
                                                                                                                                 procurement of pesticides for agricultural or
                                                                                                                                 public health purposes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           No physical cultural resources will be impacted
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         during this project, as the physical works are
                                                                                                                                 within existing power station footprints or
                                                                                                                                 government buildings. However there is a
                                                                                                                                 possibility that they could be at risk from
                                                                                                                                 downstream investments. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 provide guidance on identification and
                                                                                                                                 protection of physical cultural resources for
                                                                                                                                 downstream investments in the Master Plan,
                                                                                                                                 consistent with this policy.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The population of the FSM is predominantly
                                                                                                                                 Micronesian (99.9%) and does not conform to
                                                                                                                                 the World Bank definition of Indigenous
                                                                                                                                 Peoples. The policy is therefore not triggered.
                                                                                                                                 However, a Country-level social assessment is
                                                                                                                                 included in the ESMF and identifies areas for
                                                                                                                                 State-level social assessment to guide State
                                                                                                                                 energy sector Master Planning. This assessment
                                                                                                                                 will identify any pockets of Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                                                 or other sources of vulnerability that will inform
                                                                                                                                 downstream project design.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Though the present project will have no
                                 4.12                                                                                            currently known land acquisition and
                                                                                                                                 resettlement impacts, downstream projects to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 identified and prioritized under the Master Plans
                                                                                                                                 that are one of the outputs of the project may
                                                                                                                                 have resettlement implications. A Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to
                                                                                                                                 guide development of resettlement instruments
                                                                                                                                 for land acquisition as a result of future
                                                                                                                                 investments in the energy sector.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           Dams are not part of the proposed physical
                                                                                                                                 works in Component 1. Renovation of the
                                                                                                                                 existing hydropower scheme is a potential
                                                                                                                                 downstream project. The ESMF will provide
                                                                                                                                 guidance on the requirements of this policy for
                                                                                                                                 downstream investments under the Master Plan.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             There are no international waterways within the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            area of influence of the project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas in FSM.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Mar-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The draft EMP, ESMF and the RPF (which will be integrated into the ESMF) will be completed
                             by 18 March 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                           Date: 19-Mar-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                              Date: 19-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
