                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA4005
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Gambia, The                           Project ID:    P133079
                            Project Name:      READ: Results for Education Achievement and Development Project (P133079)
                            Task Team          Nathalie Lahire
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Aug-2013                           Estimated   27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                          Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                     Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Primary education (50%), Secondary education (30%), Tertiary education
                                               (10%), General education sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (70%), Education for the knowledge economy (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        34.60           Total Bank Financing:  11.70
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         16.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  11.70
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                   6.90
                              Total                                                                                      34.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Proposed Development Objective (PDO): To increase access to basic education, improve quality of
                           teaching and learning in lower basic schools, and strengthen education systems.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                          Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed project, which will support the implementation of the Government's Education Sector
                         Strategic Plan (2014-2023), is a US$34.6 million investment (IDA US$11.7M, GPE US$6.9M, and
                         Government financing US$16.0M). The Investment Project Financing (IPF) Grant corresponds to US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $31.0 million and the results based financing contribution is US$3.6 million. The Project comprises
                         four components: Components 1 to 3 will be executed through a traditional IPF approach and
                         Component 4 will be carried out through a results-based approach.

                         The traditional IPF component will finance essential investment activities, advisory, technical,
                         capacity-building, and monitoring and evaluation support. The results based component is critical to
                         strengthening the education system because it is geared towards changing critical behaviors that are
                         currently impeding the education system, changes without which the strategic investments will have
                         little effect. Under the results-based component, the event and amount of project disbursements will
                         be contingent on the satisfactory achievement of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).

                         The proposed project will disburse against selected key education budget line items referred to as
                         Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs), up to agreed limits. The event and amount of disbursements
                         will be based on the achievement of all pre-specified results for a given year, referred to as
                         disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs), determined in partnership with the Government and related to
                         the reforms and activities under the Education Sector Strategic Plan (2014-2023). The financial
                         management arrangements for the proposed project will follow Government systems. Procurement
                         arrangements and safeguards policies follow World Bank’s procedures.

                         Additional education policies are supported under the Development Policy Operation (DPO) led by
                         the World Bank’s Poverty Reduction and Economic Management (PREM) department and in close
                         alignment with the proposed READ project. The policies focus on reducing the financial burden of
                         the households through the provision of grants to schools to cover the school fees charged by lower
                         basic schools and the expansion of programs targeting the most vulnerable children. The DPO will
                         become effective in late 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Components
                         Component 1:
                         Increase access to basic education (US$13.0 million, of which IDA US$3.5 million, GPE US$2.3
                         million and Government financing US$7.2 million).

                         Although the enrollment has significantly improved over the last decade, the number of out of school
                         children has not been reduced due to the rapid population growth. Distance to school, high private
                         education costs, and school readiness remain critical challenges this component will support to
                         increase access to basic education.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: School construction: The data show that 17 percent (339 communities) of
                         communities in the country do not have a lower basic school within 3 kilometers. In this context,
                         READ will finance the construction of 40 multi-grade schools (80 classrooms) and water points in
                         remote areas which do not have a lower basic school within 3 kilometers reducing the number of un-
                         served communities to about 239. Each school will comprise 2 classrooms, accommodation for two
                         teachers, a water point, and furniture (desks and chairs).

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Donkey carts: One of the MOBSE policy pronouncements 2004-2015 is that no
                         child in lower basic education should walk more than three kilometers in order to access school.


                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         Under the previous GPE project, 82 customized donkey carts were provided on a pilot basis to
                         communities where lower grade students had difficulty in walking to school due to long distances.
                         However, it has been reported that donkey carts themselves are too heavy without children onboard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and they need to be redesigned. The proposed project will finance approximately 100 redesigned
                         donkey carts.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Community-based early childhood care and development (ECD): The Japan
                         Social Development Fund (JSDF) supported a pilot ECD program which has assisted children under
                         three through the Baby Friendly Community Initiatives (BFCI and BFCI+), and assisted children
                         aged 3-6 through community-based ECD. This pilot has supported curriculum development with an
                         emphasis on parental education and cognitive stimulation for those under 3, and a focus on school
                         readiness for those over 3. The project has also supported development and provision of materials,
                         construction of ECD sheds, training of facilitators and pilot testing of a community based ECD
                         provision.

                         After the closure of the JSDF program in December 2013, READ will sustain and expand the ECD
                         provision. Specifically, READ will support (i) the construction of 20 ECD sheds for BFCI+ and 20
                         sheds for community based ECD (ii) training of facilitator volunteers (they have at least grade 10
                         education) and develop a program to prepare them to gain access to ECD certification under the PTC
                         program at the Gambia College if they have the required qualifications, (iii) provision of teaching
                         and learning materials, (iv) supervision and monitoring of the program by the ECD unit in MOBSE,
                         (v) follow-up data collection as part of an existing impact evaluation, and (vi) development of an
                         ECD monitoring tool. The Government will finance the allowances for the ECD volunteers. An
                         MOU will be signed between MOBSE and Ministry of Health to use the community health nurses for
                         the health and nutrition services for the BFCI+.

                         Subcomponent 1.4: Provision of school grants to all lower and upper basic public schools and
                         stationery to all students in lower basic education in hardship areas. Schools will be provided with a
                         grant based on student enrollment numbers to substitute for formal and informal fees. At lower basic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level, the Government will finance the grants for all 517 schools, and prohibit all formal and informal
                         fees and levies. At upper basic level, the fees and charges for the 2013/14 school year will be capped
                         at D575, and in 2014/15 charges will be abolished and substituted by the school grants. READ will
                         finance grants for 77 upper basic schools in regions 3-6, and the Government will finance grants for
                         the 90 schools in regions 1 and 2. The guidelines for the use of school grants have been developed,
                         and in collaboration with Education for All Campaign Network of The Gambia, they will be
                         distributed to lower and upper basic schools and the information shared publicly.

                         The stationery will be supported through the school grant mechanism. In addition to schools fees
                         some parents cannot afford stationery; therefore, some children, especially from low economic
                         status, may not enroll or regularly attend school READ will support the purchasing of notebooks,
                         pens, pencils and erasers for about 36,000 LBS students in hardship areas in 2014 and 2015 while the
                         Government will finance notebooks, pens, pencils and erasers in 2016 and 2017.

                         Component 2: Improve quality of teaching and learning (US$10.6 million, of which IDA US$3.6
                         million, GPE US$1.6 million and Government financing US$5.4 million).

                         This component aims to improve quality of teaching and learning through (i) supporting reforms of
                         initial teacher training to improve pedagogical and content skills of new teachers, (ii) providing
                         regular stipends to student teachers taking the HTC as an initial teaching qualification, with an

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         increased stipend for student teachers specializing in mathematics, and continued provision of
                         stipends for those in the existing PTC, (iii) providing hardship allowances for lower and upper basic
                         teachers in remote areas, with enhanced payments for those in very remote areas (above 9km from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the main road)and female teachers, (iv) supporting teacher continuing professional development, (v)
                         supporting initiatives to enhance reading in the early grades, (vi) supporting the CCT program for
                         Majalis (Daaras), (vii) providing supplemental readers and library books, and (viii) supporting a
                         phased connection of schools to a high bandwidth ICT learning network.

                         Component 3: Technical and Institutional Support (US$7.4 million, of which IDA US$2.3 million,
                         GPE US$1.7 million and Government financing US$3.4 million).
                         The TA component aims to support institutional and capacity strengthening interventions to facilitate
                         the implementation of Components 1 and 2 and engaging in effective communication regarding the
                         sector and the READ project.

                         (i)     Developing a strong communications strategy. Until now, communication has been ad hoc,
                         and a cohesive communication strategy will allow for more effective communication with all
                         constituents. The strategy will address both internal and external elements (TV, radio, newsletters,
                         documentary, website) as well as attempt to build and improve upon strategic partnerships with
                         external players who can support MOBSE’s work. The communication strategy will also encompass
                         dissemination strategies involving community/opinion leaders to influence behavior changes.

                         (ii)    Institutional support and capacity building including continuous implementation of
                         assessments of learning outcomes (standardized and classroom based), with a focus on utilization of
                         the results for improved teaching and learning and involvement of parents, strengthening data
                         systems by linking the Education Management Information System (EMIS) school level data,
                         Human Resources (HR) data, learning outcomes results, and other data from the regions for a more
                         comprehensive system analysis, Project Coordination Unit (PCU) salaries and operating costs to
                         coordinate the program, building MOBSE and Regional staff statistical capacity through training
                         programs, and collecting regular data on student and teacher absenteeism using the mobile phone
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system introduced on a pilot basis under the current program in regions 1-6.

                         Component 4: Strengthening the education system with a focus on governance and management
                         results (US$3.6 million, of which IDA US$2.3 million a nd GPE US$1.3 million).

                         Under this component, the proposed governance and management reforms, for the most part, aim to
                         address gaps in and/or current poor practices in strengthening the system, all of which are critical to
                         improving access and addressing teacher and student performance. There are 9 Disbursement Linked
                         Indicators (DLIs) and each DLI weighs US$400,000. The event and amount of project disbursements
                         will be contingent on the satisfactory achievement of DLIs.

                         DLI 1: Package of final bidding documents for all schools-related construction (20 multi-grade
                         schools including teacher quarters, water supply: boreholes with solar pumps and reservoir/wells
                         with hand pump; 20 ECD centers) with No-Objection by World Bank and advertised in local
                         newspaper (National Competitive Bidding) by January 31, 2014.

                         DLI 2: First tranche (40%) of annual school grants transferred by Sept 15 from MOBSE to all public
                         lower basic schools

                         DLI 3: First tranche (40%) of annual school grants transferred by Sept 15 from MOBSE to all public

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         upper basic schools

                         DLI 4: Annual formal and informal school fees paid by parents to all public lower basic schools .
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DLI 5: Average attendance by students in public schools in NAT for grade 3, 5 and 8 for full two
                         days.

                         DLI 6: Annual School Census data collection carried out including Madrassas and min. 95 %
                         response rate and completed in November 2013 and results released in February 2014 and analytical
                         report with trends by May 2014

                         DLI 7: Annual formal and informal school fees paid by parents to all public upper basic schools.

                         DLI 8: Average attendance by students in public schools in NAT for grade 3, 5 and 8 for full two
                         days.

                         DLI 9: Head Teachers in lower basic schools adjusting School Development Plans in response to
                         NAT results and approved by Regional Directorates using an agreed upon check list
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location will be nationwide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Amadou Konare (AFTN1)
                         Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes            OP 4.01 is triggered because of the potential
                          BP 4.01                                             environmental impacts resulting from project
                                                                              activities. However, those impacts are expected to
                                                                              be minimal, site-specific and manageable to an
                                                                              accepted level. Due to the difficulty inherent in
                                                                              defining what the real environmental impacts of
                                                                              envisioned sub-projects are, and determining
                                                                              what mitigation measures to put in place, an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) has been developed and
                                                                              publically disclosed in-country and at the Bank
                                                                              Inforshop. The ESMF formulates standard
                                                                              methods and procedures, along with institutional
                                                                              arrangements for screening, review, approval and
                                                                              implementation and monitoring of specific EMPs,
                                                                              including the preparation of environmental
                                                                              clauses to be inserted in contractors’ bidding
                                                                              documents.




                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No                The project does not involve natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No                The project does not involve forestry.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project does not involve the use of
                                                                                pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The project does not involve the use of physical
                            BP 4.11                                             cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               There are no indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              The project interventions will avoid where
                            4.12                                                possible adverse impacts on people, land and
                                                                                other economic resources and livelihoods. In
                                                                                situations where this cannot be avoided, the
                                                                                Borrower has prepared and disclosed in-country
                                                                                and at the Bank InfoShop a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework (RPF) to address the needs of persons
                                                                                who will be affected by loss of economic
                                                                                activities, access to resources, land acquisition
                                                                                and/or involuntary resettlement.

                                                                                In addition, where applicable, site-specific
                                                                                Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or
                                                                                Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs)
                                                                                will be prepared and disclosed prior to school
                                                                                infrastructure construction.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                   N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No large scale, significant and/or irreversible social and environmental impacts are expected to
                              arise directly from project investments.

                             The project has triggered OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment to mitigate the potential
                             environmental and social impacts resulting from project activities. However, those impacts are
                             expected to be minimal, site-specific and manageable to an accepted level. Due to the difficulty
                             inherent in defining what the real environmental impacts of envisioned project activities are, and
                             determining what mitigation measures to put in place, an Environmental and Social Management


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                           Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and disclosed in country and in the World Bank InfoShop.

                           The social impacts of the project, by the nature of its development objective are positive.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           However, the informal practice of cultivating unoccupied land, including land that belongs to
                           schools, during the rainy season, when schools are out of session, by women from surrounding
                           communities, continues throughout The Gambia. While the project will avoid where possible
                           adverse impacts on people, land and other economic resources and livelihoods, the Involuntary
                           Resettlement policy (OP 4.12) has been triggered and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                           been prepared and disclosed in country and in the World Bank InfoShop to mitigate any adverse
                           impacts in situations where this cannot be avoided. In addition, where applicable, site-specific
                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be
                           prepared and disclosed prior to school infrastructure construction.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           If left unattended, potential long-term negative impacts of school building construction could
                           include soil erosion and loss of vegetation. In addition, if proper legal titles are not acquired by the
                           MOBSE clearly indicating ownership of land that is assigned for schools prior to construction,
                           community disputes around land ownership may arise.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No large scale, significant and/or irreversible social and environmental impacts are expected to
                           arise directly from project investments. However, the following recommendations have been made
                           to the MOBSE/PCU to minimize adverse impacts during project implementation:
                           1.        Assure full compliance with the safeguards instruments that govern the project – the
                           ESMF and the RPF- and all sub-projects be screened and environmental and social management
                           plans be prepared where needed.
                           2.        Include social and environmental clauses in bidding documents
                           3.        Designate an environmental and social focal point within the PCU who could coordinate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the safeguards compliance (in line with the recommendations of the ESMF and RPF) during
                           project implementation
                           4.        Once appointed, strengthen the capacity of the social and environmental focal point in the
                           PCU through training programs and bringing the focal point up to speed on monitoring and
                           reporting mechanisms
                           5.        Project environmental and social compliance monitoring be conducted in collaboration
                           with The Gambia National Environmental Agency (NEA). An MOU between the MOBSE and the
                           NEA for compliance monitoring has been drafted and will be signed before the project becomes
                           effective.
                           6.        MoBSE should formally acquire and record all land that is assigned to the schools prior to
                           construction. Fencing of school property before construction was also recommended.
                           7.        Organize a workshop as part of the public disclosure of the safeguards instruments (ESMF
                           and RPF) to inform all stakeholders of the safeguards instruments that govern the project, so they
                           can also be informed and active participants in compliance monitoring during project
                           implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           There is limited Borrower environmental and social safeguard capacity, in spite of the
                           implementation of several projects in the sector, in recent years. This, for the most part, stems


                                                                       Page 7 of 10
                           from the limited coordination among project implementers (MOBSE) and the National
                           Environmental Agency (NEA), in particular, in carrying out projects environmental and social
                           function. This concerns mainly the monitoring of the implementation of mitigation measures and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           compliance monitoring, a role that should be devolved to the NEA. The borrower has already
                           finalized the draft MOU for compliance monitoring with the NEA and it will be signed before the
                           project becomes effective.

                           These and other constraints to implementing the project safeguard requirements has been assessed
                           and addressed in the context of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The project is set out to strengthen, as necessary,
                           relevant stakeholders’ capacity to meet its safeguard requirements. In other words, the project shall
                           implement any capacity strengthening measures that will be identified in environmental and social
                           instruments applicable to this operation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The proposed READ project will directly contribute to strengthening public service delivery by
                           supporting learning in basic education as well as focusing on providing education services to out
                           of school children. The Project objectives are consistent with the WB/AFDB Joint Assistance
                           Strategy (2012-2015) for the Gambia. In addition, READ is fully aligned with both the World
                           Bank’s Africa Regional Strategy (Africa’s Future and the World Bank’s Support to It) and the
                           Education Strategy (Learning for All - Investing in People’s Knowledge and Skills to Promote
                           Development).

                           The key stakeholders include the local communities (urban and rural), ECD children, lower and
                           upper basic and secondary students, lower basic and upper basic teachers, student teachers, school
                           administrators, regional education offices, and the Department of State for Education (MOBSE,
                           MOHERST). The two safeguards instruments governing the project, the ESMF and the RPF,
                           includes institutional arrangements, and outlines the roles and responsibilities for the various
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stakeholder groups involved, for screening, reviewing, as well as implementation and monitoring
                           of mitigation measures.

                           As soon as the implementation sites (sites of new school infrastructure construction) are identified,
                           each project activity will systematically be processed through the environmental and social
                           screening procedures as detailed in the ESMF. The screening will be conducted by the
                           environmental and social safeguards focal point of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU)/MOBSE
                           in collaboration with the National Environmental Agency (NEA). The results of the screening will
                           be processed according to the national regulations under the control of the National Environmental
                           Agency (NEA).

                           The environmental and social mitigation measures summarized in the ESMF, will be executed,
                           monitored and reported in: (i) a specific Safeguard Monitoring Report; and (ii) the Environmental
                           and Social Safeguards section of the overall project periodic reports. The responsibility of the
                           follow up is with the PCU, while the NEA will be copied in all related reports. The indicators
                           below will be monitored, as part of the project’s global monitoring system:
                           •       Number of eligible project activities processed through the screening procedure;
                           •       Number of specific ESMPs/RAPs recommended;
                           •       Percentage of approved specific ESMPs/RAPs recommendations and measures
                           implemented timely and appropriately;


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           •        Number/ Frequency of safeguard supervision and annual project reviews undertaken;
                           •        Completion of the section on the safeguards implementation in the project periodic
                           reports.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental and social safeguards focal point within the PCU, in collaboration with the NEA
                           will work upstream with the procurement specialist, to ensure the inclusion of social and
                           environmental safeguards clause in bidding documents and annual work plans, and downstream
                           with the monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist on field supervisions to ensure proper
                           compliance of environmental and social safeguards by contractors and beneficiaries.

                           Before project approval, a stakeholder workshop will be organized by the Project Coordination
                           Unit, involving relevant project stakeholder groups to foster ownership and better apply safeguards
                           policies during implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          21-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       03-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gambia, The                                                          09-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The ESMF has been made available for public review at the Ministry of Basic and
                                         Secondary Education (MoBSE) and National Environmental Agency (NEA)
                                         websites and head offices in Banjul, as well as in all six Regional Education Offices
                                         in the country.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          21-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       03-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Gambia, The                                                          09-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The RPF has been made available for public review at the Ministry of Basic and
                                         Secondary Education (MoBSE) and National Environmental Agency (NEA)
                                         websites and head offices in Banjul, as well as in all six Regional Education Offices
                                         in the country.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Nathalie Lahire
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 24-Sep-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                         Date: 04-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
