                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6041

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Armenia                          Project ID:      P146994
                            Project Name:       Trade Promotion and Quality Infrastructure (P146994)
                            Task Team           Feyi Boroffice
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Mar-2014                      Estimated        29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSPF                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other domestic and international trade (40%), General industry and trade sector
                                                (40%), SME Finance (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Export development and competitiveness (50%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                                Enterprise support (25%), Other Private Sector Development (25 %)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     40.00                      Total Bank Financing:          40.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         40.00
                              Total                                                                         40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project’s objective is to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the government’s
                           interventions to support the competitiveness of Armenian enterprises. The project is focused on
                           helping the entities that have been charged with supporting Armenian enterprises to upgrade their
                           quality - so that they are able to compete at home and abroad - to fulfill their mandate. The primary
                           beneficiaries of the project will be the enterprise sector, particularly SMEs. The Ministry of
                         Economy, the revamped enterprise support agency, the National Metrology Institute, the National
                         Institute for Standardization and the Accreditation Center are also expected to be major beneficiaries.
                         The administrator to be selected to administer matching grants component will also benefit from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance and know-how to manage these activities.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will consist of four components.

                         Component 1. Strengthening the institutional framework in support of Investment and export
                         promotion - seeks to strengthen the institutional framework which supports of investment and export
                         promotion. With a proposed allocation of $12 million, this component comprises a $10 million
                         results-based sub-component as well as $2 million of technical assistance. The main areas of focus
                         will include: (i) adoption of a national Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) policy and strengthening the
                         investment law in line with international best practice; (ii) assessment and institutional restructuring
                         of the enterprise support agencies; (iii) restructuring and reorganization of the National Metrology
                         Institute (NMI); and (iv) creating flagship export promotion and investment promotion programs.

                         Component 2. Modernizing the National Quality Infrastructure - aims to support the Government of
                         Armenia with the modernization of the National Quality Infrastructure using traditional investment
                         project financing of $7.5 million. The first goal of this component is the modernization of the
                         metrology system. This activity will encompass the renovation of the National Metrology Institute
                         building, installation of laboratories within this building, purchase of equipment, and capacity
                         building of the staff. There will also be extensive training to build the capacity of the staff to operate
                         the equipment and training on the skills needed to run a modern metrology institute. The second goal
                         of this component is to provide capacity building and financial support for the Accreditation Center.
                         The third subcomponent will be to support the capacity building of the other actors in the National
                         Quality System including the National Institute of Standardization, and the Market Surveillance unit.
                         Finally, the component will also focus on improve the efficiency of service delivery of the entire
                         National Quality system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Upgrading Technological Capabilities and expanding Market Access for Enterprises -
                         seeks to upgrade technological capabilities and expand market access for enterprises with an
                         allocation of $19.5 million of traditional Investment Project Financing. This component encompasses
                         two main actions. First it provides the resources ($5.5 million) for the setting up and financing of an
                         Export Credit Insurance mechanism. Second, the project envisions the creation of a Matching Grants
                         Facility to support quality improvement, technology absorption, and investments in public goods by
                         multinationals ($14 million).

                         Component 4. Focusing on Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation with a proposed
                         allocation of $1 million to set up a Project Management Unit (PMU) that will be responsible for all
                         the day-to-day project implementation activities. This component will finance consultants employed
                         as part of the PMU, training, office equipment and incremental operating costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The National Metrology Institute is located in the capital city of Yerevan. Civil works activities are
                         expected to be located within the existing footprint of the NMI. Beneficiaries of the Matching Grants
                         Facility are not known upfront and may be located anywhere in the country.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Economy is expected to be the Implementing Agency for this project. It is expected
                           that a Project Management Unit (PMU) established within the Ministry of Economy will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           responsible for all the day-to-day management of the project activities, while financial management
                           will be provided by the Foreign Financing Projects Management Center (FFPMC), as is customary
                           for projects implemented with World Bank support in Armenia. FFPMC is well experienced
                           handling fiduciary aspects. The Ministry of Economy has not had previous exposure or experience
                           with implementation and oversight of Word Bank safeguard policies. Therefore, it will be essential
                           that the Ministry staffs its PMU with adequate capacity for managing environmental and social
                           aspects of the project interventions. Detailed arrangements for ensuring institutional capacity for
                           safeguards application will be worked out before the project appraisal.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                           Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)
                           Ekaterine Imerlishvili (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will support rehabilitation of
                           BP 4.01                                             premises for the National Institute of Metrology,
                                                                               including its laboratory facilities. No need for a
                                                                               new construction is expected. The use of
                                                                               explosive and/or toxic substances in the
                                                                               laboratories if the Institute is not likely,
                                                                               however that will be confirmed before the
                                                                               project appraisal. Present design of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Matching Grants Facility does not envisage
                                                                               financing civil works. That is also subject to
                                                                               confirmation at a later stage of the project
                                                                               preparation. If works are excluded from the
                                                                               grant financing, that will be documented in the
                                                                               Operational Manual (OM) to be developed for
                                                                               the project. In this case the OM will also carry
                                                                               provisions for screening grant applications for
                                                                               their potential indirect environmental and social
                                                                               impacts. Alternatively, if small works are
                                                                               eligible for financing under the Matching Grants
                                                                               Facility, an Environmental Management
                                                                               Framework (EMF) will be developed for this
                                                                               grant scheme, to guide environmental screening,
                                                                               selection, review and approval of grant
                                                                               proposals.

                                                                               Regardless of the final decisions on the design
                                                                               of the Matching Grants Facility, environmental
                                                                                                                                 risks of the entire project is expected to be small
                                                                                                                                 to moderate, because no new construction is
                                                                                                                                 expected to be financed and all reconstruction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 works are expected to be of a modest scale.
                                                                                                                                 Therefore, the project is classified as
                                                                                                                                 environmental Category B. An Environmental
                                                                                                                                 Management Plan for work in the National
                                                                                                                                 Institute of Metrology will be developed before
                                                                                                                                 appraisal. Disclosure and public consultation on
                                                                                                                                 this EMP, as well as on the EMF, if required,
                                                                                                                                 will be organized also before appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           It is not expected that renovations under
                                 4.12                                                                                            Component 2 will involve land acquisition/use
                                                                                                                                 or resettlement. However, a final decision on the
                                                                                                                                 triggering of OP 4.12 would be made prior to
                                                                                                                                 the decision stage. If triggered, a project RPF
                                                                                                                                 would be prepared, cleared and disclosed in-
                                                                                                                                 country prior to appraisal. The Matching Grants
                                                                                                                                 Facility under Component 3 will include a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 ‘negative list’ to exclude any sub-projects which
                                                                                                                                 included land acquisition/use or resettlement
                                                                                                                                 from eligibility for funding. The “negative list”
                                                                                                                                 as well as the procedure for screening sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects for land acquisition/use will be clearly
                                                                                                                                 described in the OM to be developed by the
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             EMP for the rehabilitation of the National Metrology Institute will be drafted, disclosed, discussed
                             with stakeholders and finalized before appraisal. The same procedure will be applied to the EMF
                             and RPF, if there are needs to develop them. Site-specific EMPs and RAPs, if required, will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                             subject to the same consultation, review and disclosure procedures.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Feyi Boroffice

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                 Date: 19-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Aurora Ferrari (SM)                                 Date: 17-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
