                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR6705
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P099224
                            Project Name:       Liaoning Third Medium Cities Infrastructure (P099224)
                            Task Team           Yanqin Song
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           08-Jan-2008                                  Estimated   27-May-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEEDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (97%), Oil and gas (3%)
                            Theme:            Climate change (50%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                             No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        375.85                Total Bank Financing:      191.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             184.85
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                191.00
                              Total                                                                                                375.85
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project objective is to improve the effectiveness of heating supply and gas supply in
                           selected medium cities of Liaoning Province, with a particula                                r
                           emphasis on cost recovery and system efficiency. The LMC3 components are plan
                           ned to include: (i) investment in rehabilitation and expansion of urban heating


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         supply utilizing demand driven heating supply designs; (ii) investment in urban
                         gas distribution and storage systems; and (iii) consulting services for technica
                         l implementation, for special topics relating to the implementation of urban hea
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ting sector reform, following the Government's heat reform guidelines (issued Ju
                         ly 2003), and project management support, including incremental operating costs.

                          The project should have a positive environmental impact on local air quality with the replacement of
                         numerous inefficient, small boilers located in city centers                                and use of
                         improved technology for new capacity. It will encourage construction
                         of boiler houses further removed from urban concentrations, where practicable,
                         taking advantage of advanced piping insulation technologies used widely in simil
                         ar system worldwide. The quality of gas services will be improved through the re
                         habilitation of severely deterioriating gas networks and access will be increase
                         d through the increased sustainable use of indigenous gas resources.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed project objective is to improve the effectiveness of heating supply and gas supply in
                         selected medium cities of Liaoning Province, with a particula                                r
                         emphasis on cost recovery and system efficiency. The LMC3 components are plan
                         ned to include: (i) investment in rehabilitation and expansion of urban heating
                         supply utilizing demand driven heating supply designs; (ii) investment in urban
                         gas distribution and storage systems; and (iii) consulting services for technica
                         l implementation, for special topics relating to the implementation of urban hea
                         ting sector reform, following the Government's heat reform guidelines (issued Ju
                         ly 2003), and project management support, including incremental operating costs.

                          The project should have a positive environmental impact on local air quality with the replacement of
                         numerous inefficient, small boilers located in city centers                                and use of
                         improved technology for new capacity. It will encourage construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of boiler houses further removed from urban concentrations, where practicable,
                         taking advantage of advanced piping insulation technologies used widely in simil
                         ar system worldwide. The quality of gas services will be improved through the re
                         habilitation of severely deterioriating gas networks and access will be increase
                         d through the increased sustainable use of indigenous gas resources.
                         3. Project Description
                         1) The project was approved on May 27, 2008 for an IBRD loan of US$ 191 million. Both the
                         progress towards the achievement of the PDO and the overall implementation progress were as
                         assessed Moderately Satisfactory after the April 2014 mission. As of March 31, 2014, after six years
                         implementation, the disbursement is US$ 73.06 million or 38.25% of the loan amount. The loan
                         closing date is December 31, 2014.

                         2)       Restructuring request from Ministry of Finance was received on June 10, 2014 proposing
                         adding two new subprojects, adjust loan allocation among a few subprojects, and extend closing date
                         of the project by one year. The two new subprojects, Chaoyang Central heating project and Yixian
                         Central heating project, with IBRD loan of US$59 million were proposed for a second restructuring.
                         This ISDS will focus on the two new subprojects.

                         3)      The project after restructuring will include:


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                           Component 1: Centralized Heating Infrastructure (US$377.93 million equivalent; IBRD US$189.6
                           million). This component covers ten subprojects in nine cities and includes the construction and
                           rehabilitation of centralized heating systems. The ten subprojects are Benxi Steel, Benxi Nanfen,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Gongchangling, Huludao,Yingkou Dashiqiao, Yingkou EDZ, Kangping, Lingyuan, Chaoyang, and
                           Yixian. Among which, Chaoyang and Yixian are two newly proposed subprojects for the second
                           restructuring. The other eight are existing subprojects (Kangping and Lingyuan were added in the
                           first restructuring).

                           Component 2: Institutional Development (US$1.4 million equivalent; IBRD US$1.4 million). The
                           component proposes to include: (a) project management and design review and advisory consultancy
                           services, including follow on training in O&M and pilot project assessments.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The originally proposed LMC3 project cities are small to medium sized cities located in Liaoning
                           Province in northeast of China. Under the current restructuring, Chaoyang Cental Heating Project
                           and Yi County Central heating Project added. Both projects will use existing heat sources to supply
                           heating in urban area.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Jun Zeng (GURDR)
                           Xin Ren (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                             Since the two new subprojects only build new heating pipelines and substations, they will have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           limited and temporary adverse environmental impacts during construction and operation. The heat
                           sources have design or have been retrofitted to comply with Chinese new emissions standards for
                           SO2, NOx and dust for heat only boilers. These new emission standard are either the same as or
                           stricter than those in the WB/IFC EHS Guidelines for Thermal Power Plants. The refurbishment of
                           the generation turbine in Chaoyang Yanshan Lake Power Plant is an associated facility and that
                           environment and social due diligence has been conducted. Due diligence review of these heat
                           sources has been part of the EA process with the result included in their EMPs, i.e. they meet the
                           Bank’s criteria on Environmental Assessment (EA) and the actual operation for existing ones also
                           comply with relevant emissions standards of China and the Bank’s EHS Guidelines.
                           For the original project, the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been followed during
                           construction. Operation of completed subprojects has shown compliance with applicable
                           environmental requirements and emission standards. The original EMP was proved to be pertinent
                           and practical during implementation. Since the new subprojects are very similar to other
                           subprojects under implementation, their impacts are expected to be limited too if the EMPs be well
                           followed. The EMPs of new subprojects were modeled after the original EMP which was
                           approved by the WB.

                          Since the two newly added subprojects will only support the building of pipelines and substations,
                          and all pipelines will be constructed along the alignments of existing roads, the involuntary
                          resettlement impacted caused by the Bank financed project will be very limited. Main impact will
                          be state-owned land taking and temporary land occupying during project construction. It is
                          expected that few people will be affected by involuntary resettlement.

                          The project of Chaoyang Thermal Power Plant, one of the two heating source, was identified as
                          the linkage project from OP4.12 perspective and the construction of the Heating Source Plant will
Public Disclosure Copy




                          cause collective land acquisition and structure demolition according to the project proposal.
                          However, during the project preparation, the design of this Heating Source was not determined
                          and therefore the resettlement impact cannot be determined. Another heating source of Chaoyang
                          city is the Yanshan Lake Power Plant, which is an existing heating source that is under operation.
                          Therefore, this Yanshan Lake Power plant is not identified as the linkage project as defined by
                          Para 4 of OP4.12.

                           In the original project, the implementation of involuntary resettlement and environment
                           management are in line with the requirements of RAP/RPF and EMP. The recent rating of the
                           safeguards performance of the original project is “Satisfactory”.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Not applicable.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Not applicable.

                          In terms of minimizing the impacts associated with involuntary resettlement, efforts have been



                                                                    Page 4 of 7
                           made during project planning and design. The resettlement impacts have been significantly
                           reduced through optimizing the project design and implementation arrangements.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            EMPs,ARAP and RPF have been prepared. The provincial PMO has hired an external
                           environmental monitor to assist in supervision of the EMP implementation in the original project
                           and will cover the two new subprojects as well. Contracting of this competent external monitor
                           proves to have greatly fostered the EMP implementation in this project. The Bank team has
                           conducted safeguard supervision twice a year and found the EMP implementation for the original
                           project has been satisfactory.

                          Abbreviated RAP was prepared by Yixian subproject according to the Bank’s OP4.12, however,
                          during the project preparation, all potential impact on people’s livelihood had been avoided due to
                          the project design change. For Heating Source Plant in Chaoyang. The project Resettlement
                          Policy Framework was updated in April, 2014 to deal with any involuntary resettlement impact
                          that might be caused by substations and this heating source plant.

                           Experience from other similar subprojects already under implementation indicates that with the
                           EMP of the original project which is the model for these two newly added subprojects being well
                           followed, the environmental impacts have been moderate as predicted by the EA. The
                           environmental monitoring of the existing subprojects over the past few years also shows their
                           emissions compliant with the relevant national standards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Following Chinese regulations and the Bank’s requirement, public disclosure of EA/EMP and
                           consultations were held for the new projects with focus on local residents to be affected or
                           benefited, among other stakeholders. The consultations took the form of meetings and
                           questionnaire. The feedback has been incorporated in the EMPs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Public consultation and participation was a key element in resettlement planning. The affected
                          residents, business people and district governments participated in the census, inventory and
                          formulation of the livelihood rehabilitation strategy, measures and relocation sites. Their feedback
                          has been incorporated in determining the compensation rates and livelihood rehabilitation
                          measures.

                          The RAP contains a list of major consultation sessions. The participation and consultation process
                          will continue in resettlement implementation. To facilitate active public participation, following
                          complains handling mechanism has been established:

                          Step 1: Displaced persons can appeal by verbal or paper way to village committee or project
                          demolition implementation institution if they are not satisfied with resettlement plan. For verbal
                          appeal, village committee and demolition institution should record in written form and solve the
                          problems within two weeks;

                          Step 2: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of Phase 1, they can appeal to
                          municipal PMOs/ administration institutions after receiving decision notice and the latter should
                          resolve it within two weeks;



                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Step 3: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of municipal PMOs/
                           administration institutions, they can appeal to subproject leading team or local municipal
                           construction commission after receiving decision notice. The latter should handle the case within
Public Disclosure Copy




                           two weeks;

                           Step 4: If displaced persons are still not satisfied with the decision of subproject leading team or
                           local municipal construction commission, they can bring a lawsuit to a civil law court in case of
                           objection to any aspect of the resettlement plan after receiving decision notice.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            05-Aug-2014
                           Comments: Aug. 5, 2013(Yixian) and July 29, 2013 (chaoyang)
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Apr-2014
                           Comments: April 30, 2014 (Yixian) and April 28, 2014 (chaoyang)
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [   ]   No [    ]    NA [       ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice          Yes [   ]   No [    ]    NA [       ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated      Yes [   ]   No [    ]    NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/          Yes [   ]   No [    ]    NA [       ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [   ]   No [    ]    NA [       ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Yanqin Song
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 25-Jul-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager:   Name:                                                Date:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
