                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3090

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                      Project ID:      P145391
                            Project Name:      Studies for Sustainable Flood Mgmt. (P145391)
                            Task Team          Joop Stoutjesdijk
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Apr-2014                      Estimated        31-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPS                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (70%), Natural disaster management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          7.00             Total Bank Financing:        0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Philippines - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                               7.00
                              Total                                                                        7.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective is to prepare priority projects that aim to improve flood
                           management and resilience in the Greater Metro Manila Area.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Post Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) carried out late 2009 after Ondoy recommended that a
                           comprehensive update of the 1990 master plan be prepared that would propose a comprehensive
                           flood risk management plan and determine an updated set of priority structural and non-structural
                         measures to provide sustainable flood management up to a certain safety level. The Flood
                         Management Master Plan for the Greater Metro Manila Area (hereafter the Master Plan) has since
                         been prepared, with World Bank assistance. It was approved by the NEDA Board on September 4,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2012 during a Board meeting chaired by the President of the Philippines. The total estimated cost for
                         the implementation of the Master Plan is about Peso 352 billion (US$8.7 billion) over the next 20-25
                         years. The Master Plan proposes solutions to reduce flooding from river systems, around Laguna
                         Lake, and for urban drainage.

                         The Master Plan proposes a program of priority infrastructure to safely manage and control major
                         flood events in the Greater Metro Manila Area. Among the key priority interventions that have been
                         identified in the Master Plan are: (i) a high dam in the upper Marikina River catchment area to reduce
                         the peak flows entering the city during typhoon events; (ii) flood protection works in the Marikina
                         River, upstream of the proposed JICA Phase IV of the Pasig-Marikina River Channel Improvement
                         Program; (iii) land raising along the western shore of Laguna Lake to protect the population against
                         high water levels in the lake; and (iv) further development of a comprehensive flood forecasting
                         system and monitoring and early warning system for the Greater Metro Manila Area, with maximum
                         participation of local communities.

                         The Government of the Philippines has started the implementation of the Master Plan with a number
                         of small investments (e.g. dredging and pumping station modernization), but is interested to invest in
                         some of the larger infrastructure as well. It is therefore necessary to prepare some of the large high
                         priority investments, both structural and non-structural, as well as develop improved institutional
                         arrangements for flood management. This proposed AusAID grant will finance two components, the
                         main one related to the development of feasibility and design studies of priority infrastructure that
                         will lead to substantially increased safety of the population during flood events. A small second
                         component relates to project management and administration.

                         Component A – Preparation of feasibility and design studies for priority flood management
                         infrastructure. Feasibility and design studies will be prepared for: (i) a high dam in the upper
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Marikina River catchment area; and (ii) land raising along the western shore of Laguna Lake. Multi-
                         disciplinary teams of consultants, with expertise in civil engineering, dam engineering, hydrology,
                         economics, resettlement and social development, urban planning , environment, etc., will be recruited
                         to prepare detailed feasibility and design studies for the above mentioned proposed interventions.
                         Separate consulting firms will be hired for the technical studies for the dam and for the Laguna Lake
                         land raising. One consulting firm/institute will be hired for the social and environmental assessments
                         related to both interventions, including the social surveys that will target the communities that are
                         affected by the potential projects and that will have to be resettled. A Panel of Experts will be
                         established with technical, environmental, and social safeguards expertise to provide guidance and
                         oversee the implementation of the studies and provide guidance, where needed. A Dam Safety
                         Review Panel will also be established.

                         The ancillary facilities and potentially linked projects and activities as well as the area of influence of
                         the studies to be undertaken will be identified by the team at the beginning of the feasibilities studies
                         and will be one of the first activities to be undertaken as part of the of the environment and social
                         studies. The feasibility studies will review the various options for flood management improvements
                         in the study areas to be followed immediately by design studies of the selected option. The design
                         work will include the technical and engineering studies, economic studies, and social and
                         environmental studies, all in compliance with the relevant World Bank Operational and Safeguard
                         Policies, and up to a level ready for appraisal/financing by the government, possibly with the
                         assistance of international organizations such as the World Bank and JICA. In this respect, the Bank
                         already has a Metro Manila Flood Management Project in its pipeline, for which the detailed scope
                         has yet to be defined based on the outcomes of this AusAID grant and other donor-funded
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation activities (it is envisaged that PHRD will make funds available to finance the preparation
                         of other major interventions mentioned above).

                         Particular mention is made of the need for detailed social and resettlement (also called ‘rehousing’ in
                         the Philippines) studies as some 300,000 people, often informal settlers, are living in the flood plain
                         of the Laguna Lake study area. Most of these people would have to move out of the flood plain to
                         allow land raisingto take place, during which time they could benefit from rental voucher or other
                         schemes, but it is envisaged that many of them could return to live on the raised land in multi-story
                         social housing units. The implications of the (temporary) move would be assessed in close
                         cooperation with the affected people who should be involved in participatory planning processes.
                         There will have to be extensive formal (through workshops) and informal consultations with the
                         affected communities, non-governmental organizations (NGO) and civil society organizations (CSO)
                         that work with the affected communities, Local Government Units (LGU), government agencies, etc.
                         to ensure that the rehousing/resettlement proposals will be understood and acceptable to all parties.
                         The Bank task team in close cooperation with DPWH and other agencies will work on a public
                         consultation and information campaign that emphasizes expectations and transparency.

                         Component B – Project management and administration. Operational expenses for the Department
                         of Public Works and Highways (DPWH) will be financed to manage the implementation of the grant
                         and monitor the consultants and the outputs of the services. The component will also finance the
                         annual audit of the grant. Fixed costs, such as staff costs, will be paid for by DPWH.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is the Greater Metro Manila Area, in particular a dam site in the upper
                         catchment area of the Marikina River and the western shore of Laguna Lake.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         DPWH has been implementing both TA and lending operations of the Bank and possesses adequate
                         technical and fiduciary capacity to implement this grant. DPWH is also familiar with the WB
                         Safeguards Policies. It has an Environment and Social Safeguards Office (ESSO) primarily
                         dedicated to the environmental and social impact management of their different projects, although it
                         maintains separate sets of safeguard standards depending on the funding source of the project it
                         implements. Implementation of mitigation activities are usually done by contractors supervised by
                         DPWH project teams at times assisted by consultants and monitored and reported by ESSO, where
                         appropriate. The performance of ESSO, based on the recent World Bank thematic review for the
                         Philippines, points to the need of putting in place a capacity building program if it is to be in charge
                         of handling safeguard issues during the future implementation of the designs prepared under this
                         project. The large scale and complexity of the resettlement/rehousing aspects also point to the need
                         to provide additional support. ESSO will benefit by strengthening its capacity to manage and
                         coordinate the safeguards principles and procedures especially related to the preparation of the
                         environmental and social assessment studies and for resettlement/rehousing of affected communities.
                         The consultants preparing the Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), rehousing studies,
                         and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will work very closely with ESSO during the preparation of the
                         studies. ESSO and the consultants will also coordinate closely with various other government
                         agencies.
                           A number of consulting teams will be working under the project and there has to be good
                           cooperation and close interaction. This is especially true for the consulting teams working on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           dam and the team working on the flood protection works in the Marikina River (funded from the
                           PHRD) as hydrological design parameters will be similar for both studies and the two structures will
                           complement each other. This is also true for the technical consultants and the environmental and
                           social consultants that will have to work together closely to come up with the best technical solutions
                           that are environmentally and socially sound and that can minimize resettlement of people.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (EASPS)
                           Josefo Tuyor (EASDE)
                           Victoria Florian S. Lazaro (EASPS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             While the project only supports the preparation
                           BP 4.01                                              of feasibility studies and engineering designs of
                                                                                the two priority investments identified in the
                                                                                Metro Manila Flood Master Plan, i.e. a high
                                                                                dam in the upper Marikina River catchment area
                                                                                and the raising of low-lying areas along the
                                                                                western shores of Laguna Lake, and the conduct
                                                                                of environmental and social assessments for
                                                                                these priority investments, including
                                                                                resettlement studies, the policy is triggered since
                                                                                these studies are expected to lead to investments
                                                                                expected to have positive but also potentially
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                adverse environmental and social impacts,
                                                                                including resettlement of mostly informal
                                                                                settlers, if not managed adequately.

                                                                                Part of this project is the conduct of
                                                                                environmental and social assessments and
                                                                                resettlement (rehousing) studies to precisely
                                                                                assess impacts and put forward options and
                                                                                mitigation measures that will be considered in
                                                                                the feasibility studies and engineering designs
                                                                                of the proposed two main investments. The
                                                                                environmental and social assessments will be
                                                                                carried out by DPWH with technical assistance
                                                                                and support from qualified consultants to ensure
                                                                                that the Bank's and the National government's
                                                                                environmental and social safeguard policies are
                                                                                being followed and complied with and that the
                                                                                project will follow standards that are sound and
                                                                                acceptable. The ESIAs (one ESIA for the dam
                                                             (and the Marikina River retarding basin, the
                                                             design of which is financed from PHRD) and
                                                             another one for the Laguna Lake raising) will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             carefully assess the environment and social
                                                             impacts of the priority investments, including
                                                             impacts from ancillary facilities as well as
                                                             cumulative impacts, and lay out detailed plans
                                                             for mitigation in the Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Plan (ESMP), monitoring and
                                                             reporting program, including institutional
                                                             assessment and capacity building for ESSO.
                                                             The EMSP will be properly costed to ensure
                                                             that the costs get incorporated into the civil
                                                             works contracts. The various options in terms
                                                             of sites, alignments, resettlement (rehousing)
                                                             will also be analyzed as part of the ESIA.

                                                             A Grievance Redress Mechanism will also be
                                                             developed and will be detailed in the ESMP and
                                                             be presented to the communities during public
                                                             consultations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The ESIA will identify natural habitats and
                                                             other ecologically sensitive areas that may be
                                                             affected by the priority investments. The project
                                                             will not support activities that would
                                                             significantly convert or degrade critical natural
                                                             habitats consistent with the policy. If the ESIA
                                                             indicates that a project would significantly
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             convert or degrade non-critical natural habitats,
                                                             the project would include acceptable mitigation
                                                             measures. Such mitigation measures could
                                                             include, as appropriate, minimizing habitat loss
                                                             (e.g., strategic habitat retention and post-
                                                             development restoration) and establishing and
                                                             maintaining an ecologically similar protected
                                                             area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   The ESIA will confirm the project impacts on
                                                             forests and forest-dependent communities,
                                                             particularly in and around the proposed dam
                                                             site. If the forest policy is triggered, the ESMP
                                                             will include measures to address impacts on
                                                             forests, forest health, and forest-dependent
                                                             communities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The Project will not support directly or
                                                             indirectly any investments that would trigger the
                                                             policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The ESIA will closely assess the various
                         BP 4.11                                 alternative alignments to determine any possible
                                                                 cause of disturbance and negative impacts to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 historical areas, architectural land marks, and
                                                                 other cultural property, which may need to be
                                                                 mitigated. During construction, the landscape
                                                                 of the sites may also be affected and structural
                                                                 damage to old structures may occur due to
                                                                 vibrations and excavation of adjacent areas.
                                                                 The ESIA will confirm impacts of priority
                                                                 investments on physical cultural resources
                                                                 (PCR), and where needed a PCR management
                                                                 plan will be formulated as part of the ESMP,
                                                                 including chance find procedures that will be
                                                                 followed during construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The whole of Metro Manila does not have
                                                                 ancestral domains and/or Indigenous Peoples
                                                                 (IP) communities. However, a study done in
                                                                 early 2000s for another project found that there
                                                                 are IP communities in the upland areas of 8
                                                                 LGUs of Rizal Province. The upper Marikina
                                                                 catchment may also be home to Dumagat-
                                                                 Remontados. It is important to determine if any
                                                                 IP community is present at the project area of
                                                                 influence of the proposed dam in the Upper
                                                                 Marikina area. Screening for the presence of
                                                                 IPs in the areas of the priority investments will
                                                                 be done during preparation and if the screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 confirms their presence in the project areas, a
                                                                 social assessment to comply with the policy will
                                                                 be incorporated in the ESIA and an IP
                                                                 Framework and/or IP Plan will be developed.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The Master Plan has indicated that thousands of
                         4.12                                    families are living in the flood plain of the
                                                                 Marikina River and along the western shore of
                                                                 Laguna Lake. It is not expected that people live
                                                                 in the possible reservoir area of the dam. The
                                                                 priority investments may cause both temporary
                                                                 and permanent physical and economic
                                                                 displacement of people, many illegal, occupying
                                                                 the flood plains of the lake and the river.

                                                                 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and/or
                                                                 Resettlement Plans (RP) will be prepared. The
                                                                 RPF and/or RPls will be guided by and include
                                                                 a series of rehousing studies. The RPF and/or
                                                                 RP will assess various alternatives/options that
                                                           will have the least impacts on settlers and factor
                                                           these in the findings in the engineering designs.
                                                           In addition, impacts to potentially affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           persons and planning for mitigation of the same
                                                           to their housing and livelihood conditions are
                                                           important aspects of the studies to be made.
                                                           The outcomes of these studies will influence the
                                                           decision on the final configuration of the
                                                           investments, including alignments.
                                                           Resettlement action plans, where needed, will
                                                           also be prepared together with the preparation of
                                                           the detailed engineering design of the
                                                           infrastructure to be built as soon as the final
                                                           sites for the priority investments are known.

                                                           The Resettlement Framework or Plan studies
                                                           will provide a sufficiently detailed analysis of
                                                           the resettlement/rehousing impacts, social
                                                           impacts and the institutional aspects in order to
                                                           able to provide detailed recommendations on
                                                           how these should be taken into account during
                                                           implementation. Particular attention will be
                                                           given to the key institutions and different
                                                           government entities involved in the
                                                           resettlement/rehousing. Interventions may
                                                           include institutional strengthening activities,
                                                           development of Peoples Plans, and the possible
                                                           implementation of a rental voucher scheme. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           TORs for the Resettlement Framework or Plan
                                                           studies will be cleared by the RSA prior to their
                                                           beginning.

                                                           An independent Panel of Experts will be
                                                           established to oversee the implementation of the
                                                           social and Resettlement Policy Framework and/
                                                           or Plans studies and provide guidance, where
                                                           needed. The Panel will include expertise in
                                                           social, resettlement, and urban development.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes   Since the project will entail the design of a high
                                                           dam as one of its priority investments, this
                                                           policy is triggered. OP 4.37 requires that
                                                           experienced and competent professionals design
                                                           and supervise construction, and that the
                                                           borrower adopts and implements dam safety
                                                           measures through the project cycle. A Panel of
                                                           Experts on Dams will be established.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             There will be no sub-projects in international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There will be no sub-projects in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Mar-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard-related studies will be implemented together with technical studies from around July
                                      2014 to June 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Joop Stoutjesdijk

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 02-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 03-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
