                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7486
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed:
                         25-Feb-2013, 21-Jun-2013, 27-Jun-2013, 08-Jul-2013, 30-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                             1. Basic Project Data

                             Country:           Philippines                        Project ID:    P118904
                             Project Name:      Learning, Equity and Accountability Program Support Project (P118904)
                             Task Team          Lynnette Dela Cruz Perez
                             Leader:
                             Estimated                                             Estimated   06-Mar-2014
                             Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                             Managing Unit:     EASHE                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                             Sector(s):        Primary education (70%), Secondary education (30%)
                             Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                             Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                             8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Financing (In USD Million)
                             Total Project Cost:       300.00               Total Bank Financing: 300.00
                             Financing Gap:               0.00
                               Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                               Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                               International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      300.00
                               Total                                                                                      300.00
                             Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                             Category:
                             Is this a          No
                             Repeater
                             project?

                             2. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The project development objective is to improve the quality of grade 1 to 3 reading and math skills of
                            children in Target Regions and Target Schools, with a special focus on those belonging to Target
                            Disadvantaged Groups.



                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed project will continue to support the implementation of the government's Basic
                         Education Sector Reform Agenda (BESRA). This proposed US$300 million operation will build on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the gains and experiences of the Bank's ongoing project, the National Program Support for Basic
                         Education (NPSBE) project, which spearheaded support to the implementation of the government's
                         BESRA. The proposed project considered DepED's limited capacity and focuses on a number of
                         critical reforms in areas that are lagging behind. This was also meant to maximize the project's
                         contribution to the achievement of MDG and EFA goals. In line with both government and Bank
                         emphasis on "convergence" to improve project impact, the project will also work in areas covered by
                         the Philippine Government's CCT project (the Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program or 4Ps). The
                         proposed interventions are intended to selectively address remaining gaps in terms of learning and
                         access, strengthening and expanding some of the critical reforms started in NPSBE1 but which were
                         not completed or fully implemented. The idea is to keep the project simple yet strategically critical
                         by linking it to the Government's comprehensive but complex basic education reform agenda.

                         The Learning, Equity and Accountability Program Support Project (LEAPS) seeks to improve the
                         quality of teaching and learning of reading and math skills in the early grades and improve coverage
                         for disadvantaged populations in basic education in the selected target areas and schools. This will
                         be achieved through strengthening teacher capacity in assessment and teaching of reading and math
                         for Grades 1 and 2; strengthening of enabling mechanisms to foster accountability and incentives for
                         good performance; and improved targeting and evidence-based implementation of programs
                         supporting disadvantaged groups.

                         The Project would implement the following components: (i) Component 1: Improvement of
                         Teaching and Learning in Grades 1 to 3 Reading and Math; (ii) Component 2: Strengthening of
                         Accountability and Incentives of Department of Education Employees; and (iii) Component 3:
                         Improvement of Program Design for Targeting Disadvantaged Groups. Specifically, Component 3
                         will support the improvement of access and quality outcomes for the following disadvantaged
Public Disclosure Copy




                         groups: poor students residing in areas far from a school or learning center, out of school youth,
                         indigenous peoples and persons with disabilities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         For the purposes of the Project, the “target areas” are Regions 5, 8, 9, CAR and CARAGA. This
                         selection of areas considers the request of government for Bank assistance to focus on the poorest
                         regions in the country, as indicated in the recently-released 2012 poverty statistics. These regions
                         also face significant challenges related to other components of the project: reading and math scores,
                         dropouts, malnutrition (as a function of poverty), incidence of disability and concentration of
                         indigenous peoples.

                         The choice of beneficiary communities/schools within each selected division will be done through a
                         methodology that would allow credible impact analysis. Final selection of the target schools/
                         divisions will be done during project implementation. It is highly possible that a lot of the target
                         areas will have presence of indigenous students since indigenous communities are among the
                         disadvantaged areas in the country where educational outcomes are low.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maria Loreto Padua (EASPS)


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           OP 4.01 is triggered due to the need to assess and
                         BP 4.01                                         take into account, in an integrated manner, the
                                                                         social aspects of the project, particularly its
                                                                         impact on IPs. However, while OP 4.01 is
                                                                         triggered, no separate instrument is required.
                                                                         During the project concept stage, the government
                                                                         proposed the inclusion of classroom construction
                                                                         into project activities to be financed by the loan,
                                                                         at which time OP 4.01 was triggered. To address
                                                                         routine environmental issues, the DepEd prepared
                                                                         an Environmental Code of Practice for classroom
                                                                         construction. As project preparation progressed,
                                                                         however, the government decided not to finance
                                                                         any school construction or rehabilitation as part of
                                                                         the LEAPS project. The final project design also
                                                                         excludes the financing of any other civil works,
                                                                         acquisition of potentially hazardous school
                                                                         laboratory equipment or materials/chemicals to be
                                                                         used in laboratories. Therefore, no negative or
                                                                         long-term environmental impacts are expected for
                                                                         any activity under the project. The PDO of
                                                                         improving the early grade reading and math skills
                                                                         of students in the target areas can be achieved
                                                                         independent of classroom construction through
                                                                         the conduct of professional development activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         for teachers to enhance their assessment and
                                                                         teaching skills, training of principals and head
                                                                         teachers to strengthen field-level support system.
                                                                         The project’s special focus on disadvantaged
                                                                         groups involves the implementation of alternative
                                                                         delivery modes and alternative learning system
                                                                         which are usually done outside the classrooms. In
                                                                         view of these, the team did not trigger OP 4.01
                                                                         even though it was triggered at the Program
                                                                         Concept Note stage.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            There is no impact on Natural Habitats.

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            There is no impact on Forests

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve the use of Pesticides.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            N/A
                         BP 4.11



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           The proposed project is anticipated to have
                                                                           positive impact on indigenous students in terms of
                                                                           increasing their access to basic education.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           Specifically, Component 3 of the LEAPS focuses
                                                                           on disadvantaged groups, including IP students.
                                                                           In view of this and given the presence of IPs in
                                                                           some project sites/areas, the IP policy is triggered.
                                                                           In close coordination with the National
                                                                           Commission on Indigenous Peoples (NCIP), the
                                                                           DepED updated its existing IPPF based on the the
                                                                           lessons learned under the NPSBE and provides
                                                                           more specific strategies for implenting IP-
                                                                           sensitive strategies which will be pursued under
                                                                           Component 3 of the LEAPS. It aims to expand
                                                                           learning opportunities for IP learners through the
                                                                           design and implementation of culturally
                                                                           appropriate learning modalities; put in place
                                                                           mechanisms for the effective and sustained
                                                                           implementation of IP education; and support IP
                                                                           learning systems and other learning modalities.
                                                                           The draft IPPF includes the consolidation and
                                                                           analysis of IP data primarily through from the
                                                                           Basic Education Information System (BEIS)
                                                                           which serves as a screening procedures as well as
                                                                           monitoring tool. Once the specific target schools
                                                                           are identified during implementation phase,
                                                                           DepED will prepare specific IP plans for the
                                                                           schools that cover IP students as part of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           School Improvement Plans, which will involve
                                                                           broad participation of the specific IP groups in
                                                                           each target school. The draft enhanced IPPF has
                                                                           been presented to the NCIP Board with no major
                                                                           comment. The DepEd, through its Indigenous
                                                                           Peoples Education Office (IPsEO), will regularly
                                                                           consult with NCIP as part of its regular inter-
                                                                           agency committee on IP Education at national and
                                                                           sub-national levels.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No            No involuntary resettlement is expected.
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            N/A

                            Projects on International        No            N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                   Page 4 of 7
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project does not include any construction. There are no impacts on the physical or biological
                           environment.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           LEAPS is anticipated to improve access of IPs to basic education.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           n/a
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The DepEd has adopted a National IP Education Policy Framework and 5-year Strategic Plan
                           (Department Order No. 62 s. 2011) which, to a large extent, was propelled by the IPPF under the
                           NPSBE1. DO 62 defines the Department’s policy guidelines and strategic directions for ensuring
                           improved access of IPs to culturally-responsive basic education . In line with the policy
                           framework, Component 3 of LEAPS explicitly seeks to improve access of IP to basic education.
                           The DepEd has likewise prepared an updated IPPF, with broad consultation from the NCIP, which
                           articulates the strategic priorities for implementing the IP-responsive basic education. The
                           Indigenous Peoples Education Office (IPsEO) was also formally created by virtue of Department
                           Order 103 s. 2011 as a dedicated unit that will be responsible for ensuring the Department’s
                           strategic objectives and plan for IP education will be implemented and monitored not just as a
                           compliance to safeguards but as a national commitment to achieve improved basic education
                           outcomes. The IPsEO is provided with budget (i.e., approximately Php100M or US$2M for 2012)
                           as part of the Departments’ regular appropriations to ensure efficient coordination and monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of IP education across the various units of DepEd and in partnership with NCIP, the National
                           Basic Sector Council for IP and other external stakeholders.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The development of the enhanced IPPF was based on the National IP Education Framework and
                           Strategic Plan which involved very extensive consultations at the local and national level. The
                           Framework was formally adopted by virtue of DepED Order No. 62, s. 2011 and formally
                           launched with participation from broad multi-stakeholder s in Ocbore 2011 as part of the IP
                           month. Moving forward, the implementation of the enhanced IPPF, which is drawn from the IP
                           Education Framework and Strategic Plan, will involve participation of the IP groups through their
                           involvement in the formulation of the School Improvement Plan for areas/schools with IP students
                           as well as through the regular participation of NCIP in DepEd inter-agency committee for IP
                           Education at the national and sub-national levels.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-Dec-2012
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Dec-2012



                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Philippines                                                           20-Dec-2012
                           Comments: OP 4.01 is triggered due to the need to assess and take into account, in an integrated
                                         manner, the social aspects of the project, particularly its impact on IPs. However,
                                         while OP 4.01 is triggered, no separate instrument is required. Social document was
                                         already disclosed on December 20, 2012.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Dec-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        19-Dec-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                           20-Dec-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Lynnette Dela Cruz Perez
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                          Date: 29-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Luis Benveniste (SM)                         Date: 30-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
