                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC9987

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                      P149233
                                                                              Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     Education Project for Quality and Relevance in Secondary and Tertiary
                                              (P149233)
                            Task Team         Dung-Kim Pham
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       06-Jan-2015                       Estimated       26-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEDDR                              Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (30%), Tertiary education (20%), Vocational training
                                              (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                   Total Bank Financing:       200.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                 200.00
                              Total                                                                     200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           14. The proposed PDO is to improve the quality and relevance of Junior Secondary Education,
                           formal TVET and corresponding areas of Tertiary Education. Project interventions in Junior
                           Secondary and Tertiary Education will prioritize STEM education, while in formal TVET are limited
                           to selected priority sectors and targeted geographic areas.
                         C. Project Description
                         A.      Project Concept
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1. Description

                         1. In the DRC, many different institutional actors are involved in TVET landscape in the formal,
                         non-formal, informal and industrial) sectors. This project will focus on only formal provision, which
                         is under the governance of MEPSP, even if overall coordination of all actors is warranted under the
                         TVET Inter-Ministerial Committee ('Comité interministeriel de l’ETFP'), and, in Tertiary Education,
                         is under the purview of the Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research.

                         2. Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) occupations will be critical to
                         Africa’s future economic competitiveness because of their direct ties to innovation, economic
                         growth, and productivity. This is especially true for the DRC where the expanding Labor Market
                         (LM) requires a supply of workers and specialists in many STEM areas; that being said, it is still not
                         clear what skills will in fact be needed in the DRC’s near future, but preparing for that eventuality
                         can be mediated by a good quality STEM education. At present, secondary education is not
                         responding to the needs of the LM; a skills mismatch is clearly apparent.

                         3. Reform of secondary education in DRC needs to address the following major and interrelated
                         challenges of: (i) removing barriers to secondary education; (ii) starting structural reform for a more
                         efficient use of available resources; and (iii) improving the quality and relevance of the teaching and
                         learning process.

                         4. In line with the Government's strategy to provide a cycle of eight years of basic education in the
                         future, the Project will, among other things, include a relevance assessment of current general
                         secondary curricula and place priority on a review of math, science and technology curricula.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improve Quality and Relevance of Junior Secondary education, of formal TVET and
                         corresponding areas of Tertiary Education.

                         5. Sub-Component 1.1 Strengthening Junior Secondary Education. A common observation made
                         regarding students entering Junior Secondary (the 'tronc commun') is that they are academically
                         weak, lacking basic competencies in literacy and numeracy. This situation, if unaddressed, leaves
                         them in a poor position to undertake junior secondary education, let alone succeed in later studies. In
                         addition, students are recognized to be weak in other basic skills, like STEM competencies -- that is,
                         those competencies most sought after in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math, such as
                         critical thinking, problem-solving, ability to work in groups, and so on.

                         6. This sub-component would seek to address this double concern (lack of basic skills and STEM
                         competencies). It would provide the following: i) the curricula would be reviewed with an eye to
                         strengthening STEM content (in math, science, and technology ); (ii) up to date textbooks and
                         teacher guides reflecting the new curricula would be made available, as well as other pedagogical
                         resources; (iii) training on the competency-based approach used by the new curricula (developed but
                         not yet entirely and successfully rolled out), on the textbooks, and on competency-based pedagogy
                         would be presented to teachers (an emphasis being placed on teaching STEM competencies in all
                         subject matters, in so far as possible); and (iv) studies to define the extent and characteristics of
                         upgrades needed to junior secondary education institutions would lead to equipment provision and
                         infrastructure rehabilitation. In addition, (v) modules and/or teacher training will be developed and
                         implemented to help teachers remediate the noted weaknesses in basic skills in students throughout
                         the course of their two years of study in Junior Secondary. Finally, (vi) the development of reliable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessments of student achievement (literacy and numeracy) and student competencies (STEM or
                         soft skills) at this education level is required.

                         Sub-Component 1.2 Rationalizing TVET.

                         7. The TVET system, which includes the Vocational and Technical streams, has operated up to now
                         without any well- articulated strategy. Consequently, it does not address the future skills needed to
                         underpin the economic development of DRC in any effective or efficient way. The Vocational and
                         Technical streams ('Cycle court' of two or three years and 'Cycle long' of four years) both offer about
                         40 different options. There is much overlap between the two. Analysis of enrollment and
                         participation rates indicates that less than half of these options enroll more than 1500 graduates;
                         some do not enroll more than 20 graduates nationwide (such as Metallurgy in the Vocational stream
                         and Meteorology in the Technical stream); while still others have zero enrollment.

                         8. Further, most options do not have appropriate curricula; of more concern, curricula may be
                         inexistent and hence the quality of the learning entirely relies on the creativity of teachers. The
                         absence of national curricula and clear standards of achievement evidently questions the quality and
                         the fairness of the examination process. Most importantly, many of these options appear out of date
                         and so reflect little relation to the needs of the Labor Market.

                         9. Ongoing initiatives have tried to address this redundancy/irrelevance by beginning to restructure
                         the streams. So, for instance, MEPSP (with support from VVOB and CTB) has developed relevant
                         curricula for agriculture (6 for the ‘technical’ stream, thereby reducing agriculture curricula/options
                         from 10 to 6; and 5 for the ‘vocational’ stream), while the APEFE/CTB have supported the
                         development of 10 additional programs. Of all these new programs, the agriculture curricula are in
                         the process of being rolled out, while the others are still in a pilot phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         10. There is need for a major shift from ‘piecemeal’ initiatives like these, however successful and
                         important they have proven to be, to whole-system reform, which will require: (i) a more harmonized
                         and stronger donor intervention for effective structural reform and related (political) commitment by
                         MEPSP and line ministries, such as Budget and Finance; (ii) clear policies on priorities and relevant
                         routes for development (building on the national/provincial mapping developed by CTB that has
                         started to analyze the labor market on the demand side); (iii) a more comprehensive and well-defined
                         delineation of roles and responsibilities involving all Ministries that cover TVET (such as Social
                         Affairs, Labor, Youth and Sport).

                         11. The restructuring of TVET is a long-term initiative. It will include mainstreaming the vocational
                         with the technical stream and feature a way for students to transfer between the two streams, thereby
                         allowing them greater educational opportunity. This project, building on the work done by the
                         Ministries supported by VVOB and CTB, will concentrate efforts, first, on the vocational stream to
                         respond to the immediate employability needs of the large number of students concerned.

                         12. Once selected, the programs in targeted, priority sectors would be developed through the
                         financing a set of interrelated inputs to improve their quality, which would include:

                         •       Curriculum Development: design and implementation of competency-based, demand-
                         responsive curricula;
                         •        Pedagogical Support: textbooks and teacher guides would be drafted on the basis of the
                         curricula developed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Training of Trainers: design and delivery of training to upgrade existing trainers and train
                         new trainers on technical, pedagogical, and STEM skills as per the new competency-based curricula;
                         • Infrastructure, Furniture, Equipment, and Materials: Infrastructure rehabilitation and reconstruction,
                         provision of furniture, equipment and materials;
                         •        Assessment: the design and implementation of competency-based training will be
                         accompanied by the assessment of trainees.

                         13. Entrepreneurship modules in TVET. This activity aims to create and provide entrepreneurship
                         training modules in TVET streams. Evidence from randomized trials at university level has shown
                         that entrepreneurship training significantly improves a graduate’s chance of being self-employed.
                         Similar programs in Botswana, Kenya, and Uganda with younger students have also seen promising
                         results. Following these precedents, the project will include financing to develop these modules,
                         which will include curricula and pedagogic materials, and build capacity for their delivery within the
                         TVET streams by training trainers. It will also include an assessment of this project.

                         14. TVET awareness and promotion campaign. In order to counter the p oor present image of TVET
                         in civil society, an awareness campaign would be developed and implemented in the course of this
                         project. It would aim to expose some of the current stereotypes surrounding secondary education in
                         the DRC today, like the unfounded preference for G eneral Arts and the fascination with Diplomas,
                         while demonstrating that TVET streams lead to self-employment or employment in well-paid jobs in
                         the Labor Market (monthly salaries for TVET graduates are higher than secondary graduates).

                         Sub-Component 1.3 Strengthening TVET and STEM at the Tertiary Level.
                         15. Technical secondary streams (the cycle long) can lead to Tertiary Education, and it is in those
                         selected priority sectors at the Tertiary level that require strengthening. In addition, other Tertiary
                         Education sectors that relate to STEM education are underfunded and so require immediate attention
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to improve their infrastructure, furniture, equipment, and materials. The project activities at this level
                         will include studies to define size and characteristics of upgrades to higher education institutions,
                         infrastructure rehabilitation, relevant equipment and materials provision in STEM subjects, and
                         curricula adaption.

                         Component 2. Institutional Capacity Strengthening and Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         16. This component finances investments in the kinds of institutional capacity-building necessary to
                         ensure strong project management and successful implementation.

                         Sub-Component 2.1 Institutional Capacity Strengthening.
                         17. This sub-component will support the effective implementation of this project. It presupposes in
                         order for it to be fully successful, improved coordination between the relevant stakeholders in
                         question, improved capacity, and improved commitment.

                         Sub-Component 2.2 Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         18. This sub-component will build capacity for monitoring and evaluating (i) student achievement (in
                         Junior Secondary and in TVET programs, as described above in second paragraph describing Sub-
                         Component 1.1) and (ii) training delivery, which will involve establishing reliable ways to assess the
                         outcomes of teacher training.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           19. There will be renovation/rehabilitation and the provision of equipment to a number of secondary
Public Disclosure Copy




                           schools. Project interventions will be limited to some geographical areas which are not yet defined at
                           present.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           20. Borrower's institutional capacity is satisfactory in light of its experience in implementing several
                           education projects that also include school civil works.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Antoine V. Lema (GURDR)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              An Environmental and Social Management
                           BP 4.01                                               Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to cover
                                                                                 the impacts of rehabilitation and renovation of
                                                                                 secondary technical schools, including the
                                                                                 provision of water and sanitation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not undertake any investments
                                                                                 in critical natural habitats. In particular, the
                                                                                 project will not support schools inside the
                                                                                 Salonga National Park.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               The project will not support the purchase of any
                                                                                 pesticides or pest management programs.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The project will target a number of provinces
                                                                                 which are not yet identified. In the case that
                                                                                 indigenous populations are located in the
                                                                                 selected provinces, and to ensure that these
                                                                                 populations benefit from the project, an
                                                                                 Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be
                                                                                 prepared.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               Works under the project are limited to
                           4.12                                                  reconstruction and rehabilitation of existing
                                                                                 schools. The project will not involve any taking
                                                                                 of land.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      21. The Borrower will be advised to initiate the safeguard-related studies by the end of the
                                      preparation phase which is expected to be in mid-October 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dung-Kim Pham

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 19-Aug-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (PMGR)                                                                                          Date: 20-Aug-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
