                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1016

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                      Project ID:      P152001
                            Project Name:      Syr Darya Control and Northern Aral Sea Project, Phase 2 (P152001)
                            Task Team          Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Gha
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Dec-2014                     Estimated        22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Animal production (30%), Flood protection (30%), General water, sanitation
                                               and flood protection sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (14%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (29%), Water resource management (29 %), Other environment
                                               and natural resources management (28%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    126.00                    Total Bank Financing:        107.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     19.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       107.00
                              Total                                                                       126.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The PDOs are to control flooding, achieve bulk-water savings, and improve water provision for
                           developing aquaculture in the project areas along the Lower Syr Darya.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project would include three components, operating along the lower Syr Darya in Kazakshtan:

                         Component 1: Increasing the conveyance and flood-regulation capacity in the lower Syr Darya (US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $43 million):
                         This component will help increase the Syr Darya mean flow capacity in winter from 500 to 700 m3/s,
                         thus reducing water losses (for improved water provision including to the Delta Lakes and NAS) and
                         contributing to protect settlements, cultivable lands, roads, and rail infrastructure against floods. It
                         includes 3 subcomponents:
                         A.      Riverbed straightening at Turumbet and Korgansha sections: to increase the river
                         conveyance capacity, to pass winter floods and retain them in the flood-retention reservoir Koksarai.
                         This includes cutting meanders at four sections along Syr Darya in Karmakchi district, thus
                         increasing river slope, which increases the flow capacity;
                         B.      Rehabilitate and develop around 50 Km of flood protection dikes in Kazalinsk and
                         Karmakchi districts;
                         C. Rehabilitate the left bank irrigation off-take at Kzylorda barrage: the irrigation canal head works
                         would be repaired and protected against high floods; to avoid inundation of 60,000 ha of irrigable
                         lands and damage to civil infrastructure; and
                         D. Construct road bridges near Birlik settlement in Kazalinsk district: This subproject will be the first
                         road in Kazalinsk district which improves communication and transportation during the freight
                         handling by motor transport. It will replace two existing low-capacity pontoon bridges by two
                         modern bridges, thus curbing the risk of ice-jams in winter and also improving the river flow
                         capacity (widening the river bed up to 200m).

                         Component 2: Improving water provision to the Syr Darya Delta Lakes (US$78 million):
                         This component will involve two subcomponents operating adjacent to NAS, and benefiting from the
                         water-regulation improvements resulting from Component 1:
                         A.        Rehabilitate delta lake systems in Aralsk district of Kzylorda oblast (Kamuishlibash and
                         Akshatau lakes): This subcomponent will improve water supply to the lakes, by providing adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         hydraulic structures and conveyance canals, replacing the large number of makeshift intakes and
                         temporary canals. By providing regulated water to the lakes together with operating better the
                         Amanotkel weir and other control structures, the delta lakes will be revived, thus improving the
                         biodiversity of the Syr Darya delta, fish production, and the processing of reeds used for fodder and
                         house construction.
                         B.        Reconstruct/extend fishery ponds at Tastak site of Kamuishlibash fish hatchery (Aralsk
                         district, Kzylorda oblast): this will help utilize the fish production capacity of the NAS, delta lakes
                         and Syr Darya, through artificial stocking of valuable fish species breading in the hatchery, thus
                         improving the fishery-dependent employment.

                         Component 3: Enhancing river basin management, preparing the SYNAS3, and project coordination
                         (US$5 million):
                         This component will involve three subcomponents:
                         A.       Technical support for preparation of SYNAS3: the NAS restoration and the Kyzylorda RBM
                         Center;
                         B.       Strengthen the Government capacity in RBM (TBD by appraisal), through developing
                         limited river-basin modeling and monitoring tools. These include: establishing new hydroposts and
                         refitting gauging stations; developing an Early Flood Warning System; developing the Mike 11
                         model; and developing a Decision Support System (DSS) using state-of-the-art open-access sources
                         (using SYNAS2 funds, also possibly complemented through support from the ongoing Central Asia
                           Energy-Water Development Program, CAEWDP). During SYNAS2 these tools will be developed
                           mainly up to the level needed to support the NAS feasibility study (as needed to prepare SYNAS3),
                           whereas during SYNAS3 these tools will be developed further to support operational decisions as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           part of the Kyzylorda River Basin Management Center that will be established by SYNAS3; and
                           C. Project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), audit, and training.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project area comprises the Syr Darya basin from the Chardera Reservoir on the Uzbekistan
                           border to and including the Northern Aral Sea (NAS). Administratively, the project operates in parts
                           of Kyzylorda and South Kazakhstan Oblasts within the basin of the Lower Syr Darya. The Syr
                           Darya originates at the confluence of the Naryn and Kara Darya, in the Ferghana Valley. The project
                           area is estimated at 230,000 km2.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Kazakhstan has adequate environmental legislation, institutional capacity, and mechanisms to deal
                           with environmental issues arising during project preparation and implementation. This includes an
                           environmental assessment procedure for projects, governed by a State Environmental Expertise
                           Review. Environmental performance of the SYNAS-1 was ensured through the implementation of
                           an environmental management plan (EMP) that identified preventive actions and mitigation
                           measures to address potential adverse environmental impacts; its implementation was effected
                           through environmental audits comprising systematic independent reviews of works construction sites
                           and camps. The reviews included inspection of sites, consultations and interviews with clients,
                           consultants and contractors, and examination of relevant supporting documentation. The audits
                           ensured that the appropriate environmental impact prevention and mitigation measures were applied
                           and that the works and outcomes were in accordance with the environmental and socio-economic
                           enhancement and improvement plans and expectations. The same procedure will be institutionalized
                           under SYNAS2, and World Bank reviews will confirm that the EMP for SYNAS2 will be
                           implemented satisfactorily.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Similar to SYNAS, most environmental issues in SYNAS2 are related to construction activities.
                           Construction activities are monitored by the construction supervision consultants and the Committee
                           of Water Resources (CWR). As done with SYNAS, for SYNAS2 the CWR and its design/
                           supervision/safeguards consultants will incorporate the EMP clauses into the bid documents and
                           construction contracts, and then audit the contractors to ensure compliance. The social specialists in
                           CWR and its consultants will monitor implementation of the land acquisition. The Bank will assess
                           the capacity of these designated staff for SYNAS2 and provide guidance and training as needed.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GENDR)
                           Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             SYNAS2 is expected to deliver real
                           BP 4.01                                              environmental and social benefits to the Kazakh
                                                                                SyrDarya basin. The project will operate in
                                                                                areas already intensively transformed to be used
                                                             for municipal/public infrastructure, where
                                                             neither construction nor operation would affect
                                                             the environment in a significant scale.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The project may have limited adverse
                                                             environmental impacts due to its construction
                                                             activities, being undertaken in an area with
                                                             complex hydro-ecological systems, with poor
                                                             socio-economic and health conditions of the
                                                             related population. The project area contains
                                                             several natural habitats, among them Important
                                                             Bird Areas and valuable Tugay forests, which
                                                             may be impacted temporarily by the
                                                             construction activities.

                                                             However, the project will have net positive
                                                             effects by improving the hydrological regime
                                                             (more stable conditions for wetlands, improved
                                                             food dynamics in the floodplains). It is
                                                             expected that Any adverse impacts of the
                                                             construction and operation will be limited to the
                                                             extent they can be easily outweighed by the
                                                             socioeconomic and biodiversity benefits. This
                                                             is a preliminary conclusion that is subject to the
                                                             completion/clarification of the environmental
                                                             and social assessment document (ESA), which
                                                             is currently underway and will be completed
                                                             before appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project may have a limited potential impact
                                                             on small areas of natural habitats, particularly
                                                             during the construction phase. The project
                                                             operates in areas involving or nearing natural
                                                             habitats, ranging from the water bodies of the
                                                             Syrdarya River, the Aral Sea, the Aydar-
                                                             Arnasay lake system and the delta lakes to
                                                             wetlands and terrestrial ecosystems in the
                                                             SyrDarya floodplain, most notably semi-desert
                                                             and desert ecosystems.
                                                             The natural habitats also include protected areas
                                                             in the zone of influence (e.g. the Zapovednik
                                                             Barsakelmes, Zapovednaya Zona Arys-
                                                             Karaktau, planned Nuratau-Kyzylkum
                                                             Biosphere Reserve in Uzbekistan), areas with
                                                             known high suitability for biodiversity
                                                             conservation and sites that are critical for rare,
                                                             vulnerable, migratory, or endangered species (e.
                                                             g. assigned and potential Important Bird Areas
                                                                 and potential Ramsar sites), and the Tugay
                                                                 forests in the Syrdarya floodplain with
                                                                 ecosystems specific to Central Asian rivers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 being in extreme decline and inhabited by
                                                                 several endemic and vulnerable species. The
                                                                 project will however have a net positive impact
                                                                 on these habitats due to the improvements in
                                                                 biodiversity.

                                                                 Of particular relevance are the areas where river
                                                                 meanders will be straightened. The draft ESA
                                                                 has preliminarily assessesd that SYNAS2
                                                                 impact on the habitats (if any) would be limited
                                                                 as the affected river stretch is merely within 6
                                                                 kilometers long, and any impact will be small
                                                                 enough to be easily offset by the SYNAS2
                                                                 improvements. The offset measures include
                                                                 improving the natural habitats, and the
                                                                 compensatory effect is currently being assessed
                                                                 as part of finalizing the ESA (due completion by
                                                                 the appraisal). The straitening will prevent the
                                                                 river (during high flows) from overtopping a
                                                                 dike which protects a nearby settlement ,
                                                                 including farms used for hey production .

                                                                 Given a limited risk for degradation of any of
                                                                 these habitats as a result of project
                                                                 (construction) activities, the project triggers this
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 safeguard policy and will address these issues
                                                                 during project design, construction and
                                                                 operation phases. The ESA will project will do
                                                                 this by means of the site-specific EMPs, which
                                                                 will give particular attention to project impacts
                                                                 on natural habitats in the subproject areas, and
                                                                 thereupon, include appropriate measures to
                                                                 minimize habitat degradation and compensate
                                                                 for any loss that might occur.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project does not anticipate physical
                         4.12                                    resettlement; however construction of flood
                                                                 protection dikes and bridges might require land
                                                           acquisition for permanent or temporary use. The
                                                           client prepared a draft Land Acquisition Policy
                                                           Framework, and will prepare (during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           implementation, pending the detailed designs)
                                                           site-specific Land Acquisition Plans as
                                                           applicable.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes   Under SYNAS-1, following a dam safety
                                                           review prepared for the Chardara Dam included
                                                           in the project, an independent panel of experts
                                                           (IPOE) consisting of international and national
                                                           experts reviewed the design and oversaw the
                                                           implementation of mitigating measures to
                                                           ensure dam safety. Thereupon in 2008 and
                                                           2011 dam-safety assessments were undertaken
                                                           and concluded that there are remaining safety
                                                           measures that need to be undertaken.

                                                                    Further safety related works supported
                                                           by the state Government budget would be
                                                           carried out on the Chardara Dam, including an
                                                           additional spillway (TBC by appraisal) to be
                                                           located at the left abutment of the dam will
                                                           increase the spilling capacity of the dam and
                                                           reduce the risk of dam breach in case of extreme
                                                           floods exceeding 1,000 year flood. A
                                                           conveyance canal crossing the Kyzylkum main
                                                           irrigation canal will link the spillway with the
                                                           Syr Darya to safely discharge the spilled water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           back into the existing riverbed .

                                                           By the concept-review meeting, the Bank’s
                                                           dam-safety Advisor requested updating the
                                                           aforementioned 2008 and 2011 safety
                                                           assessments and related plans (e.g. Framework
                                                           for an Emergency Preparedness Plan), focusing
                                                           on the immediate safety measures such as the
                                                           toe drainage and the vibration in one bottom
                                                           outlet. Whereas, the issue of developing an
                                                           additional spillway seems to be a longer-term
                                                           less-critical one (TBC by the appraisal).
                                                           Depending on the outcome of the updated safety
                                                           assessment, during the pre-appraisal the Team
                                                           will agree with the Government on the approach
                                                           and the timeline of addressing any immediate
                                                           dam-safety works (possibly through
                                                           Government parallel financing).
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           As with SYNAS and IDIP2, SYNAS2 triggers
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            the safeguard policy for Projects on
                                                                                                                                 International Waterways (OP 7.50). The Syr
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Darya and the Aral Sea are international
                                                                                                                                 waterways for purposes of this safeguard policy.
                                                                                                                                 The Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan,
                                                                                                                                 pursuant to paragraph 7(a) of the policy, has
                                                                                                                                 agreed to inform the Governments of the
                                                                                                                                 relevant riparian states (Uzbekistan, Tajikistan
                                                                                                                                 and Kyrgystan) of the project with a notification
                                                                                                                                 letter providing the relevant details of the
                                                                                                                                 project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project Environmental Impact Assessment and Management Plan has been prepared back in
                                      2008 and recently being updated. Once it is reviewed and cleared by the Bank it will undergo
                                      disclosure both in-country and in the Infoshop. Resettlement Policy Framework is also being
                                      updated by the client and will be disclosed.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ahmed Shawky M. Abdel Gha
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)                                                                                          Date: 01-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
