                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5296
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          South Sudan                        Project ID:    P143975
                            Project Name:     Institutional Development and Capacity Building Project (P143975)
                            Task Team         Verena Maria Fritz
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         07-Jul-2014                        Estimated   16-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTP2                              Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (90%), Public administration- Health (5%),
                                              Public administration- Transportation (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (35%), Public expenditure, financial
                                              management and procurement (35%), Other accountability/ anti-corruption
                                              (10%), Other public sector governance (5%), Managing for development results
                                              (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      40.00           Total Bank Financing:                40.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              40.00
                              Total                                                                                    40.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to introduce a results orientation and to enhance core human
                           resource management and development and public finance management capacities and functions in

                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         key targeted ministries.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         45.       The IDCB Project will seek to support an increased focus on performance and results as well
                         as its efforts to enhance institutional development and capacity building through three main
                         interrelated components: support for initiating results-based management, monitoring and evaluation
                         and leadership development; support for strengthening institutions for human resource management
                         and development; and support for further developing public financial management systems,
                         capacities, and practices and for strengthening accountability in the use of resources. Overall, these
                         activities will target three core ministries/institutions (Office of the President, MOLPSHRD,
                         MOFEP), and initially three sector ministries (MoH, MoTRB, and MoAFARF), as well as the Audit
                         Chamber of South Sudan and the establishment of a Parliamentary Budget Office. Improvements in
                         these aspects of public sector management are expected to have mutual synergies and jointly
                         addressing them is expected to reduce existing bottlenecks for strengthened delivery of services and
                         of public infrastructure in South Sudan. The project will intersect and will seek to build synergies
                         with other development support, provided both by the World Bank and by other partners. This may
                         include providing co-funding for activities initiated by other development partners when this is the
                         most appropriate form of support within the parameters of the components of IDCBP.

                         46.     Given the importance of transparency and participation to strengthen state legitimacy, social
                         accountability tools and approaches will be mainstreamed into project components. In particular, the
                         project proposes to encourage or support transparency in procurement, the use of public expenditure
                         tracking (‘PETS’)’, and independent budget analysis (see also Annex 6).

                         47. The proposed IDCB Project seeks to provide support to the GoRSS to make progress in public
                         sector development in three interrelated key areas. The project builds on what has been achieved
                         since the CPA, while also taking into account where progress has stalled or been partially reversed
                         over the past two years due to austerity and renewed conflict. It also incorporates lessons from what
                         has been less successful in South Sudan and in other post-conflict countries and considers the risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                         involved. As set out above, the relatively broad scope is expected to help make progress in
                         interrelated areas so that the overall public sector improves in effectiveness, rather than seeking deep
                         reforms in a single area. Components and sub-components may need to be adjusted in response to an
                         evolving situation on the ground, given that earlier gains in institutional development have been
                         negatively affected by the return to conflict since December 2013, and related to this, changes in the
                         support by other development partners. A mid-term review of the project is scheduled to take place
                         18 months after effectiveness to enable adjustments to be made in a timely manner.

                         C.    Project Components
                         Component 1: Result-oriented Management and Leadership

                         48.      The GoRSS has recognized the need for a greater focus on delivering public services which
                         has lagged behind expectations of citizens and has in turn contributed to fragility. Prior to the re-start
                         of the conflict in late 2013, the government embarked on a major initiative to develop a system of
                         results-based management across the public administration. As is clear from the experience of other
                         countries, the process for establishing such a system will take time and will entail a number of
                         challenges. In the context of a weak institutional environment, the main benefits of this component
                         are expected to be (a) the effect of signaling government commitment to improving service delivery
                         across the public administration and (b) developing insipient capacity to monitor whether policies
                         and government efforts are indeed leading to improvements.


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         49.      This component is most evidently dependent upon government commitment and attention to
                         strengthening the delivery of public goods and services. It will assist the government with building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         an actual system to signal and follow through on its commitment, and to monitor progress and
                         results. Implementation of the component may have to be adjusted in case that GoRSS shifts the
                         institutional responsibility for performance management.

                         The component will include the following:
                         51.     Support to the Government Performance Management Secretariat that has been established
                         in the Office of the President since late 2013. The Secretariat is being tasked to implement the
                         presidential initiative to develop Performance Contracts between the Office of the President and
                         ministries and departments and to monitor their implementation. The project will support the
                         Secretariat to initiate a system of Results-Based Management, including a strong M & E function, to
                         monitor and to support priority project implementation efforts and to play a coordinating role across
                         government agencies.

                         52.     As part of the establishment of performance management, the project will support the use of
                         implement Rapid Results Initiatives (RRI) as an approach and tool to deliver specific initiatives and
                         targets on service delivery and related government services.

                         53.     Support to the M&E units being established within the Secretariat as well as across
                         ministries, with a focus on the five target ministries (MOFEP, MOLPSHRD, MOH, MTRB, and
                         MoAFARFA). The GoRSS is keen to expand its ability to monitor and evaluate its own performance
                         and progress with service delivery (to date M&E has largely been undertaken by development
                         partners only). The project will support continuous training and coaching for M&E officers,
                         including direct hand-holding and further case-based learning around M&E tasks. As needed, this
                         may include support for the acquisition of software tools.

                         54.    Promote Leadership Skills Building, through organizing training workshops, mentoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coaching, to promote the development of responsive and accountable as well as effective leadership.
                         The project will support training in adaptive leadership to teams to address specific adaptive
                         problems/challenges will complement the rapid results initiative.

                         Component 2: Strengthening Institutions for Human Resource Management and Development

                         The component will include the following:
                         55.       Working with and through the MoLPSHRD, the project will seek to support the process of
                         strengthened public sector capacity and the development and embedding of systems for HR and for
                         records management. It will support the development of a school of public service in South Sudan
                         that can deliver more continuous capacity development and can successively cover a wider range of
                         civil servants than has been possible to date, to help develop longer term solutions for capacity gaps.
                         The need for a long-term and systematic approach to capacity building is a key lesson from recent
                         cross-country analytic work as summarized in section I (see also OECD 2010). The main challenge
                         will be to define the right balance between a centralized effort and more sector-specific capacity
                         building approaches, as highlighted by reviews of the MDTF.

                         56.    With regards to HR systems, the component seeks to support the further development and
                         deployment of the South Sudan Electronic Payroll System (SSEPS), the strengthening of a
                         Recruitment Board and the establishment of a Diaspora program, which will both contribute to the

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         hiring of qualified staff into the public service. Furthermore, the component will support
                         MOLPSHRD to implement its mandate for better records management in selected government
                         central government institutions and sector ministries. SSEPS has been recognized as an important
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tool for ensuring the integrity of the public sector payroll.

                         57.      Finally, the project will support the operationalization of a pension system in South Sudan.
                         This will enable civil service staff reaching the retirement age to leave the active civil service. The
                         establishment of a pension system also has the potential to contribute to the renewal and
                         strengthening of the civil service through the complimentary effort at strengthening the recruitment
                         function.

                         58.      The level of ambition within each of the sub-components is to establish institutions, systems
                         and processes that are ‘fit for purpose’ for a fragile and conflict-affected environment. In terms of
                         sequencing, sub-components (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) are immediately actionable and build on prior
                         work. Sub-component (v), developing the CSRB, will depend on political commitment to proceed
                         with a strengthened recruitment process. Sub-component (vi) builds on some earlier effort (to
                         establish an Electronic Record Management system in the Ministry of Cabinet Affairs, pursued
                         successfully under the CABIHRD process ), but will need to be gradually developed in order to
                         pursue a viable system of record keeping.

                         59.      Support to the Policy Planning and Budget Unit of the MoLPSHRD. The aim of the support
                         is to develop an effective Policy Planning & Budget Unit with timely and effective procedures for
                         policy formulation, planning, and budget preparation and implementation, as well as M&E. This will
                         in turn strengthen MoLPSHRD’s ability to project its efforts at continuous public service
                         improvements across government and service delivery functions.

                         60.       Supporting the establishment of a South Sudan Management Development Institute . The
                         key objective of the Institute will be to provide civil servants both at the national and at the state
                         level with crucially needed public administration skills for improving their on-the-job performance.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support will include curriculum development, institutional design and support for establishing the
                         institute, the appropriate combination of training modalities (including class-room based and on-the-
                         job modules, investing in the training of trainers, etc.), establishing certification, and evaluation. In
                         the process of establishing the institute, MOLPSHRD will continue to liaise with key service
                         delivery sectors to understand their training needs and how these can best be met between sector-
                         specific training and cross-cutting skills. Responsibility for the development of core sector specific
                         skills (e.g. medical training for nurses) will continue to rest with sector ministries, but SSMDI is
                         expected to offer selected course modules related to management in key sectors (e.g. management for
                         health sector staff).

                         61.       The project will provide support to the further development and deployment of the South
                         Sudan Electronic Payroll System (SSEPS). SSEPS has the potential to make an important
                         contribution towards a well-managed public service. A basic initial excel-based system (SSEPS I)
                         has been in place since 2010. The development of a more comprehensive web-based system (SSEPS
                         II) started in 2012, with piloting of the system taking place since early 2013. As of spring 2014,
                         SSEPS II was in principle in use for the central government, and for Central Equatoria state (actual
                         payments were switched back to cash due to the ongoing conflict and a partial exodus of civil
                         servants).

                         62.     Support for establishing a pension system. In 2013, the South Sudan Pension Fund Act was

                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                         passed by the Legislative Assembly. This provides for a Pension Fund to be established and tasked
                         with administering relevant pension schemes. The Assembly also passed the Civil Service Pension
                         Scheme Act which provides for a pension scheme for civil servants. The Pension Fund Act provides
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the parameters for the governance of the Fund, and board members have since been appointed.
                         However the Fund is not yet operational, and significant work is required to develop and implement
                         the various policies and procedures of the Fund. The MoPSHRD has requested support to
                         operationalize the Fund, including support to developing and finalizing policies and procedures for
                         approval by the board, followed by support to implement these procedures (in particular the vetting
                         of files at national and sub-national levels). Once operational, the Pension Fund will require support
                         in implementing the provisions of the Civil Service Pension Scheme. The project will not fund the
                         actual payment of pensions to retirees.

                         63.      Support to Civil Service Recruitment Board (CSRB). The aim of the support is to strengthen
                         the CSRB to develop capacity to implement a merit-based recruitment and selection policy across the
                         civil service. This will include supporting the adoption of an appropriate legal framework for the
                         CSRB including preparation of CSRB Draft Bill and relevant follow-up regulation. The CSRB will
                         also be assisted to establish a database and improve management of records on establishment posts,
                         vacant posts, potential job seekers, advertisement records, and recruitment and selection decisions .
                         The support will further help enhance CSRB staff capacity through training.

                         64.     Diaspora Program to tap into South Sudanese professionals abroad. The GRSS through
                         MoLPSHRD seeks to strengthen its outreach to, policies for, and potential recruitment of diaspora
                         professionals into civil service positions. Potentially diaspora professionals can bring much needed
                         technical and managerial expertise to fill critical positions in the public service. These critical
                         positions will be identified across government and advertised on the basis of relevant job descriptions
                         and monetary and non-monetary incentive packages to attract diaspora professionals to priority
                         positions.

                         65.      Support to improved records management in selected ministries. Managing and storing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government records systematically and reliably is a key challenge for the government, which also
                         affects accountability. MoLPSHRD seeks to play a key role, jointly with MoFEP in setting standards
                         and working with selected MDAs (MoH, MoTRB, OOP, MOFEP and MoLPSHRD) to establish
                         effective records management.

                         66.      The support builds on previous efforts by MoLPSHRD and is guided by MoLPSHRD’s
                         overall mandate and its Medium Term Capacity Development Strategy adopted in 2011. It is
                         expected that the Management Development Institute will make an important contribution to
                         enabling more continuous training opportunities within South Sudan for civil servants, especially in
                         skills that are required in many positions across the public service, such as budgeting and budget
                         monitoring, systematic record keeping, use of key IT systems, and similar skills. The support to
                         SSEPS provides important continuity to an effort that has been initiated since 2009 by the CBTF and
                         which has made critical contributions to strengthening the payroll and overall HRM. Similarly,
                         establishing a pension system is a crucial reform for establishing a normally functioning and staffed
                         civil service; and also fulfills an important promise made to those who have worked in the civil
                         service and who reached retirement age.

                         Component 3: Strengthening selected aspects of Public Financial Management and Accountability in
                         selected central agencies and sector ministries



                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         The component will include the following:

                         67.     The component builds on critical bottlenecks identified through the 2012 PEFA assessment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The focus is on (i) strengthening domestic capacity for budget preparation, execution and monitoring
                         in MOFEP; (ii) strengthening PFM capabilities in the targeted sector ministries, (iii) strengthening
                         public investment management and procurement; and (iv) further developing the accountability and
                         oversight institutions for public finances.

                         68.     The level of uncertainty over other sources of funding is particularly high in this area. This
                         concerns in particular support for budget preparation and execution functions. Support will be closely
                         coordinated with that provided by other development partners to ensure that there is sufficient depth
                         of support in key areas aligned to the government’s plan for strengthening PFM functions, while
                         avoiding duplication (Annex 7 provides an overview of PFM support provided by various
                         development partners, including known changes since December 2013).

                         69.      Support for continuous systems strengthening and training of staff in MOFEP’s budget and
                         accounts departments. Building on previous and ongoing efforts, Training will be designed to be
                         provided mainly in-country and will combine classroom based training with on-the-job support in
                         collaboration with current technical assistants. Both departments are being supported by other
                         development efforts targeting the functioning of systems and processes; complementary to these,
                         support provided through IDCBP will focus on strengthening the capacity of national staff.
                         Accountants are posted from the Ministry of Finance to sector departments. As training modules are
                         established, they will also be offered to staff in state-level ministries of finance.

                         70.      Capacity development in the area of budget preparation and execution for targeted sector
                         ministries: sector ministries have thus far not benefitted from substantial support for strengthening
                         their capacities to manage funds. The component will target supporting staff training and the
                         development of systems and processes in Planning Departments and Administration and Finance
                         Departments. There is a window of opportunity, as accounting staff in MDAs is now seconded from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MoFEP, as foreseen in the PFMAA. Also, with the eventual ending of the austerity period, a growing
                         need to decentralize budgeting and accounting functions from MoFEP is expected at least to selected
                         larger sector ministries.

                         71.     Supporting more effective public investment management as a key aspect of budget
                         preparation and execution: Strengthened public investment planning is essential for guiding and
                         managing the process of re-building and expanding physical infrastructure in a post-conflict country
                         like South Sudan, and strengthening capacity in this area has been a key recommendation bythe IMF.
                         Support will be focused on the targeted sector ministries responsible for developing and costing
                         proposed public investment projects and on a planned unit under the Budget Department in MOFEP,
                         to be charged with vetting and monitoring capital expenditures; and will be closely aligned with
                         support provided by other development partners.

                         72.     Selected public procurement reforms and capacity building: this will include support to the
                         implementation of the new procurement law (in close collaboration with a procurement focused IDF
                         grant (P144038)) and supporting the strengthening of procurement processes, skills, and practices. A
                         new procurement bill is pending in the Legislative Assembly. Support comprises establishing a
                         procurement cadre in the civil service; relevant HR policies and regulations; procurement capacity
                         building including development and roll-out of training modules on various aspects of procurement,
                         procurement planning and audit, records, logistics and equipment support. The support under this

                                                                     Page 6 of 13
                         component will build on the Institutional Development Fund technical assistance by the World Bank
                         and on support being provided by USAID/CORE II.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         73.      Strengthening external audit and oversight: this includes (i) continuing support to external
                         audit, through supporting continuous training as the office expands (from a current 100 to an
                         expected 200+ staff; increasing coverage of state level governments is envisaged to be covered from
                         a central office in Juba), supporting the use of good audit practices and the further audit chain
                         through the legislature, as well as responses of audited entities (MDAs, state governments). (ii)
                         Support to relevant committees in the Parliament, including setting up a Parliamentary Budget
                         Office. A SPF grant (P127107, Strengthening Core Functions of Economic Management) is
                         providing initial support for selected activities which the project will continue after effectiveness and
                         as the grant support will come to a close in mid-2016. Support to the parliamentary budget and public
                         accounts committees will be undertaken in collaboration with WBI.

                         74.       Additional support may be provided upon government request for other PFM functions and
                         challenges, depending on the availability of support from other DPs. This may include support to the
                         tax directorate (with a focus on non-oil revenues) and a focus on stock-taking and strengthened
                         management of arrears and sovereign debt. Revenue mobilization is a central aspect of state-
                         building, and typically faces particular challenges in countries dependent on natural resources; while
                         it is currently expected that support by other development partners will resume (see Annex 7).
                         Arrears and a weakly managed proliferation of debt have rapidly accelerated as problems in South
                         Sudan in recent years. Complementary support such as TA for strengthening of the Front office of
                         the Minister of Finance, and potentially for macro-fiscal forecasting and for development planning in
                         MOFEP (South Sudan Development Initiative) may be provided if needed. Currently, support to
                         these aspects is delivered through an SPF grant (until mid-2016). Once the SPF grant closes,
                         government may request a continuation of capacity building support to these units as part of the PFM
                         component of the IDBCP.

                         75.      The possibility of support for strengthening PFM at the state level will be explored. State-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level ministries of finance play an important role in developing sub-national budget proposals as well
                         as in sub-national budget execution. Over the coming years, some of these functions are expected to
                         be further devolved to the county level, but state level ministries are expected to retain a significant
                         role. For the coming 18 months (through the end of 2015), an EU Technical Assistance grant is
                         providing technical assistance to State Ministries of Finance. It will be explored what form of support
                         may be most valuable for ensuring that PFM systems function well at sub-national levels to ensure
                         that funding can be channeled reliably and effectively to front line service delivery functions in
                         particular beyond the time-horizon of the current EU support.

                         76.     Support to further strengthening Public Financial Management is designed with a view to
                         being flexible and extending or complementing existing efforts, in particular those made by USAID/
                         Core II and DFID/BSI, as well as by IDF and SPF grants (P127107, P144038) currently provided by
                         the World Bank (see Annex 7). Extending support for budget planning and execution to sector
                         ministries and the focus on public investment management are important complementary areas that
                         are expected to commence as the project becomes effective. If relevant and most suitable, GoRSS
                         can use the IDA resources provided to scale up capacity building activities initiated by other
                         agencies. The project will seek to prioritizeopportunities for in-depth training on the job as well as
                         through evening and on-line courses. Many of the existing support mechanisms (WB grants, USAID/
                         CORE II) are scheduled to close between mid-2015 and 2017; however, implementation schedules
                         may shift as many TA activities have been suspended since late 2013.

                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                         Component 4: Project management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The component will include the following:

                         77.      This component is to support the GRSS in managing and coordinating project activities and
                         will be located under MoFEP. Specifically, the component will: (a) support the establishment and
                         operationalization of a Project Management Unit (PMU) as a joint PMU with LGSDP; (b) support
                         project financial management and procurement functions for the implementing agencies (c) staffing
                         and training of professional staff in FM, procurement, M&E and other support functions required by
                         the implementing agencies; (d) support the collection of data to facilitate project monitoring and
                         reporting (e) impact evaluation on the training delivered, including data collection, analysis and
                         reporting led by the MoLPSHRD and (f) operational cost of project coordination.

                         78.       The establishment of a joint PMU with LGSDP is judged to be the most reasonable way for
                         delivering support and strengthening coordination, while also meeting the fiduciary expectations of
                         the contributors to IDA. PMU staff is expected to be hired locally where possible or otherwise
                         regionally. The project will work with and develop country systems in multiple ways: a) by ensuring
                         that the funding provided can be reflected on annual budgets, b) by assisting the national Audit
                         Chamber to expand its capacity, including for auditing aid-funded projects, and c) by strengthening
                         country systems as such, including the capacity for M&E, HRM, and budget planning, and
                         execution, including procurement.
                         D.        Project Financing
                         79.       The lending instrument is a Technical Assistance Loan (TAL) of $40 million with a project
                         life of five years. The credit will be on standard IDA terms with a repayable period of 38 years with a
                         6-year grace period. As a new member with a 2012 GNI/capita (Atlas method) of US$790, South
                         Sudan will be classified as a regular IDA borrower and will receive regular IDA credits.
                         E.        Project Cost and Financing
                         80.       Table 3 provides a breakdown of project costs by component. The costs below include a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of US$2.5m to finance consultancy services, training,
                         workshops, small works, and operating costs to ensure readiness for implementation by project
                         effectiveness, which was approved in April 2014 and is expected to be implemented prior to project
                         effectiveness.

                         81.      The unallocated amount is proposed to be US$2.45, equivalent to about 6 per cent of the
                         total. This unallocated funding is proposed as a way to maintain the flexibility needed for a project in
                         the highly uncertain context of South Sudan. It is proposed that the unallocated funds can be used to
                         provide additional funding for project activities where this is justified, as well as in particular for
                         activities indicated as tentative under the project components. It is expected that by the Mid-Term
                         Review, the allocation of funds across components will be revisited and adjusted as appropriate.

                         Table 3: Project cost and financing overview
                                                                                              Project cost(in US$)
                         IDA Financing (in US$)               % Financing
                         1. Results-based Management and Leadership   3,250,000                            3,250,000
                         100

                         2. Strengthening Institutions for HRM and HRD                         22,10,000             22,100,000
                         100

                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                         3. Strengthening selected aspects of Public Financial
                         Management in central agencies and selected sector ministries             10,100,000
Public Disclosure Copy




                         10,100,000                    100

                         4. Project management and Impact Evaluation                  2,100,000                   2,100,000 100

                         5.Unallocated                                                2,450,000       2,450,000         100

                         Total Costs                       40,000,000      40,000,000                             100

                         Total Project Costs           40,000,000           40,000,000                         100

                         Total Financing Costs                          40,000,00 0               40,000,000         100


                         F.      Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

                         82.      The World Bank has provided support to institutional development and capacity building in
                         South Sudan since 2003-04 alongside support provided by other development agencies. Previous
                         World Bank engagement includes: (i) Capacity Building in Post-Conflict Sudan (LICUS grant), (ii)
                         Institutional and Human Development in South Sudan (P100980)/ Capacity Building, Institutional
                         and Human Resource Development Project (CABIHRD, MDTF-SS) , (iii) Core Fiduciary Systems
                         Support Project (P098639), as well as capacity building efforts for sub-national levels.

                          83.     Effective capacity development in South Sudan has proven more challenging than was
                         originally anticipated. The overall IEG rating for P100980 has been ‘moderately unsatisfactory’,
                         while the suggested ICR rating for P098639 is satisfactory (yet to be reviewed by IEG). Over the past
                         5-10 years, the World Bank has also supported capacity building in a number of other post-conflict
Public Disclosure Copy




                         countries (such as Afghanistan, DRC, Liberia, and Sierra Leone) which offer some useful lessons.

                         84.      Evaluations also note the positive progress that has been achieved. As the independent
                         evaluation of the MDTF-SS emphasizes (2013), in South Sudan a public sector had to be established
                         largely from scratch, in terms of physical infrastructure, human resources, and a legal basis – the
                         latter due to the fact that the government deliberately sought to develop a new legal framework,
                         rather than building gradually on that inherited from Sudan.

                         85.      The conflict that erupted in late 2013 underlines th e fact that public sector development
                         takes place within a high risk context. The violent contestation is linked to a sense that groups have
                         not received fair benefits from independence; while the threat of violence itself is likely to render
                         efforts at developing a meritocratic and effective public sector more challenging.

                         86.      There are three key insights from recent reviews and re-thinking of approaches to reforming
                         and strengthening public administrations. Firstly, there is an important need to ensure a problem-
                         driven approach (see PSMA 2012), targeting actual bottlenecks to a good functioning of the public
                         sector, rather than primarily seeking to establish institutional ‘forms’ copied from more developed
                         contexts. Second, complexity and rigidity in project design increase the risks of problems emerging
                         during implementation (and can make these more challenging to address). Third, (sustained) political
                         commitment (based on underlying incentives) increases the likelihood of successful implementation

                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                         – and inversely projects have to cope with the risk of volatility or variability of such commitment.

                         87.      A key criticism raised with regards to the preceding project (P100980) was that while its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         objectives were highly relevant, it suffered from insufficient contextualization. The project failed to
                         ‘stem the tide’ during a period of rapid and uncoordinated expansion of the public service. The new
                         operation is being designed in a context that is now marked by considerable distortions. Its approach
                         is to primarily go ‘with the grain’ – i.e. work with and within the prevailing incentive environment,
                         while also seeking to help government to hold steady on some improvements that have been
                         repeatedly attempted. This will need to be pursued against the background of renewed conflict and
                         possibly continued insecurity and uncertainty, which on the one hand includes an increased pressure
                         on South Sudan’s leadership to demonstrate a focus on service delivery, while on the other hand also
                         creating high pressures to satisfy various particularistic and patronage-based demands.

                         88.      The proposed project seeks to take several of these lessons on board in its design, as well as
                         building on the OECD’s insights and principles for engagement in fragile states. Firstly, it explicitly
                         includes a focus on key service delivery sectors and seeks to improve how central agencies support
                         these line ministries and agencies and how these interact. At the same time, to limit complexity, the
                         project will initially focus its en gagement to three core ministries/agencies and two sector ministries.
                         The intention is to maintain the flexibility to broaden its scope over time if the core approach proves
                         viable and effective (including possible use of additional funds). The support to sustainable capacity
                         development with the aim of reducing reliance on external TA over time, strengthening state
                         legitimacy, and enabling central government to play an effective coordinating role for sub-national
                         governments are aligned with the OECD principles.

                         89.     It is envisaged that a Mid-Term Review for the project will be carried out early on,
                         approximately 18 months after the start of disbursements. This will allow revisiting whether
                         conditions have stayed steady, improved, or worsened; and will allow a timely adjustment of the
                         operation if needed, leaving sufficient space to proceed with potential adjustments and to achieve
                         progress.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The main project locations are the ministerial compound in Juba, the Human Resources Training
                         Center under the Ministry of Public Services and Human Resource Development, located just outside
                         Juba, and possibly other training sites in Juba. It is also possible that project activities will make use
                         of training facilities in some state capitals.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         John Bryant Collier (AFTN3)
                         Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The only physical activities that are foreseen are
                          BP 4.01                                               the procurement of electronic hardware (computer
                                                                                terminals), possible minor works to refurbish
                                                                                office space to accommodate the hardware, and
                                                                                possibly the construction of a borehole. This
                                                                                project does not warrant a separate dialogue on



                                                                       Page 10 of 13
                                                                                safeguards, as the anticipated impacts are
                                                                                negligible.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              E.      Social (including Safeguards)

                             113.     The project does not include activities that may incur significant social risks or deal
                             directly with the population at large. However, through the support provided, it is anticipated that
                             the services government provides will be impacted (and improved) and as such there will indirect
                             social implications, expected to be positive. Public servants will benefit directly from the capacity
                             building efforts received.

                              F.      Environment (including Safeguards)
                              114.    The project is not expected to have any negative environmental impacts. The client has
                              proposed drilling a small borehole for water supply at the existing structure of the Human
                              Resource Training Center outside Juba, which was built and equipped with support from the
                              AfDB. Prior to the construction of the borehole, the contractor will be required to prepare a short
                              environmental management plan (EMP) for the construction and operation of the borehole for
                              review by the client and the Bank.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No major impacts are expected.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                       Page 11 of 13
                              impacts.
                              The main alternative to drilling a borehole is using water delivery tanks.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The project does not include activities that may incur significant social risks or deal directly with
                              the population at large. Public servants will benefit directly from the capacity building efforts
                              received.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Public servants will benefit directly from the capacity building efforts received. Through the
                              support provided, it is anticipated that the services government provides will be impacted (and
                              improved) and as such there will be indirect social implications, expected to be positive.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Technical Assistance Project
                            For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                            indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                            N/A
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                         Page 12 of 13
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Verena Maria Fritz
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Borko Handjiski (SM)      Date: 27-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 13 of 13
