                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8337
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Turkey                            Project ID:    P147183
                            Project Name:     Frontier Finance (P147183)
                            Task Team         Ilias Skamnelos
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         23-Apr-2014                       Estimated   15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSPF                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       250.00              Total Bank Financing: 250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 250.00
                              Total                                                                                 250.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to long term Islamic finance and
                           export factoring for small and medium enterprises and export oriented enterprises.
                            3. Project Description
                           A single component will provide US$250 million to be intermediated by TSKB through participation
                           banks and factoring companies targeting SMEs and EOEs. Sub-component 1 will focus on Islamic

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         finance (estimated at US$150 million) and sub-component 2 will focus on factoring (estimated at US
                         $50 million). The choice of a single component provides re-allocation flexibility against a limited
                         number of Islamic finance players and increased financial markets uncertainty. The credit line,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         guaranteed by the Turkish government, will be intermediated by TSKB, which will be the Borrower
                         and implementing agency for this project. TSKB will in turn on-lend/finance PFIs, which can be
                         participation banks and factoring companies. TSKB will select PFIs pursuant to criteria agreed
                         between TSKB and the World Bank, and subject to no objection by the World Bank. The selected
                         PFIs will in turn sub-finance private SMEs and EOEs, the final beneficiaries of the credit line. The
                         PFIs will assume the risk of the sub-beneficiaries who will be selected based on agreed upon
                         selection criteria. TSKB will have exposure only to the selected PFIs and will assume the risk for on-
                         lending/financing PFIs. There will be no sectoral restrictions and financing will be extended on
                         market terms to avoid any distortion.

                         In the case of Islamic finance, the expected Subsidiary Finance Agreement structure is a Wakala
                         arrangement –an agency contract under which the participation bank finances the enterprise on
                         behalf of TSKB. The participation bank acts as an agent for TSKB, investing on its behalf and
                         offering a guarantee (a Kafalah agreement) to pay back TSKB in case the enterprise fails to repay its
                         obligations. Nevertheless, the option of a Murabaha structure will also be allowed as a possibility –
                         the transfer of funds from TSKB to the PFI is achieved through commodity based buy and sell
                         transactions. Any accepted structure will have to receive the participation bank PFI’s Shariah board
                         approval and the no objection of the World Bank.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented by TSKB as Borrower/ Implementing Agency through the PFIs.
                         The sub-project (SME and EOE beneficiary) locations are not defined at this stage and are expected
                         to be all over Turkey.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
                         Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The Environmental Category of the project is FI,
                          BP 4.01                                             as all the investments under the project will not be
                                                                              identified until project implementation.
                                                                              Environmental issues of sub-beneficiaries and
                                                                              their sub-projects will be addressed through the
                                                                              sub-finance environmental eligibility
                                                                              assessments. Environmental assessments will be
                                                                              carried out in accordance with both Government
                                                                              of Turkey Environmental Assessment (Regulation
                                                                              on Environmental Impact Assessment, from the
                                                                              Ministry of Environment and Urbanization-
                                                                              MoEU) and World Bank EA (OP 4.01)
                                                                              requirements. Due to the nature of the project,
                                                                              working capital or investment finance
                                                                              applications are expected that will include



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                                                         machinery purchase/replacement or small scale
                                                                         construction works. Therefore, it is expected that
                                                                         there will be no large scale significant and/or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         irreversible impacts. Sub-projects in
                                                                         environmental Category A will not be eligible for
                                                                         funding. Moreover, since the policy on
                                                                         international waterways is not triggered, there
                                                                         will be a positive list of watersheds in Turkey in
                                                                         the framework which will guide the FI and the
                                                                         PFIs for the eligible locations of the actions. The
                                                                         environmental assessment (including
                                                                         environmental due diligence) procedures will be
                                                                         conducted according to the environmental review
                                                                         framework which has been prepared by TSKB
                                                                         and approved by WB. The environmental review
                                                                         framework also includes evaluation forms for
                                                                         assessing the environmental due-diligence of the
                                                                         existing facilities (SMEs/EOEs) which will be
                                                                         applying for working capital or investment loans.
                                                                         The framework provides guidance for additional
                                                                         requirements if the investment finance includes
                                                                         activities which will then lead to a classification
                                                                         of 'Category B' of the sub-projects. It is expected
                                                                         to have a prior review for an initial set of projects
                                                                         whereby WB will review all safeguard
                                                                         documentation, and then it is planned to have a
                                                                         sampling system where WB's environmental and
                                                                         social safeguard specialists will conduct site visits
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         and safeguard documentation assessment for
                                                                         randomly selected sub-projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            It is not expected that the project will involve any
                                                                         investment which has a footprint on green lands.
                                                                         In any case, the project will not finance sub-
                                                                         projects which may have impacts on natural
                                                                         habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Because the specific civil works of the existing
                         BP 4.11                                         factory buildings could potentially be within a
                                                                         historic district, the Bank safeguard policy on
                                                                         Physical Cultural Resources (OPO/BP 4.11) is
                                                                         applicable to these investments. For cultural
                                                                         property issues, local municipality is responsible
                                                                         for application of Turkish laws and regulations,



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                       including those relating to cultural heritage.
                                                                       Although it is not expected that, a significant
                                                                       impact will be seen on physical and cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       resources, the procedures for mitigating any
                                                                       potential risk is detailed in the environmental
                                                                       review framework.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           OP 4.12 is not triggered, since sub-projects
                         4.12                                          supporting involuntary land acquisition or
                                                                       associated involuntary resettlement that would
                                                                       trigger the OP 4.12 are not eligible for financing.
                                                                       For all civil construction works that will be
                                                                       executed on existing land plots in possession, a
                                                                       screening of investments will confirm that: 1) the
                                                                       locations are not occupied or being used for
                                                                       economic activities by any persons, and 2) the
                                                                       land is not recently involuntarily acquired land
                                                                       (through expropriation) in anticipation of use for
                                                                       the project to be funded by the FI. For all civil
                                                                       construction works that will be executed on land
                                                                       to be newly acquired, a screening of investments
                                                                       will need to confirm that: 1) the land is being
                                                                       acquired as a willing buyer – willing seller
                                                                       transaction on the market, where the seller has the
                                                                       option to refuse to sell as well as negotiate on
                                                                       price, and 2) the locations are not occupied or
                                                                       being used for economic activities by any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       persons. Thus, the project will utilize land that is
                                                                       free of squatters and other users that would be
                                                                       subsequently displaced by the project
                                                                       (economically or physically) or otherwise
                                                                       involuntarily block access to important assets and
                                                                       resources of community members. The Social
                                                                       Safeguard Specialist is included in the project
                                                                       team and will provide guidance to TSKB (and to
                                                                       PFIs if necessary) regarding the Bank's
                                                                       Involuntary Resettlement Policy, in order to
                                                                       eliminate any incompliance with this requirement.
                                                                       The requirements for screening are also
                                                                       incorporated in the EMF and the Operations
                                                                       Manual. The social safeguard specialist will also
                                                                       attend the implementation support missions to
                                                                       assess the scope and documentation of a sample
                                                                       of sub-projects, and to ensure that involuntary
                                                                       land acquisition that will trigger OP 4.12 will not
                                                                       be financed by the project.


                                                               Page 4 of 7
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               The project will not finance any investments
                                                                                  related to construction or rehabilitation of a dam,
                                                                                  or dam related infrastructure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International            No               There is a positive list of river basins listed in the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  environmental review framework and those will
                                                                                  be the eligible locations for sub-projects. The
                                                                                  positive lists were identified by LEGEN and
                                                                                  accepted as national waterways of Turkey.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project has been assigned Category “FI” in accordance with World Bank safeguard policy OP/
                              BP/GP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), since the project will be executed by intermediary
                              banks. Environmental issues of sub-beneficiaries and their sub-projects will be addressed through
                              the sub-finance environmental eligibility assessments. Environmental assessments will be carried
                              out in accordance with both Ministry of Environment and Urbanization (MoEU) Environmental
                              Assessment Regulation and World Bank environmental assessment (OP 4.01) requirements. Most
                              of the sub-finance is expected to be working capital, equipment/machinery purchase type of
                              activities. There could be some rehabilitation activities and/or small scale construction works. It is
                              anticipated that there will be no large scale significant and/or irreversible impacts from the project,
                              so the sub-finance applications are expected to be Category B or C. Category A projects and
                              projects triggering World Bank policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), Safety of Dams (OP/BP
Public Disclosure Copy




                              4.37), Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50) will not be eligible for financing. Due
                              to Turkey's rich cultural heritage inventory the policy on physical cultural resources (OP 4.11) is
                              triggered to be on the safe side. Environmental Assessment, public consultation and disclosure
                              procedures that the sub-project should comply with were explained in detail in the environmental
                              review sections of the FI Bank's Operational Manuals.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              This will be evaluated in individual sub-project environmental assessment documents as needed.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              This will be evaluated in individual sub-project environmental assessment documents as needed.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The PFIs will be approached for financing of sub-projects after the sub-project sponsors have
                              obtained all necessary environmental permits and environmental clearance from Turkish
                              Government. After ascertaining that all Turkish requirements have been met and clearances
                              obtained, PFI and TSKB (as the FI) would screen the project according to World Bank
                              categorization (Category A, B or C) according to OP 4.01. Only projects falling within Category
                              B or Category C may be considered for financing under this project. The environmental review


                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                           and categorization of the sub-project applications will focus on the proposed new investment
                           rather than on the existing facility/operation, through use of the Screening Forms (due-diligence
                           forms provided in the Operational Manual). FIs should ascertain that the existing facility/operation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           is in compliance with Turkish environmental regulations and has all required licenses and permits.

                           The FI, TSKB, during the course of the implementation of the EFIL and other credit line projects,
                           has developed institutional capacity to determine and monitor environmental risks of sub-projects.
                           The staff in TSKB are aware of the safeguard issues as they have been associated with the World
                           Bank in the past. TSKB, has a well established environmental and social risk rating tool, which
                           will be useful during the course of the project screening. The project will be implemented via
                           participation bank and factoring company PFIs, which are not determined at this stage. The
                           Operations Manual (OM) will be a part of the subsidiary finance agreements between TSKB and
                           the PFIs. PFIs will be informed that implementing the OM will be their responsibility, and their
                           capacity of implementing will be assessed by TSKB, and improvement measures will be given by
                           TSKB (with the assistance of the World Bank if requested) as necessary. TSKB will also assess
                           the capacities of the PFIs and offer them trainings if necessary. The capacity assessment tools,
                           assessment results and the improvement measures identified for the PFIs will also be shared with
                           the Bank for no objection and these actions will be done prior to the respective PFI's beginning to
                           on-lend/finance WB funds for any sub-projects with potential Safeguards impacts.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The environmental review/management framework (EMF) document has been prepared and
                           disclosed by TSKB, and then similar frameworks will be generated for the PFIs and the documents
                           will be disclosed by PFIs. If the sub-project requires a public consultation and environmental
                           assessment document disclosure for specific sub-projects, then these will be handled in line with
                           the procedures defined in the EMF document.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Turkey                                                           25-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Ilias Skamnelos
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Aurora Ferrari (SM)                          Date: 05-May-2014




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
