                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA9403
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                           Project ID:    P146883
                            Project Name:      ET Productive Safety Nets 4 Program (PSNP 4) (P146883)
                            Task Team          Camilla Holmemo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          30-Jun-2014                        Estimated   21-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (70%), Public administration- Other social services (20%),
                                              General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (1 0%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (60%), Natural disaster management (10%), Vulnerability
                                              assessment and monitoring (10%), Improving labor markets (10%), Nutrition
                                              and food security (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Page 1 of 20
                         Financing (In USD Million)
                         Total Project Cost:   3390.00                        Total Bank Financing:       500.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Financing Gap:        1274.00
                           Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                           BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          100.00
                           International Development Association (IDA)                                                 500.00
                           US Agency for International Development (USAID)                                             550.00
                           DENMARK Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA)                                                25.00
                           UK British Department for International Development
                                                                                                                        412.00
                           (DFID)
                           EC European Commission                                                                       130.00
                           CANADA, Govt. of                                                                             115.00
                           IRELAND, Govt. of                                                                             68.00
                           NETHERLANDS Netherlands Development Association                                               68.00
                           SWEDEN Swedish Intl. Dev. Cooperation Agency (SIDA)                                           23.00
                           UN Children's Fund                                                                            25.00
                           World Food Program                                                                           100.00
                           Total                                                                                       2116.00
                         Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                         Category:
                         Is this a           No
                         Repeater
                         project?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The Program Development Objective for the program is: Increased access to safety net and disaster
                         risk management systems, and complementary livelihood and nutrition services for food insecure
                         households in rural Ethiopia.

                         This will be achieved through 1) support for building core instruments and tools of social protection
                         and DRM systems, 2) delivery of safety net and enhanced access to livelihoods services for
                         vulnerable rural households, and 3) improved program management and institutional coordination.

                         The project will also contribute to the higher level objectives of (i) improved household food
                         security, livelihoods and nutrition, and (ii) enhanced household and community resilience to shocks.
                         This is consistent with the higher level objectives of the ongoing APL series supporting the PSNP.
                         3. Project Description
                         PSNP 4 builds on the significant lessons learned in previous PSNP phases, documented through bi-
                         annual impact evaluations and a large number of studies, assessments and missions. It also
                         incorporates global experiences, in particular from Latin-America, South- and East-Asia and other
                         countries in Africa . The new program will be integrated within a broader system and policy
                         framework for social protection and disaster risk management. This move to a systems approach,


                                                                     Page 2 of 20
                         supporting investments to build administrative and management systems, marks a natural progression
                         of the program to date, as it has developed from transitioning Ethiopia's emergency system to a more
                         predictable safety nets program, which will now be aligned under a national system. This will build
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on lessons from program coordination under the current phase, and significantly move forward the
                         integration and rationalization of programs by supporting the development of a system for effective
                         delivery of social protection and DRM. Because the HABP design was ambitious and complex,
                         institutional arrangements (including coordination and integration with the PSNP) lacked the
                         necessary buy-in from key partners. PSNP 4 will simplify livelihoods interventions in the program
                         with an aim to enhance clients’ access to livelihoods services as a sub-component within the PSNP.
                         The HABP will no longer continue. Thus, PSNP 4 will provide an integrated set of safety net
                         services and technical assistance to enhance livelihoods strengthening to clients. The program will
                         continue to be implemented through government systems, in partnership with Non-Governmental
                         Organizations (NGOs) and service providers. It will also build strategic linkages with the urban
                         safety net (under development with the Ministry of Urban Development, Housing and Construction)
                         to ensure the two programs use complementary tools and a consistent approach under the same
                         system.

                         Three components will contribute to the achievement of the overall PSNP development objective.
                         These are:

                         Component 1: Systems Development (USD 144 million total; USD 27 million IDA). Support to the
                         social protection and DRM systems will include targeting, registry, capacity development,
                         management information systems (MIS), early warning triggers and response mechanisms.

                         Component 2: Productive safety nets and enhanced access for PSNP households to livelihoods
                         services (USD 3.031 billion total; USD 451 million IDA): this will be done through 3 sub-
                         components delivering key services to the targeted households: (a) safety nets transfers to chronically
                         food insecure households, and support to a scalable response mechanism for transitory needs; (b)
                         sustainable community assets and human capital investments; and c) enhanced access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complementary livelihoods services for client households through crop and livestock production, off-
                         farm income generating activities, and labor/employment linkages.

                         Component 3: Institutional and Management Development (USD 219 million total; USD 22 million
                         IDA). This component will support sustainable capacity development and institutional strengthening
                         to implement PSNP 4.
                         Component 1: Systems Development

                         Component 1 (USD 144 million total; USD 27 million IDA) would support the strengthening of the
                         social protection and DRM systems and the transition from independent programs to a system of
                         integrated social protection and DRM service delivery. It will finance key building blocks, tools and
                         instruments of the systems, including for targeting, single registry and information management. For
                         the DRM system, support will focus on improving response mechanisms for transitory needs and
                         integrating risk reduction planning into public works, including development of early warning
                         triggers and harmonized planning and monitoring.

                         The current community-based PSNP targeting system, which has worked very well particularly in
                         highlands regions, would be retained and supplemented by a proxy-means test (PMT) based poverty
                         index. This would provide the foundation for the development of a unified registry database which
                         would form the basis of targeting and exit of PSNP client households. Over time, the registry would

                                                                      Page 3 of 20
                         bring together beneficiary data across different programs serving the same clients and harmonize
                         PSNP beneficiary targeting with other social protection programming within the country. This would
                         enable the provision of a suite of services (for instance, PSNP transfers as well as fee waivers for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health services) to the same beneficiaries, identification of gaps and duplications (double dipping) in
                         support, and analysis of the impact of different services. The registry would initially focus on PSNP
                         areas, and expand over time to a comprehensive national registry. In accordance with GOE policies,
                         the registry will be developed by and housed in the Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA).
                         A consultancy will be contracted to develop the registry once the program is effective. A more
                         detailed description of the targeting and registry is in Annex 8.

                         Harmonized information management will entail M&E systems with common indicators for related
                         programs (e.g. public works, sustainable land management and pastoral community development),
                         and a harmonized M&E data collection and analysis system. In addition, a program-specific MIS
                         would be established to ensure effective monitoring of performance and facilitate improved program
                         management in determining client eligibility and monitoring payments and program performance. A
                         comprehensive public works database would also be a crucial part of the MIS. Given the
                         decentralized nature of Ethiopia and the program, the MIS will be developed to be functional at both
                         federal and regional levels. Establishing the MIS system would necessitate targeted capacity building
                         efforts at all levels, involving both skills training and investments in information and communication
                         technology.

                         Using an adaptable social protection approach, the program would finance the development of
                         clearer early warning triggers (indicators) and thresholds for intervention linked to the MIS.
                         Harmonized information management would enable the use of common triggers for responding to
                         emergencies, thereby enabling more rapid and effective responses to shocks. To support risk
                         reduction planning, the program will support development of woreda risk profiles, risk reduction and
                         contingency plans.

                         The program would focus on improving the appeals system to address current weaknesses, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complementing it by the development of a detailed grievance redress system and manual. It would
                         also scale up the collaboration with the PBS supported Ethiopia Social Accountability Program
                         (ESAP) to strengthen and standardize the application of social accountability tools consistent with
                         international good practice. This will support the use of social accountability as an element of
                         Ethiopia’s good governance policy.

                         The program would also prioritize capacity development, building on the lessons from the Safety
                         Nets Support Facility in the ongoing program. This would include development and implementation
                         of a comprehensive capacity development strategy and setting up of a National Capacity
                         Development Facility to support institutionalized capacity development and knowledge management
                         at federal, regional, zonal, woreda and kebele levels.

                         Component 2: Productive Safety Nets and Links to Livelihoods Services

                         Component 2 (USD 3.031 billion; USD 451 million IDA)will finance a range of support to program
                         clients, including safety nets transfers, sustainable community assets and access to human capital
                         services, and support for enhancing households’ access to livelihoods services. This will be done
                         through implementation of the three sub-components described below.

                         Sub-component 2a - safety nets transfers to chronically food insecure households, and support to a

                                                                      Page 4 of 20
                         scalable response mechanism for transitory needs - (USD 2.52 billion; USD 371 million IDA) will
                         finance safety nets transfers to targeted households. The program will provide transfers to chronically
                         food insecure households based on completion of public works labor and/or soft conditionalities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related to health and nutrition, based on a household’s level of economic and social vulnerability.
                         The program will aim to strengthen the impact of transfers through improved timeliness,
                         appropriateness and accessibility; an increased shift to cash and improved cash-food parity (a new
                         food basket with 15 kg of grain and 4 kg of pulses has been agreed); further piloting of innovative
                         transfer mechanisms such as electronic payments and vouchers; the provision of a lump-sum
                         payment equal to 6 months of transfers upon graduation to enhance sustainability; increasing the
                         period of support for permanent direct support beneficiaries from 6 to 12 months; and
                         communication and training on better ante-natal, nutritional and health habits. The management of
                         direct support transfers will gradually move to MoLSA after confirming the capacity of the ministry
                         is adequate at all levels. The primacy of transfer will continue to be an import principle of the
                         program.

                         This sub-component will also support effective response mechanisms that provide appropriate and
                         timely resources to transitorily food insecure households in response to shocks. The program will
                         support the improvement of a continuum of response that entails: 1) PSNP 4 covering the chronic
                         caseload (expanded to all rural areas), and 2) a contingency budget at three levels (woreda, regional,
                         federal) to address transitory needs and take preventative action when needed. Outside the program,
                         this will be complemented by a humanitarian response for rapid onset and large scale crisis. This will
                         require access to adequate information as well as clear triggers and thresholds for intervention. The
                         single registry in combination with the early warning information system will provide the necessary
                         household-level information to enable rapid scale-up using the contingency budget. The transitory
                         response would continue to use the delivery mechanisms for support developed under the regular
                         program transfers.

                         Subcomponent 2b - sustainable community assets and human capital investments - (USD 300
                         million; USD 45 million IDA) will support the development of sustainable community assets and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improved enabling environment for livelihoods through watershed development planning and public
                         works. Continuing its successful participatory community planning process, the program will aim to
                         further improve public works, building on lessons from the current program as well as international
                         good practices, through increased attention to the technical quality of public works, particularly for
                         road and water subprojects, improved planning and M&E; improved appropriateness of public works
                         timing and subprojects in pastoral areas; and more appropriate work norms for women. Financing for
                         administrative costs and capital inputs will be allocated to woredas to provide the necessary
                         complementary inputs as well as technical supervision and monitoring for public works activities.

                         This sub-component will also introduce soft conditionalities to supplement the public works
                         conditionality. These will include awareness raising and behavioral change communication (BCC)
                         for nutrition, training for financial literacy, and use of ante-natal services for pregnant women who
                         are moved temporarily from public works to direct support as well as for public works participants as
                         they prepare for graduation. The Community Based Nutrition Program (CBN), part of the NNP,
                         currently provides growth monitoring, BCC for improved infant and young child feeding practices
                         (IYCF), and referral to nutrition sensitive programs and PSNP 4 will link clients to these services.

                         Subcomponent 2c - enhanced access to complementary livelihoods services for client households
                         through crop and livestock production, off-farm income generating activities, and labor/employment
                         linkages - (USD 211 million, USD 35 million IDA) will support households’ access to livelihoods

                                                                      Page 5 of 20
                         services and opportunities, drawing on lessons learned from implementation of the HABP, other
                         livelihoods support in Ethiopia, including through the Agriculture Growth Program, and global
                         lessons from CGAP and others. In particular, PSNP 4 will facilitate access to technical and financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         livelihoods support services and household savings promotion. Households will receive tailored
                         support through three potential pathways: on-farm income generation for crop and livestock, off-
                         farm income generating activities, and/or links to labor/employment. This will entail stronger links to
                         extension services for client households, including on-farm extension, mentoring and coaching in
                         business and technical skills training for diversification into off-farm activities/entrepreneurship, and
                         linkages to employment services.

                         The program will also support improved access to appropriate financial services, such as voluntary
                         savings promotion, livelihoods transfers and linking households to micro-level financial institutions.
                         The program will have a greater focus on household savings as a critical step in livelihoods
                         strengthening and on village savings and lending associations (VSLAs) as an important entry point
                         for households into the financial system, and will continue to support RUSACCOs. It will also
                         introduce livelihoods transfers as grants. These transfers will be predicated on household
                         participation in skills training and savings activities. In addition, the program will continue to support
                         linkages to micro finance institutions for households, but will not directly deliver credit to clients.

                         PSNP 4 will seek to improve graduation mechanisms and introduce risk mitigation measures to
                         ensure that program graduates do not fall back into food insecurity. It is necessary to implement
                         evidence-based graduation for individual households. In addition, measures must be put in place to
                         mitigate the risks of recent graduates, for instance through the continuation of certain types of
                         support (e.g. health fee waivers) beyond graduation, and the ability to re-enter the program if
                         necessary.

                         Component 3 Institutional and Management Development

                         Component 3 (USD 219 million; USD 23 million IDA) will provide institutional support to GoE to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improve overall program management. It will finance the management budgets at federal and
                         regional levels for activities related to ensuring effective management of the program. These budgets
                         are used to finance contract staff and technical assistance, logistics support, training and per diems,
                         among other costs required to support effective implementation. In particular, financing will be
                         provided for planning, implementation, and technical oversight of public works, including the
                         resources necessary for the full functioning of the Public Works Coordination and Public Works
                         Focal Units; and more effective financial, commodity, and procurement management. At federal and
                         regional levels, dedicated management budgets will be given to each of the key implementing
                         agencies (including MOFED, NRMD, EWRD, MOLSA and FSCD) to ensure adequate overall
                         program management and coordination. This component will also support the implementation of
                         safeguards requirements, including the ESMF and further support will be provided to support
                         systems assessments, audits and impact evaluation surveys. Finally, Component 3 will support the
                         development and implementation of a performance management system, including performance
                         benchmarking, regular dissemination of performance results, and incentives for improving
                         performance. A detailed project description is in Annex 2.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As in the previous phases of the PSNP, the Public Works program will continue to be developed by
                         the communities based on a watershed development approach, using the integrated, multi-sector


                                                                       Page 6 of 20
                         landscape management approach of the government's Community-Based Participatory Watershed
                         Development Guideline (CBPWDG) and Rangeland Management Guideline. These Public Works
                         sub-projects, together with activities related to household asset-creation, will comprise an annual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program of several thousand small-scale and micro-scale sub-projects carried out in food-insecure
                         rural areas across all regions of Ethiopia, to be rolled out over time. PW sub-projects will be small-
                         scale, and their impacts will be site-specific and limited. They will include Natural Resource
                         Management sub-projects including soil & water conservation, social infrastructure including
                         community roads, health posts, school renovation and Farmers Training Centers, community water
                         projects and livelihoods-based subprojects such as small-scale irrigation.

                         The condition of the community watershed determines to a large extent the ability of its residents to
                         engage in household asset-building and income-generating activities such as cereal or vegetable
                         production, animal fattening, beekeeping, etc. Thus as the watersheds become developed, community
                         PW Action Plans typically show an increasing emphasis on livelihoods-related subprojects. The
                         design of PSNP IV will facilitate this gradual change of focus.

                         The Climate Smart Initiative (CSI) developed during PSNP III has determined that the PW program
                         has an important role to play in mitigating the effects of climate change, and reducing the
                         vulnerability of already food insecure communities. Thus climate change requirements are
                         incorporated in the procedure for planning PW under PSNP IV. The requirements for Disaster Risk
                         Management (DRM) in terms of both risk mitigation and adaptation are also incorporated in the new
                         design of PSNP IV.

                         The community PW action plans will be more nutrition-sensitive by incorporating into the
                         community PW planning process subprojects designed to increase access to a more diversified diet,
                         enable production of nutrient rich crops, increases production of complementary food, etc. Nutrition
                         sensitive PWs subprojects will be accompanied by behavior change communication.

                         Based on livelihood groups, the rural areas in which the Public Works and livelihoods investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be implemented have been classified by the Ethiopian Development Research Institute (EDRI)
                         as the “Five Ethiopias” consist of: (a) drought prone highlands; (b) moisture reliable cereals areas;
                         (c) moisture-reliable enset areas; (d) humid moisture-reliable lowlands; and (e) pastoral areas.

                         Each Public Works sub-project will be screened utilizing an Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), which builds upon the PW ESMF procedure used in PSNP III. Livelihoods
                         investments at household level will be implemented in all of these regions and will be subject to the
                         Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) procedure as outlined in the ESMF.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ian Leslie Campbell (GSPDR)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (GURDR)
                         Laura Campbell (GSPDR)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Many of the PW subprojects, though intended to
                         BP 4.01                                              impact the environment positively, will have



                                                                      Page 7 of 20
                                 some potential for negative environmental
                                 impacts if not designed and implemented
                                 following good practice. Thus given that there
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 will be a large number of such projects, OP 4.01
                                 is triggered. The Environmental and Social
                                 management framework (ESMF) Screening
                                 process refers for Special Attention any sub-
                                 projects with one or more of the following
                                 features: (i) Involves disposal of medical waste,
                                 (ii) Likely to use pesticides or other agro-
                                 chemicals, (iii) Incorporates a dam, (iv) involves
                                 land acquisition, or loss of assets or access to
                                 assets. For sub-projects with medical waste, a
                                 GOE Medical Waste Management Guide for
                                 Rural Health Clinics will be applied, and was
                                 disclosed under APL II. For sub-projects likely to
                                 use pesticides, see OP 4.09 below. Sub-projects
                                 with a dam are required to be designed by a
                                 qualified engineer, and constructed by a qualified
                                 contractor under the supervision of a qualified
                                 engineer. Dams in excess of 15m are ineligible
                                 (see OP 4.37 below). For sub-projects involving
                                 land acquisition, see OP 4.12 below.

                                 After this initial screening, the ESMF procedure
                                 further screens the principal features of each sub-
                                 project to ascertain whether it is of Environmental
                                 Concern. This is then followed by preliminary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 environmental and social screening to identify
                                 any site-specific potential impacts that might
                                 warrant an EIA.

                                 The approach to PSNP 4’s ESMF procedures for
                                 livelihoods investments is to identify any
                                 household level activities which might give rise to
                                 negative cumulative environmental or social
                                 impacts if carried out at scale in each woreda.
                                 This identification is made by drawing up a
                                 woreda environmental profile highlighting the
                                 strengths and weaknesses of the ecosystem and
                                 social issues in that woreda, and matching the
                                 strengths and weaknesses to the types of activity
                                 that households are likely to wish to undertake.
                                 The result of this analysis, in which the PW
                                 woreda staff participate, is a list of HABP
                                 activities which should not be allowed in order to
                                 meet compliance with OP 4.01. The state of the



                         Page 8 of 20
                                                                         bio-physical and social environment of the
                                                                         woreda and the appropriateness of the negative
                                                                         list is reviewed on an annual basis under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ESMF Monitoring System.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            All sub-projects that might trigger OP 4.04 are
                                                                         eliminated at Screening stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            All sub-projects that might trigger OP 4.04 are
                                                                         eliminated at Screening stage.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           This policy is triggered under the assumption that
                                                                         successful small-scale irrigation projects might
                                                                         lead to greater agricultural activity which may
                                                                         require pest control management efforts. For this
                                                                         purpose, the GOE Integrated Pest Management
                                                                         Plan Guide was disclosed under APL II.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           OP 4.11 is triggered, since it applies whenever
                         BP 4.11                                         OP 4.01 applies, and because although deemed
                                                                         unlikely in view of the small scale of the sub-
                                                                         projects, the possibility of ‘chance-finds’ cannot
                                                                         be ruled out. The policy is addressed in the ESMF
                                                                         screening process at three stages: (i) Any sub-
                                                                         project located within a known cultural heritage
                                                                         site is earmarked as a sub-project of
                                                                         Environmental Concern, to be referred to the
                                                                         Regional Environmental Protection Authority,
                                                                         who will decide if an EIA is required, (ii)
                                                                         Assessment for potential disturbance to cultural
                                                                         or religious sites is carried out as part of the site-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         specific sub-project Screening, which also
                                                                         contributes to a decision whether to earmark a
                                                                         sub-project for possible EIA, (iii) Inclusion of
                                                                         assessment of potential cultural heritage impacts
                                                                         in the EIA of sub-projects, where EIA is found to
                                                                         be necessary, and (iv) Monitoring of sub-project
                                                                         implementation by DAs and wereda staff, in
                                                                         liaison with the Regional Bureau of Tourism and
                                                                         Culture.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           It has been determined that the majority of the
                                                                         people in the project area meet the criteria of OP
                                                                         4.10 and, therefore, PSNP 4 will trigger this
                                                                         safeguard policy. An enhanced Social Assessment
                                                                         and Consultation reflecting the requirements of
                                                                         OP 4.10 is currently being undertaken under a
                                                                         TOR agreed between the World Bank and MoA.
                                                                         The PAD summarizes the key elements of these
                                                                         requirements and the identified mitigating
                                                                         measures under the enhanced Social Assessment



                                                                 Page 9 of 20
                                                                               and Consultation will be incorporated in the
                                                                               design of PSNP 4.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             PW subprojects involving the physical movement
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12                                               and resettlement of households will not be
                                                                               eligible under the PSNP 4. These will be
                                                                               eliminated during the screening process.
                                                                               However, cases may occur that involve change of
                                                                               land use or restriction of access to communal
                                                                               assets at both community and household level.
                                                                               Where such loss of assets or access to assets is
                                                                               involuntary, the procedures under OP 4.12 will be
                                                                               implemented. For this purpose a Resettlement
                                                                               Policy Framework (RPF) will be developed by
                                                                               Government and disclosed before Appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes             Any subproject that might incorporate a dam
                                                                               more than 10 metres in height will be ineligible
                                                                               for the PSNP PW programme, and will be
                                                                               specifically eliminated in the first stage of the
                                                                               sub-project Screening process. Smaller dams will
                                                                               be constructed subject to implementation of the
                                                                               FAO dam safety measures in Ethiopia, which
                                                                               forms part of the ESMF.
                            Projects on International          Yes             This policy is triggered because of the small-scale
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               irrigation projects expected in watersheds of three
                                                                               international waterways. For PSNP III,
                                                                               Government and the Bank notified the concerned
                                                                               countries in accordance with this policy. Further
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               notification will be provided to cover the period
                                                                               of PSNP 4. This issue will be addressed in the
                                                                               course of project preparation.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                All sub-projects that might trigger OP 7.60 are
                            7.60                                               eliminated at Screening stage.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              From an environmental and social safeguard standpoint, the proposed operation is a Category B
                              project, since impacts of the project, for the most part, will be minimal, site-specific and
                              manageable to an acceptable level.

                             Productive Safety Net Program

                             One of the key objectives of the PSNP is to address the underlying causes of food insecurity, to
                             which land degradation is universally agreed to be a major contributor, particularly in highland
                             areas. Thus the design of the PSNP public works program is intended to have environmentally


                                                                      Page 10 of 20
                         positive impacts. Under Phase II these activities, which include, for example, soil and water
                         conservation and improvement of community infrastructure, have already been shown to
                         constitute a vehicle for significant positive environmental transformation and enhanced
Public Disclosure Copy




                         productivity.

                         Nonetheless, negative impacts may occur if the locations or designs of the community activities do
                         not follow good environmental practice, or if they are incompatible with optimum overall
                         management of the watershed. Such impacts, which would be limited in scale and site-specific,
                         could include, for example:

                         Community Road Construction and Rehabilitation Impacts
                         •       Alteration of drainage patterns and increased flooding and soil erosion from road
                         construction and materials excavation sites
                         •       Right of way removal of vegetation and natural habitats
                         •       Sedimentation of aquatic systems from soil erosion and runoff
                         •       Impact of increased human use on adjacent habitats and wildlife
                         •       Involuntary or voluntary displacement or loss of land or resources or access to resources
                         normally used by individuals or the community for cultivation, livestock grazing, fuelwood, etc.
                         •       Stagnant pools at excavation sites that create breeding sites for mosquitoes
                         •       Potential for disturbance of cultural and historic sites and resources
                         •       Increased in and out population migration due to improved access
                         •       Unplanned, haphazard land use development created by improved access
                         •       Temporary displacement or loss of access or livelihood due to construction detours

                         Small-scale Irrigation Development Impacts
                         •        Changes in natural drainage patterns upstream and downstream
                         •        Depletion of surface or groundwater sources
                         •        Deterioration in soil quality due to poorly managed irrigation; potential waterlogging and
                         salinisation of soils, leading to agricultural abandonment and land degradation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Runoff from irrigated fields and potential for agricultural chemicals to pollute water
                         bodies
                         •        Abstraction effects on source streams and related aquatic ecosystems
                         •        Lowering of water quality due to agricultural runoff
                         •        Increased pest and disease control problems due to the promotion of monoculture
                         •        Reduced biodiversity due to focus on cash crops
                         •        Potential for disturbance of cultural and historic sites and resources, and damage to nearby
                         sites resulting from changes in the water table or salinisation.
                         •        Stagnant waters and disease vectors arising from poorly managed irrigation systems
                         •        Increased use of agricultural chemicals with related human health concerns

                         Watershed Treatment and Water Harvesting Impacts
                         •       Increased access can aggravate soil erosion problems, especially in higher gradient
                         topography
                         •       Poorly maintained drainage controls and in-stream structures can lead to eventual failures
                         and increased flooding problems
                         •       Reduced downstream nutrient levels from dams that reduce stream transport of organic
                         material and sediment
                         •       Social tensions arising from issues and rights of water allocation
                         •       Mosquito and related health concerns arising from stagnant pools

                                                                   Page 11 of 20
                         •       Impacts on cultural and historic sites and resources through changes in the water table
                         •       Social problems arising from poorly managed regenerated catchment areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Afforestation and Revegetation Impacts
                         •        Effects of some tree species (e.g., eucalyptus) in reducing groundwater levels
                         •        Long term effects of forest harvesting on hydrologic systems and stream characteristics
                         •        Possible reduction in tree and plant species diversity arising from the introduction of new
                         plantations and re-vegetation schemes
                         •        Effects of monocultures on ecosystem diversity, function and sustainability
                         •        Changes in habitat characteristics and potential effects on endemic wildlife species
                         •        Social problems arising from issues related to the ownership and user of new forests
                         •        Effects of grazing bans on the cost of rearing livestock and shift of grazing pressures to
                         other areas

                         Livestock, Pasture and Water Points Development Impacts
                         •       Compaction of soils from increased activity around new water sources
                         •       Potential contamination of water sources and needs for controls on human use
                         •       Concentrations of livestock at specific watering sites/routes that result in overgrazing of
                         vegetation and related land degradation
                         •       Potential social tensions over access to pastoralists water sources

                         Drinking Water Sources Development Impacts
                         •       Increased water withdrawals could exceed groundwater recharge rates in some areas
                         •       Development of springs may affect availability of downstream water supply
                         •       Physical impacts of increased human traffic near water stations
                         •       Potential contamination of open wells by livestock and human uses
                         •       Reduced availability of aquatic ecosystems due to water abstraction
                         •       Increased dependence on new water supply systems that prove to be unreliable
                         •       Sanitation and health concerns associated with the operation of new drinking water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sources
                         •       Land use and social issues and tensions over the siting of and access to new water sources

                         School, Health Posts or Farmers Training Centres Construction, Rehabilitation or Expansion
                         Impacts
                         •       Site disturbance and potential drainage alterations from construction activities and
                         expansion of facilities
                         •       Involuntary or voluntary displacement or loss of lands or resources or access to resources
                         normally used by individuals or the community for cultivation, livestock grazing, fuelwood, etc.
                         •       Water shortages due to increased demands on existing sources
                         •       Increased production of human and medical wastes and potential for contamination of
                         waterbodies and groundwater
                         •       Increased timber harvesting on nearby lands for construction materials
                         •       Construction impacts on sensitive wildlife habitats and aquatic systems
                         •       Increased pollution from site development and operations, including medical waste
                         •       Sanitation and health issues related to increased human presence and medical waste
                         disposal
                         •       In-migration and settlement generated by rehabilitated facilities

                         Component 3: Livelihoods Support through Three Pathways

                                                                   Page 12 of 20
                          Since each household-level activity will be at micro-scale, and as the procedures under this
                          Component will include the assessment of the agro-ecological suitability of the activity, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                          screening for potential negative impacts, no significant site-specific negative impacts are expected
                          from individual household-level activities. The only environmental or social concerns might be
                          potential cumulative negative impacts in the longer term of large numbers of households adopting
                          new activities in fragile environments over a number of years. This might include, for example, an
                          increase in livestock ownership with resultant potential over-grazing and environmental
                          degradation, or a falling water-table in a woreda due to large numbers of households adopting
                          shallow-well irrigation.

                          Safeguards Issues

                           This project triggers seven safeguard policies: The Environmental Assessment Policy (OP 4.01),
                           related to the possible impacts mentioned above, for which an ESMF has been developed and
                           disclosed; the Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09), predicated on the possibility of small quantities
                           of pesticides being employed in small, community-level irrigation projects; the Physical Cultural
                           Resources Policy (OP 4.11), because although deemed unlikely in view of the small scale of the
                           sub-projects, the possibility of ‘chance-finds’ cannot be ruled out; the Indigenous Peoples Policy
                           (4.10), which is applied under the present agreement between GoE and the WB, for which an
                           enhanced Social Assessment and Consultation reflecting the requirements of OP 4.10 has been
                           undertaken; the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (4.12), predicated on the possibility that although
                           sub-projects potentially involving physical relocation are ineligible, there might occur cases
                           involving change of land use or loss of assets or reduction of access to assets. In such cases the
                           procedures of OP 4.12 will be implemented, for which a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                           has been developed and disclosed; the Safety of Dams Policy, predicated on the possibility that
                           although dams of more than 10 metres in height are ineligible, smaller dams might have safety
                           issues, for which compliance with the FAO Small Dams Safety Measures in Ethiopia is required;
                           and the International Waterways Policy (OP 7.50), because of small-scale irrigation projects that
Public Disclosure Copy




                           may be implemented in watersheds of international waterways.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Activities under PSNP 4 are expected to include watershed development interventions and
                           improved farming and land-use management systems, under the community watershed
                           development approach of the government. These are expected to make contributions to positive
                           environmental regeneration and transformation, which is one of the objectives of the PSNP. As
                           stated above, any potential long-term or cumulative impacts that might have been caused by PSNP
                           PW activities such as infrastructure will be detected through the Screening and mitigating
                           procedures, and addressed. At the same time, potential long-term cumulative impacts that might
                           have been caused by the implementation of large numbers of similar Livelihoods Strengthening
                           activities will be managed by annual monitoring of impacts at woreda level, and corrective action
                           taken. In view of this, no indirect or long-term negative impacts are anticipated from the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The principal project design alternative considered was to provide the cash or food on a
                           predictable basis, but as direct support, ie., not to undertake physical public works. This would
                           have avoided incurring any negative impacts from infrastructure sub-projects. However, this
                           option was rejected, due to (i) potential large-scale dependency, with attendant negative social

                                                                    Page 13 of 20
                           impacts; and (ii) because it would not offer the opportunity to carry out environmental
                           rehabilitation of the watersheds through Soil and Water Conservation (SWC) sub-projects, which
                           is necessary for improved livelihoods. In addition, the creation of new community infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assets, which are also essential to meet the objectives of the project, would not be achieved.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The 1994 Constitution of Ethiopia proclaims that all citizens shall have a right to live in a clean
                           and healthy environment, and that Government and citizens have a duty to protect the
                           environment, and the design and implementation of programs and projects shall not damage or
                           destroy the environment. The Constitution incorporates a number of other provisions relevant for
                           the protection, sustainable use and improvement of the environmental resources of the country. It
                           reflects a view of environmental concerns in terms of fundamental human rights, and provides a
                           basis for the formulation of national policies and strategies on environmental management and
                           protection. It assures that no development activity shall be disruptive to the ecological balance,
                           and that people concerned shall be made to give their opinions in the preparation and
                           implementation of environmental protection policies and programs.

                          The Constitution also:
                          (a) Maintains land under the ownership of the Ethiopian people and the government but protects
                          security of usufruct tenure;
                          (b) Reinforces the devolution of power and local participation in planning, development and
                          decision taking by regions and woredas;
                          (c) Ensures the equality of women with men;
                          (d) Ensures the appropriate management as well as the protection of the well-being of the
                          environment; and
                          (e) Maintains an open economic policy;
                          (f) Recognises the rights of groups identified as “Nations, nationalities and Peoples” having a
                          common culture or similar customs, mutual intelligibility of language, belief in a common or
Public Disclosure Copy




                          related identity, a common psychological make-up, and who inhabit an identifiable, predominantly
                          contiguous territory.
                          (g) Recognises the rights of pastoral groups inhabiting the lowlands.

                                  A series of legal proclamations form the basis for the environmental assessment and
                          management framework in Ethiopia: the Proclamation on the Establishment of Environmental
                          Protection Organs (No. 295/2002); the Proclamation on Environmental Impact Assessment (No.
                          299/2002); the Proclamation on Environmental Pollution Control (No. 300/2002); and the
                          Proclamation on Solid Waste Management (No. 513/2007). The EIA Directive 1 of 2008,
                          Directive to Determine Projects Subject to EIA, determines the categories of project subject to
                          EIA Proclamation 299/2002.

                          There are two key public institutions that are directly responsible for monitoring environmental
                          compliance: the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) and Ministry of Agriculture (MoA),
                          which have decentralized to the regional level. In the case of MoA, decentralization has gone
                          further to the woreda and kebele levels. There exists a critical mass of capacity within the (MoA)
                          and MoEF at the federal and decentralized levels to manage environmental and social safeguard
                          issues.

                          Since 2005 the borrower has taken, and continues to take, extensive measures to build capacity for


                                                                     Page 14 of 20
                         the implementation of safeguard policies, as follows:
                         All the regions in which PSNP 4 will be implemented, apart from Beneshengul-Gumez and
                         Gambella, have developed institutional capacity for implementing the ESMF either fully
Public Disclosure Copy




                         established or in the process of being established. However, depending on the frequency of
                         occurrence of Public Works sub-projects involving involuntary loss of assets or access to assets in
                         PSNP 4, which is a new feature of the PSNP, some additional capacity-building for the
                         development of Resettlement Action Plans will be required. In the case of Beneshengul-Gumez
                         and Gambella, PSNP 4 will provide capacity-building for implementation of the specific
                         requirements of the ESMF.
                         There are now Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists working in all of the PW units at
                         federal, regional and woreda levels. As a result, during PSNP III, ESMF screening rates are
                         running at 100% in the highland regions of Amhara, Oromia, Tigray and SNNP. Investment in
                         continuous training of regional and woreda staff and arouind 6,000 Development Agents is seen as
                         key to this success and has sustained the technical capacities of each level in the implementation
                         not only of the ESMF but of community-based watershed planning and the development of PW
                         plans. This continuous approach to training and cascading to experts will be critical for PSNP 4.
                         However, capacity in pastoral areas is weak, and this has impacted ESMF implementation. This is
                         partly due to the fact that at the time of the last PW Review only two full years of implementation
                         had been completed in those areas. If performance in lowland areas is compared with performance
                         in highland areas after only two full years of implementation, the differences in capacity would
                         appear less significant. Nonetheless, ESMF Screening of PWs in pastoral areas experienced a slow
                         start with low rates of screening identified by Public Works Reviews in certain areas. In order to
                         address this a pastoral-specific ESMF was developed and rolled out.

                                 The Government responded to concerns that the Community Based Participatory
                         Watershed Development Guideline was developed with highland implementation in mind, by
                         developing a specific Rangeland Management Guideline for lowland areas. This Guideline
                         introduced a number of key differences in the planning approach including specifying the Pastoral
                         Associations (or kebeles) as the lowest planning unit in pure pastoral areas; the involvement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         customary leaders in the public works planning process; the introduction of a rangeland approach
                         to planning; and the emphasis given to screening for risks of social tension during the application
                         of the ESMF. Moving forward, additional capacity building support will be required for the
                         lowland areas.

                                 Since the ESMF Screening process generates the documentation required to monitor
                         ESMF implementation, the initial priority was to ensure that ESMF Screening was fully
                         operational. The monitoring of the implementation of mitigating measures has been conducted
                         principally through Public Works Reviews, which study a sample of sub-projects. However in
                         PSNP 4 such monitoring will be part of an improved regular M&E system for all sub-projects.

                                  While the PW Reviews have found that most mitigation measures have been implemented,
                         the fact that some water and community road sub-projects in highland areas have resulted in
                         negative environmental impacts highlights the need to continue to improve the implementation of
                         ESMF mitigation measures for these types of sub-project. The implementation of mitigation
                         measures in lowland areas has not yet been fully reviewed.

                                 Under PSNP 4 joint government-donor monitoring of ESMF implementation will be
                         conducted, followed by corrective measures if required. This monitoring will be undertaken
                         through (i) The PW component of the PSNP 4 M&E system, which will track the nature and

                                                                  Page 15 of 20
                         extent of implementation of the ESMF, and (ii) Twice-annual joint Government-donor PW
                         Reviews, in which samples of PW sub-projects countrywide are examined for quality,
                         sustainability, impact and ESMF compliance. Any rectification works (both labour and non-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         labour) required will be conducted using Project resources in the form of repair and rehabilitation
                         works under the next annual PW programme of activities. Ensuring that this happens will be the
                         responsibility of the DA involved in the community PSNP PW planning process, and the NR
                         Expert in the NR Woreda Case Team.

                         All woredas during PSNP III where HABP was being implemented developed Woreda
                         Environmental Profiles and ‘Negative Lists’ limiting the types of activities that could be
                         undertaken under HABP in order to meet compliance with the World Bank safeguard policies. An
                         improved version of the same ESMF procedure has been developed for the Livelihoods
                         Strengthening component, and an annual updating and monitoring system is presently being rolled
                         out to ensure that this compliance continues in the future.
                                  Staff of the Regional EPAs and the woreda Environmental (Natural Resources) focal
                         persons will participate in the annual awareness-creation and training courses for the PSNP Public
                         Works, which includes ESMF training of NR Experts in the Woreda NR Case Teams. These
                         training courses, which have been upgraded by the expanded federal PWCU, will be provided by
                         teams drawn from MoA at Federal and Regional level, with technical assistance from the Natural
                         Resources Management personnel of MoA, the regional Environmental Protection Bureaus and
                         agencies such as WFP. The woreda-level trainees will in turn train the DAs at the local level. The
                         cost of implementing the ESMF training are covered partly by the PSNP 4 Management Budget at
                         federal, regional, woreda and kebele levels, and partly by the regular government staffing and
                         overhead budgets at all levels.

                                 The PW Reviews during APL III indicated the desirability of adjusting some of the ESMF
                         procedures. Thus the ESMF as disclosed for Phase IV has been modified to incorporate the
                         following changes:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        In the interests of harmonization with parallel projects such as PCDP, SLM, AGP, and to
                         ensure that any cases of involuntary loss of assets are properly addressed, Involuntary
                         Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 is now triggered, and requires application of the Resettlement
                         Planning Framework that has been developed. However subprojects causing physical relocation of
                         households will continue to be ineligible.
                         •        By agreement with the GoE, an Enhanced Social Assessment and Consultation has been
                         conducted in respect of the application of the Indigenous Peoples Policy OP 4.10. The resultant
                         recommendations are required to be incorporated into procedures for the potentially underserved
                         groups concerned.
                         •        The Safety of Dams policy OP 4.37 is now triggered. There are now safety guidelines
                         attached to the ESMF for small dams. PSNP PW dams are limited to a maximum of 10 meters in
                         height, and any dam over 5 metres in height will be referred to the Regional Environmental
                         Authority to ascertain whether an EIA is necessary.
                         •        A more detailed ‘Chance Finds' procedure has been added for the implementation of
                         Physical Cultural Resources policy OP 4.11.
                         •        The Voluntary Asset Loss procedure is now withdrawn.
                         •        The Livelihoods Strengthening ESMF monitoring procedure formats have been simplified.

                         In order to address projects that might include the renovation or extension of medical clinics in the
                         public works program, the Government's Waste Management Guide for Rural Health Clinics is

                                                                   Page 16 of 20
                          published and disclosed, in accordance with OP 4.01.

                          To address the possible use of small quantities of pesticides in small-scale irrigation schemes, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          government Guide for Integrated Pest Management in Small-Scale Irrigation Schemes is published
                          and disclosed under APL II, in accordance with the ESMF and OP 4.09.

                          The Physical Cultural Resources safeguard policy is addressed by being integrated into the ESMF
                          screening process at three stages: (i) Any sub-project located within a known cultural heritage site
                          is earmarked as a sub-project of Environmental Concern, to be referred to the Regional EPA, who
                          will decide if an EIA is required, (ii) Assessment for potential disturbance to cultural or religious
                          sites is carried out as part of the site-specific sub-project Screening, which also contributes to a
                          decision whether to earmark a sub-project for possible EIA, (iii) Inclusion of assessment of
                          potential cultural heritage impacts in the EIA of sub-projects, where EIA is found to be necessary,
                          and (iv) Monitoring of sub-project implementation by DAs and woreda staff, in liaison with the
                          Regional Bureau of Tourism and Culture.

                          The International Waterways policy OP 7.50 is triggered because some of the public works may
                          be small-scale irrigation projects located in watersheds of international waterways. The World
                          Bank, on behalf of Government, has notified the concerned riparian governments in accordance
                          with this policy, covering the five-year period of PSNP 4. The Task Team’s assessment is that the
                          Project will not cause appreciable harm to any of the Riparians concerned.


                          Safeguard Policies Not Triggered by PSNP 4

                          The Natural Habitats and Forests safeguard policies are not triggered because (i) Land not already
                          converted to settlement, cultivation or community grazing is not incorporated in the watershed
                          areas covered by the community watershed development plans; (ii) PW activities involving land
                          conversion are ineligible for PSNP funding; (iii) The DA screens out (for separate EIA) any
Public Disclosure Copy




                          activity within a National Park or other designated wildlife area or buffer zone, and any activity in
                          a Priority Forest Area, and any activity that might involve draining of, or disturbance to, a wetland.

                           OP 7.60 (Projects in Disputed Areas) is not triggered because any PW activity proposed in, or
                           adjoining, a disputed area is ineligible for PSNP funding and is specifically eliminated by the
                           ESMF Screening process.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the beneficiary households, and those involved in the implementation of
                           the program. The provisions of the ESMF are incorporated into the training materials used at
                           woreda and kebele levels, which will reach some 1.5 million beneficiary households, and are
                           regularly updated according to community and government staff feedback. Consultation on the
                           safeguard policies have taken place through the annual training programmes, twice-yearly Public
                           Works Reviews, and the participatory community public works planning meetings conducted
                           annually by the DAs in over 10,000 watersheds during the nine years of APL I, II and III. The
                           PSNP 4 Enhanced Social Assessment and Consultation, ESMF and RPF have been the subject of
                           extensive consultation among stakeholders including at community level, and the reports and
                           requirements of these consultations are incorporated in the final documents as disclosed in the
                           World Bank Info Shop and Country Office public-access library, and through the Ministry of


                                                                    Page 17 of 20
                           Agriculture at federal level, and regional levels, as well as through the Ministry of Environment
                           and Forests.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         10-Jul-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         10-Jul-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jul-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         10-Jul-2014
                           Comments: The document is the Enhanced Social Assessment and Consultation, as required in
                                         the case of Ethiopia for OP 4.10.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Aug-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Aug-2009
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         13-Aug-2009
                           Comments: The Integrated Pest Management Procedure has been redisclosed in-country in the
                                         ESMF on 7/10/14. Pest Management Plans (PMPs) will only be produced if
                                         necessary at subproject level.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 18 of 20
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                    Page 19 of 20
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Camilla Holmemo
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 12-Jul-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager:   Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)                          Date: 12-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 20 of 20
