                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA6688

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Russian Federation                Project ID:    P146463
                                                       Parent         P069063
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing for St. Petersburg Economic Development Project
                     (P146463)
   Parent Project    St. Petersburg Economic Development Project (P069063)
   Name:
   Task Team       Tatyana Shadrunova
   Leader:
   Estimated       17-Apr-2014                         Estimated   23-Sep-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: ECSUW                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (50%), Housing construction (50%)
   Theme(s):         Cultural Heritage (80%), Other urban development (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        250.00                Total Bank Financing:       200.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 50.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   200.00
     Total                                                                                   250.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                             Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   1) Policy and regulatory environment is conducive to the expansion of private sector enterprises;
   2) Larger and more efficient private market for land and real estate; 3) Improved City fiscal
   management capacity; 4) City to preserve its comparative advantage in culture and the arts.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to support St. Petersburg in (i) promoting
   conducive policy and regulatory environment to the expansion of private sector enterprises, (ii)
   facilitating larger and more efficient private market for land and real estate; (iii) strengthening
   City fiscal management capacity; and (iv) preserving and enhancing cultural assets in St.
   Petersburg.
 3. Project Description
The proposed additional loan would support financing the costs associated with reconstruction and
restoration of the historic building of the State Academic Mariinsky Theater and the rehabilitation of
two inner Courtyards of the Mikhailovsky Palace of the State Russian Museum. Both structures are
outstanding and unique cultural heritage sites of Russian and global significance. The reconstruction
and restoration of the Theater and the Courtyards were initially appraised under the investment
component of the original St. Petersburg Economic Development Project (SPEDP), and design
documentation for both structures was prepared. However, these sub-projects were subsequently
dropped at the request of the Borrower due to the inability of the administrations of these sites to
vacate the premises for the works. These impeding issues have since been resolved. With 98% of the
SPEDP loan disbursed, the Russian Federation is now requesting the additional US$200 million loan
from the Bank, for which it will provide US$50 million of co-financing to pursue with the above
mentioned activities
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The historic building of the State Academic Mariinsky Theater and Mikhailovsky Palace of the State
Russian Museum are located in the central historic part of St. Petersburg.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              As in case of the SPEDP Investment component,
 BP 4.01                                              the AF is assigned Environmental Category B.
                                                      The main risks are associated with complex
                                                      geological and hydrological conditions of St.
                                                      Petersburg broadly, and especially for historic
                                                      building of the Mariinsky Theater that may
                                                      require significant enforcement of foundations.
                                                      Otherwise expected negative impacts are standard
                                                      for reconstruction and restoration activities, and.



                                              Page 2 of 6
                                                no potential large scale, significant or irreversible
                                                impacts were identified. The Environmental
                                                Management Plan (EMP) prepared for SPEDP
                                                was updated accordingly and will be used for AF
                                                activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project client is the Russian Ministry of
BP 4.11                                         Culture and the substance of the interventions
                                                under AF was developed with strong focus on
                                                protection/preservation of cultural and historic
                                                assets. As the AF operation focuses exclusively
                                                on preservation of existing cultural heritage
                                                assets, the project does not raise any issues in the
                                                sense of OP 4.11 "Physical cultural resources".
                                                As in case of the SPEDP, the AF supported
                                                activities are aimed to protect some of the highest
                                                priority cultural heritage from further
                                                deterioration, increase the exhibition and
                                                activities capacity of the respective cultural
                                                institutions, improve the operational safety and
                                                efficiency of the facilities for both visitors and
                                                personnel; and ensure a high safety of artworks
                                                on display and other cultural assets from physical
                                                damages, theft or other hazards. The
                                                rehabilitation and restoration works will mainly
                                                include primarily repair and upgrading of
                                                buildings and will also cover some interior utility
                                                networks (electricity, water, heating, a/c, etc).
                                                Each site will be developed and managed in
                                                accordance with principles of good practice in the
                                                cultural heritage field. As the project aims on the
                                                cultural heritage protection itself, there is no need
                                                to prepare a separate cultural management plan.
                                                From the technical perspective, the rehabilitation
                                                and conservation works will follow the
                                                conservation and rehabilitation guidelines
                                                established by the Russian Legislation. The
                                                guidelines are in line with the International
                                                Conservation Standards established in the
                                                BURRA charter provided by ICOMOS
                                                (International Council on Monuments and Sites)



                                        Page 3 of 6
                                                         that is an advisory body to the 1972 UNESCO
                                                         World Heritage Convention, of which Russia is a
                                                         signatory, and are in line with the requirements of
                                                         the OP/BP 4.11. The Bank task team includes
                                                         specialists knowledgeable in all aspects of
                                                         heritage preservation and heritage site
                                                         management.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Complex geological and hydrological conditions of St. Petersburg broadly, and especially for
     historic building of the Mariinsky Theater, may require significant enforcement of foundations.
     Also, historic spatial limitations around the Mariinsky Theater building, in combination with
     projected construction of two entrances to metro station and technological shaft in the immediate
     proximity to the theatre’s building at the Teatralnaya square, will create significant challenges for
     organization of the construction site (i.e. material supply and temporary storage, construction
     waste handling, construction camp functioning, etc.). The above circumstances will require strict
     compliance with material supply and waste disposal schedules to avoid cluttering of the space of
     the construction sites. Otherwise, potential negative impacts associated with the AF project are
     standard for reconstruction and restoration activities. No potential large scale, significant or
     irreversible impacts were identified.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No potential indirect or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area are
     expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     St. Petersburg Economic Development Project (SPEDP) is being implemented by the experienced
     Project Implementation Unit (PIU) - St. Petersburg Foundation for Investment Projects (FISP),
     and the same PIU will be implementing the AF project. The Environmental Management Plan

                                                 Page 4 of 6
  (EMP) for SPEDP has been implemented in a satisfactory manner. Every supervision mission of
  the Bank had environmental safeguards specialist on the team, and environmental performance of
  the project has been closely monitored and recommendations incorporated into the Bank
  supervision missions Aide-Memoires. No significant environmental issues were identified during
  the SPEDP implementation.
  The EMP was updated to reflect changes in regulatory environment of the Russian Federation, but
  broadly mitigation measures and monitoring of compliance with the EMP remain the same. FISP
  has a designated environmental safeguards specialist who received received training on World
  Bank safeguards and has extensive experience in implementation of the SPEDP and Preservation
  and Promotion of Cultural Heritage in Russia Project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders of the project are residents of St Petersburg and visiting tourists, Russian
  Ministry of Culture, and administration and staff of the benefiting cultural institutions. The project
  EMP was prepared for SPEDP and publicly disclosed. For the purposes of AF the EMP was
  updated to reflect changes in the Russia's regulatory environment. No changes regarding types and
  scale of impacts or proposed mitigation measures were made. The updated EMP will be disclosed
  at the websites of the Russian Ministry of Culture of the RF, Project Implementation Unit (FISP)
  and the websites of the benefiting cultural institutions (the State Mariinsky Theater and the State
  Russian Museum).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Mar-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Russian Federation                                               25-Mar-2014
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [        ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [        ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [        ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources


                                             Page 5 of 6
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Tatyana Shadrunova
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 27-Mar-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Soraya Goga (SM)                               Date: 28-Mar-2014




                                             Page 6 of 6
