                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7185

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                            Project ID:      P147010
                            Project Name:      Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)
                            Task Team          Mohan Prasad Aryal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Jun-2014                      Estimated        16-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Tertiary education (80%), Central government administration (10%), Other
                                               social services (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Social safety nets (10%), Other
                                               human development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     90.00                     Total Bank Financing:         80.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  80.00
                              Total                                                                        90.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To support reforms for improving quality, relevance, equity and efficiency of the higher education
                           system.
                           C. Project Description
                           1.      Nepal’s higher education system is expanding rapidly. However, it is unable to meet the
                         aspirations of students or respond to the current and emerging human resource needs of Nepal. Based
                         on extensive national consultations, the UGC, in close coordination with MOE, is developing a
                         ‘Comprehensive program of reform for the HE sector” focusing on the issues of development and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         innovation, access, quality, equity, financing, and governance. The Government has requested the
                         Bank for assistance to help implement the program. The proposed project would support mutually
                         agreed critical reforms which need urgent attention and could be implemented in the next 3-5 years.

                         2.        Investment Project Financing (IPF) with disbursement linked indicators (DLIs) is proposed
                         to achieve a set of physical targets and reforms objectives in five years. Disbursements would be
                         linked to achievement of yearly/six-monthly benchmarks in 6-7 pre-defined measurable and
                         verifiable indicators. It would support selected universities and institutions that meet certain
                         eligibility criteria and agree to undertake time-bound major reforms for excellence, relevance and
                         efficiency. It would also support meritorious disadvantaged students (from poor families with
                         preferential treatment to dalits and female) for equity.

                         3.      The following key performance indicators are proposed to measure achievement of the
                         development objectives:
                         Indicator 1: Increase in number of accredited programs/institutions (as a measure of quality
                         assurance) by xx% (Baseline - 11)
                         Indicator 2: Increase in percentage of students enrolled in priority areas (as a measure of relevance to
                         meeting Nepal’s emerging human resources needs) from yy% to zz%; (Baseline - TBD)
                         Indicator 3: Increase in percentage of enrolled students belonging to bottom two economic quintiles
                         receiving scholarship (measure of equity) from aa% to bb%; (Baseline - TBD)
                         Indicator 4: Increase in number of research publications supported by program (measure of
                         excellence and relevance) by mm% (Baseline - 22)
                         Indicator 5: Increase in percentage of undergraduate students graduating on time (as a proxy for
                         quality of teaching and efficiency) from uu% to vv%; (Baseline – TBD)

                         In addition, achievement of agreed periodic milestones for reforms will be monitored and supported
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through a set of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs).

                         4.       The Project would comprise of two components, the first one supporting the implementation
                         of critical reforms in the Government program and the second one focusing on technical assistance to
                         build system capacity.

                          Component 1: Implementation of Reforms:
                         5.    To achieve its development objective, HERP would aim at four results areas as follows:

                         Results area 1; Systemic/Institutional Reforms:
                         These would include major reforms for: (a) more effective public funding, (b) institutionalization of
                         national accreditation system; (c) greater institutional autonomy and decentralization; and (d)
                         strengthening of the examination system. Some details are indicated below:

                         a)      More effective public funding: Public institutions are funded on cost-sharing basis through
                         headcount of teachers and staff, student scholarship/free-ship, and other annual operating cost. Public
                         financing is generally not linked to performance and/or output. Performance based funding in
                         leveraging grants initiated under SHEP to selected community campuses created a great demand and
                         impact . HERP would support the Government plan of increasingly linking of public funding to
                         outcome measures on quality, relevance, equity and performance.
                         b)      Institutionalization of national accreditation system: Accreditation of institutions/ programs
                         is one of the major reforms initiated – 11 institutions have been accredited and 15 more are in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pipeline. GON is administering the accreditation through an independent Quality Assurance and
                         Accreditation Committee established at UGC. The system has now received international
                         recognition. HERP would support the Govt. plan of establishing an independent National
                         Accreditation Board outside of UGC, expanding the accreditation system and bringing most higher
                         education institutions (HEIs) within this framework.

                         c)       Greater institutional autonomy and decentralization: Tribhuvan University (TU) with a total
                         of 383,000 students in over 900 campuses (in 2012) is one of largest universities in the world. With
                         its highly centralized structure, it faces acute management challenges. Decentralization of 49 of its 60
                         constituent campuses with significant administrative and financial autonomy has helped to keep them
                         and TU better managed. Academic autonomy granted to four of these campuses has led to significant
                         improvement in their overall performance, innovations and new initiatives. The university faculties
                         (mostly in professional areas) which have been given academic autonomy have better student
                         performance (in terms of pass rate, and placement), adherence to academic calendar, and
                         innovations. HERP would support TU’s plans of further decentralization and autonomy of selected
                         major campuses (including affiliated campuses) and faculties.

                         d)      Strengthening of the Examination System: A major issue effecting majority of students has
                         been failure of maintaining calendar of examinations, which are centrally administered by the TU
                         Office of the Controller of Examination (OCE). Examinations and declaration of results are often
                         delayed by months. HERP would support TU plan of decentralizing and modernizing examination
                         system, streamlining processes, and strengthening OCE capacity for efficiency.

                         This results area (Systemic/ Institutional Reforms) would be supported through the following DLIs
                         (which will be further elaborated during preparation):
                         DLI 1 – National Accreditation system established and functioning
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DLI 2 - Performance based financing extended to universities and institutions
                         DLI 3 - Decentralization and autonomy extended to additional campuses and faculties (TU)
                         DLI 4 - Examination reforms implemented (TU)

                         Results area 2: Academic Reforms and Relevance:
                         Nepal universities now offer about 350 bachelors/masters level programs. However, most of the
                         professional programs have limited intake and are confined to major campuses/ institutions. Nearly
                         70% of students are enrolled in basic programs in humanities, education and management with little
                         employment prospects. Their existing curricula with main focus on annual examinations do not help
                         develop communication and problem-solving skills. Many programs have also not been reviewed/
                         revised for quality and relevance for years. The Higher education policy emphasizes the need for
                         expanding/ introducing market oriented programs relevant to national development. HERP would
                         support academic reforms across all participating universities and campuses with focus on (a) better
                         learning outcomes in all programs possibly including some project/ field work; and (b) expansion of
                         programs in priority areas including science and technology. This would include: (a) curricula
                         revisions/ consolidation of existing programs, which have not been reviewed for more than 4 years;
                         and (b) introduction/ expansion of market relevant academic programs. It would also include
                         recruitment/ training of teachers, publication/ acquisition of learning materials, and procurement of
                         necessary laboratory equipment/computers. This results area would be supported through the
                         following DLI:
                         DLI 5 - Academic reforms introduced: Percentage of targeted under-graduate and post-graduate
                         programs revised and new programs introduced
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Results area 3: Equity:
                         Due to several socio-economic factors, higher education is largely catering to students from the
                         higher consumption quintiles. The HE policy declares that (i) access to higher education shall be
                         open for all on the basis of individual aptitude and merit, and (ii) measures would be taken to ensure
                         equity in terms of gender, and inclusion of dalits, disadvantaged ethnic groups, economically
                         deprived and regionally disadvantaged. Under SHEP, financial assistance was provided to needy
                         meritorious students selected through a Proxy-Means Testing (PMT) process develope d and
                         implemented by Student Financial Assistance Fund Development Board (SFAFDB). This process is
                         well tested and is also being adopted by other government agencies. HERP would support
                         Government program of equity by focusing on poverty targeting with preferential treatment for girls
                         and dalits. This results area would be supported through the following DLI:
                         DLI 6 - Poverty targeted financial support for disadvantaged students Results area 4: Academic
                         Excellence and Research:
                         The focus of many universities has been on undergraduate education. With the lack of attention to
                         research as an integral part of higher education, quality of teaching-learning process has suffered.
                         The HE policy emphasizes promoting (i) Research and innovation oriented curricula and teaching
                         learning practices; and (ii) Professional capacity development for research and innovation. SHEP
                         introduced an open competitive selection process for research funding. It has created a growing
                         demand. HERP would significantly expand this to support leveraging competitive funding for quality
                         research with a focus on priority areas. Teaching and learning will be integrated with knowledge
                         generation, which would also be facilitated through global and national networking and university
                         partnerships. This results area would be supported through the following DLI:
                          DLI 7 – Institutions supported for academic excellence in priority areas through Research,
                         Development and Innovation (RDI) awards

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance and Project Management:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6.      The project would include a technical assistance component to finance the necessary inputs
                         required to achieved the above-stated results as well as to enhance the capacity to support project
                         implementation, conduct third party validations, undertake studies and surveys, and strengthen
                         monitoring and evaluation.

                         7.       This component would also include necessary provision for effective project implementation
                         and monitoring. With this funding, UGC supported by TU and SFAFDB for their parts of the project,
                         will ensure compliance of applicable agreements, guidelines, fiduciary and safeguard requirements
                         by all beneficiary institutions and grant recipients.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         8.       The project will be implemented in selected existing higher education institutions urban/
                         semi-urban areas across Nepal. The country is located in the central part of the Himalayan region.
                         About 83 percent of Nepal’s geographical area is mountainous/ hilly and the remaining 17 percent is
                         plain. The environmental conditions and nature widely vary depending on mountain or plain/Tarai
                         area. Nepal’s mountains are fragile with natural incidences of landslides and soil erosion as well as
                         floods. There are important environmentally sensitive sites in the country such as National Parks and
                         other protected areas, water bodies recognized as important biodiversity habitat (Ramsar sites or
                         habitat of endangered or protected species), forests (including state and community forests) and
                           various cultural heritage sites. However, the project will not affect such sites or habitats as it will be
                           confined within the existing premises of already established academic institutions. It is expected that
                           some of the participating institutes will carry out repair works and/or minor civil works from project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           grants.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           9.       The proposed project will be implemented by the UGC in close coordination with MOE and
                           Tribhuwan University (TU). Participation in the project by universities, community colleges and
                           private colleges will be optional and competitive. UGC has implemented the World Bank funded
                           Second Higher Education Project (SHEP- P090967) for which a National Environmental Guidelines
                           for Higher Education Institutions in Nepal (NEG) was prepared. Through the implementation of the
                           SHEP and NEG, the implementing agency has developed general awareness and understanding of
                           the environmental safeguard requirements as relevant to the works undertaken. However, the
                           universities and the constituent and community colleges that may participate in the proposed project
                           may not be aware of those requirements. The NEG also needs to be revised/ updated based on the
                           experiences from the previous project and to reflect the proposed project component, activities and
                           approach. Hence, environmental capacity strengthening measures needs to be designed and an
                           environmental management framework (or updated environmental guidelines) needs to be prepared
                           for the proposed project.

                           10.      The project seeks to provide support to poor and disadvantaged students including
                           disadvantaged groups including IPs, Dalits and females. The identification of individual students will
                           be done through the Proxy Means Testing (PMT) approach. The project will prepare a Vulnerable
                           Community Development Framework as part of the Social Management Framework to ensure that
                           project benefits to IPs and other vulnerable communities is maximized while any potential adverse
                           effects are mitigated.

                           11.     At sub project level, a VCDP will be prepared and disclosed, if required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
                           Bandita Sijapati (SASDS)
                           Annu Rajbhandari (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Repairs of buildings or minor civil works may
                           BP 4.01                                                be constructed within existing premises of the
                                                                                  participating institutions. This can have
                                                                                  construction related environmental issues such
                                                                                  as noise & air pollution, health & safety
                                                                                  (workers, students/ teachers, neighborhood
                                                                                  community), nuisance related to construction
                                                                                  wastes, water and sanitation, etc. Environmental
                                                                                  Guidelines or a Framework will be prepared.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            No activity will take place in natural habitat.

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            No activity will take place in forest area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           TBD                           Not sure at the PCN stage if laboratories will be
                                                                                                                                 supported, and if yes, which chemicals are
                                                                                                                                 likely to be used in the laboratory. This will be
                                                                                                                                 further assessed during preparation, and
                                                                                                                                 confirmed before appraisal.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   TBD                           Not sure at the PCN stage if there are cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources within the existing premises of the
                                                                                                                                 participating institutions or near the civil works
                                                                                                                                 sites. This will be further assessed during
                                                                                                                                 preparation, and confirmed before appraisal.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           Given the widespread distribution of indigenous
                                                                                                                                 communities in Nepal, it is likely that there will
                                                                                                                                 be presence of IPs in the project area. The
                                                                                                                                 project seeks to provide support to poor and
                                                                                                                                 disadvantaged students including IPs, Dalits and
                                                                                                                                 female students. The identification of individual
                                                                                                                                 students will be done through the Proxy Means
                                                                                                                                 Testing (PMT) approach. The project will
                                                                                                                                 prepare a Vulnerable Community Development
                                                                                                                                 Framework as part of the Social Management
                                                                                                                                 Framework to ensure that project benefits to IPs
                                                                                                                                 and other vulnerable communities are
                                                                                                                                 maximized while any potential adverse effects
                                                                                                                                 are mitigated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            No new civil works will be carried out as part of
                                 4.12                                                                                            the project hence there will not be any adverse
                                                                                                                                 impact on land or livelihood.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            Project activity does not involve construction of
                                                                                                                                 dam, or the project does not depend on an
                                                                                                                                 existing dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             No international waterway is involved.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No disputed area.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All safeguard related studies will be completed by Project Appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Mohan Prasad Aryal

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)   Date: 27-Mar-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Amit Dar (SM)              Date: 31-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
