                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6965
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Sep-2013, 06-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Vietnam                            Project ID:    P123960
                            Project Name:     Social Assistance System Strengthening Project (P123960)
                            Task Team         Puja Vasudeva Dutta
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         20-Sep-2013                        Estimated   21-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASHS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          62.50             Total Bank Financing: 60.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         2.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               60.00
                              Total                                                                                     62.50
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to support the government of Vietnam in strengthening the
                           social assistance system by developing innovations in management and service delivery nationwide,
                           and by piloting these innovations in the four project provinces.
                            3. Project Description
                           Vietnam’s economic and social transitions from a low to a middle income country, from an

                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         agricultural to an industrial economy and from a young to an aging society are focusing the attention
                         of policy makers towards systematically strengthening the formal social protection system. Formal
                         social protection, including social assistance, has been increasingly replacing traditional informal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         intra-family or community support mechanisms as the latter weaken due to migration and the
                         transition from extended, multi-generational families to nuclear ones. While Vietnam’s traditional
                         formal poverty reduction policies emphasized in-kind and geographically-targeted programs
                         addressing structural sources of poverty in remote regions, the use of household- and individual-
                         based cash transfer programs has substantially expanded over the last few years. However, a close
                         examination of Vietnam’s current formal social assistance and poverty reduction system reveals
                         important policy and implementation gaps that risk hampering long-term poverty and vulnerability
                         reduction.

                         Vietnam’s social protection system today suffers from fragmentation of multiple poverty reduction
                         and social assistance programs with overlapping objectives but separate budgeting and delivery
                         mechanisms. There are about a dozen additional cash transfer programs, both regular and one-time.
                         These include most prominently (i) monthly cash support to the disabled, orphans, single parents and
                         lone elderly without means under Decree 136/2013/ND-CP (earlier 67/2007/ND-CP, amended by
                         Decree 13/2010/ND-CP), (ii) a small monthly cash transfer to poor households to offset recent
                         increases in energy prices under Decision 268/QÐ-TTg, (both delivered through local social officers)
                         and (iii) a cash transfer to children from poor households in school for nine months per year
                         delivered through the education system under Decree 49/2010/ND-CP. In 2013, a new program was
                         developed to give additional education support to high school students in remote and difficult areas
                         (under Decree 12/2013/ND-CP). This fragmentation creates considerable inefficiency both from the
                         perspective of the implementers and the beneficiaries.

                         At the same time, the system does not provide adequate protection. Benefit incidence analysis on the
                         basis of the 2010 VHLSS shows that the main existing social assistance programs have limited
                         coverage of the poor, considerable leakage to the non-poor and low benefit adequacy. For example,
                         in 2010, only 24 percent of bottom quintile households were covered by education subsidies and 12
Public Disclosure Copy




                         percent by Decree 136. At the same time, 43 and 54 percent of spending under these programs
                         respectively accrued to bottom quintile households. Education subsidies and Decree 136 accounted
                         for 4 and 17 percent of consumption of bottom quintile households. Moreover, delivery systems for
                         social assistance programs are weak, resulting in ineffective service delivery.

                         Recognizing changing needs and increasingly binding constraints, Vietnam is increasing its efforts to
                         strengthen key elements of its social protection system including non-contributory social assistance.
                         In 2012 the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV) adopted Resolution 15/
                         NQ-TW on “Major Issues in Social Policies of the Period 2012-2020” to help ensure by 2020 a
                         “guaranteed minimum level in income, education, health care, housing, clean water, and information
                         and communication, thus contributing to gradual improvements in incomes and ensured safe,
                         equitable and happy life for the people”. The Resolution specifically highlights the need to
                         consolidate and modernize the management of programs and policies, including with modernized
                         payment mechanisms and with an integrated beneficiary database, to ensure less fragmentation and
                         overlaps of programs. The vision of the Resolution has several implications. First, the role of social
                         assistance in the poverty reduction policy framework for the next five-year plan (2016-2020) is set to
                         become considerably more prominent. Second, the new poverty reduction framework will allow for a
                         change in the mix of programs and a consolidation of the current multiple cash transfer programs into
                         fewer ones. Third, in Vietnam’s highly decentralized structure, it will provide a high-level policy
                         directive to encourage provinces in moving towards greater consolidation.

                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         The SASSP will support the efforts by the Ministry of Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MoLISA)
                         to implement Resolution 15/NQ-TW in developing solutions for social assistance system
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modernization and consolidation of programs and processes. It will also initiate the modernization
                         process in four provinces. In doing so, the project is expected to lay a solid foundation for further
                         program consolidation and deployment of a modern delivery system in all 63 provinces across
                         Vietnam during the next Socio-Economic Development Plan (SEDP, 2016-2020).

                         The SASSP has three components: Component 1 will help put in place critical elements of a
                         strengthened management and service delivery system for social assistance nationwide. This
                         information and process consolidation will provide the foundation for promoting program
                         consolidation and will be accompanied by comprehensive change management in order to build
                         broad-based consensus for rolling out these reforms across the remaining provinces. In the third year
                         of the SASSP, Component 2 will support the testing of the strengthened system through a
                         consolidated social assistance program in four project provinces (Hà Giang, Quảng Nam, Trà Vinh,
                         and Lâm Đồng) for three years. The consolidated program is named the “Cơ hội thoát nghèo truyền
                         kiếp” or “Opportunity to move out of inter-generational poverty” program (“Opportunity Program”
                         in short) and will replace cash benefits under Decrees 12 and 49 and Decision 268. Component 3 will
                         provide support for project management and capacity building. Project activities are sequenced to
                         first develop innovations and strengthen the social assistance management and delivery system, then
                         test these innovations in four project provinces and finally to support remaining provinces in putting
                         in place the necessary preconditions to adopt the strengthened system

                         Component 1: Strengthening the social assistance and poverty reduction system ($27m): Component
                         1 will support the development and testing of improved mechanisms for social assistance delivery
                         and management, including the following: (a) building a national database of social assistance
                         beneficiaries and an integrated MIS for nationwide use; (b) developing a social collaborator network
                         in the four provinces (see Box 2) and supporting communication for development (C4D) activities at
                         the national level and in the four provinces, including provision of remuneration for social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collaborators; (c) developing and implementing a grievance redress mechanism in the four provinces;
                         and (d) developing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation system in the four provinces and
                         providing support for policy formulation at the national level and in the four provinces. Component 1
                         will also support the remaining 59 provinces in putting in place the necessary preconditions (i.e.,
                         guidelines, training, software and hardware) to utilize the strengthened system for social assistance
                         management in a phased manner.

                         Component 2: Launching a consolidated social assistance program (US$30m): Component 2 will test
                         the mechanisms developed under Component 1, through the launching of social assistance
                         consolidation, including the following:
                         •       Component 2(a): Provision of the pre-identified financing shortfall for benefit payments for
                         the Opportunity Program (i.e., in addition to the government budget provision for the three programs
                         being replaced) in the four project provinces for a period of three years. The financing shortfall
                         between the government budget for the three existing programs for three years in the four provinces
                         and total estimated cost of the Opportunity Program is due to the expanded coverage of the
                         Opportunity Program (see Box 2). The program will be implemented in the third year of the project,
                         once MIS capabilities and other elements of the strengthened service delivery mechanism are in
                         place.
                         •       Component 2(b): Provision of the service fee of an independent payment agency (VN Post)
                         for paying the cash transfers under the Opportunity Program and Decree 136 as well as paying the

                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                         monthly allowance of the social collaborators. By testing the new payment mechanisms for both the
                         Opportu nity Program and Decree 136, the SASSP promotes process consolidation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project management (US$5.5m): This component will provide project management
                         and capacity building support. A Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) and four Provincial
                         Project Management Units (PPMUs) will be established to oversee the development and testing of
                         the strengthened social assistance management and delivery system, coordinate the consolidation of
                         social assistance programs, manage and monitor the implementation of the Opportunity Program and
                         ensure appropriate fiduciary controls are in place. This component will also support regular
                         monitoring of project performance as a whole, including preparation of progress reports and audits.
                         At the sub-national level, the project will rely on the PPMUs and provincial, district and commune
                         committees for program implementation and monitoring. The intent is to mainstream SASSP
                         implementation as part of regular tasks and program delivery.

                         The project design has benefited from a partnership between MOLISA, UNICEF, DFID and the
                         World Bank. This partnership will continue and the SASSP will be complemented by further
                         technical assistance. This will allow providing necessary start-up assistance and capacity building
                         even prior to SASSP effectiveness.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project implementation will be at the national level and in the four project provinces, i.e. Hà Giang,
                         Quảng Nam, Trà Vinh, and Lâm Đồng. The project provinces have a high share of ethnic minority
                         peoples, in particular among the poor who will benefit from the Opportunity Program.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Tuan Anh Le (EASVS)
                         Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The project is not expected to have any potential
                          BP 4.01                                             adverse impacts on environment and human.
                                                                              Thus it is categorized as C and, beyond screening,
                                                                              no further environmental action is required.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The project does not have any impacts on
                                                                              natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                              involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                              critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                              habitats as defined under this policy.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The policy is not triggered since the project (a)
                                                                              will not procure any pesticides, nor (b) will the
                                                                              use of pesticides increase as a result of the
                                                                              project.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               There are no civil works funded under the
                          BP 4.11                                             project. As such, the project will not affect sites




                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                                                                       with archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                       religious, or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes            The project focusses on system strengthening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       nationwide and in four project provinces,
                                                                       including Hà Giang, Quảng Nam, Trà Vinh, and
                                                                       Lâm Đồng, where there is high percentage of
                                                                       poor and pro-poor households and a large part of
                                                                       the intended target beneficiaries are from ethnic
                                                                       minority groups. According to the Vietnam
                                                                       Household Living Standard Survey (VHLSS
                                                                       2010), the share of households that are from
                                                                       ethnic minority groups are estimated as 96
                                                                       percent in Hà Giang, 41 percent in Quảng Nam,
                                                                       56 percent in Lâm Đồng and 33 percent in Trà
                                                                       Vinh in 2010. These include major ethnic groups
                                                                       such as Mong, Tay, Dao, Nung (Ha Giang), Co
                                                                       Tu, Xo Dong (Quang Nam), K’ho, Nung, Tay
                                                                       (Lam Dong), Khmer, Hoa (Tra Vinh).

                                                                       As a large part of target beneficiaries are from
                                                                       ethnic minority groups, a stand-alone Ethnic
                                                                       Minority Development Plan (EMDP, equivalent
                                                                       to Indigenous People’s Policy) was not prepared.
                                                                       Instead, the key elements of a EMDP have been
                                                                       incorporated in the project design, and
                                                                       implementation and monitoring and evaluation
                                                                       plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Because ethnic minority peoples are present in
                                                                       the project area, the Bank’s OP 4.10 (Indigenous
                                                                       Peoples) is triggered. A Social Assessment was
                                                                       conducted in accordance with OP 4.10. The
                                                                       purpose of the SA was two-fold: (a) to explore
                                                                       potential positive and adverse impacts of the
                                                                       project (to inform the project design and to design
                                                                       mitigation measures) and (b) to consult with
                                                                       ethnic minority peoples present in the project area
                                                                       and to confirm if they provide a broad community
                                                                       support for project implementation.

                                                                       The SA confirms that the overall project impact is
                                                                       positive and that there is broad community
                                                                       support from ethnic minority peoples in the
                                                                       project areas for the project activities. As
                                                                       indicated through consultation, given prior
                                                                       experience with existing cash transfer programs,
                                                                       respondents viewed cash benefits as a timely and



                                                               Page 5 of 10
                                 useful budget support for poor households,
                                 especially those who are from ethnic minority
                                 groups, to improve their children’s access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 education, healthcare and nutrition. Those
                                 consulted agreed that the project interventions
                                 will make an improvement to the current
                                 fragmented and inefficient social assistance
                                 system. As such, the respondents viewed the
                                 project’s potential positive impacts on immediate
                                 welfare as well as long-term poverty reduction
                                 amongst the project’s beneficiaries, including
                                 those who come from ethnic minority groups.

                                 Gender consultations were also conducted along
                                 with the SA. The project interventions and
                                 monitoring and evaluation plan integrate various
                                 elements of gender mainstreaming. As a result, a
                                 separate Gender Action Plan was not prepared
                                 and The SA suggests that women in beneficiary
                                 households, including those from ethnic minority
                                 groups, often manage the family income and
                                 typically spend most of it on food and on their
                                 children’s other needs, including schooling and
                                 healthcare. The SA indicates it will be convenient
                                 for the participation of target beneficiaries (both
                                 men and women) in community activities, such as
                                 experience sharing, and building census for
                                 collective action. There are no potential adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 impacts anticipated on household workload, intra-
                                 household labor division, and social relationships
                                 at the household and community levels.

                                 Findings from the SA have been incorporated into
                                 the project design and the project implementation
                                 and monitoring and evaluation plans.

                                 Overall, the project design ensures ethnic
                                 minority peoples in the project area receive
                                 project benefits that are culturally appropriate to
                                 them. Potential social adverse impacts, if any,
                                 will be mitigated through continued consultation
                                 with affected ethnic minority peoples during
                                 project implementation.

                                 A summary of the findings of the social
                                 assessment, and how the project complies with
                                 Bank’s OP 4.10, particularly with EMDP



                         Page 6 of 10
                                                                                 requirements, is presented in Annex 3 of the
                                                                                 PAD. The detailed SA report as well as the
                                                                                 summary was disclosed locally in Vietnamese,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 and at Bank’s Infoshop in English, and at
                                                                                 Vietnam Development Information Center in
                                                                                 Hanoi prior to project appraisal in September
                                                                                 2013.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               The project does not involve land acquisition
                            4.12                                                 and resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams.
                            Projects on International        No                   The project does not involve international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not located in any dispute area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Since ethnic minority peoples are present in the project area, the World Bank’s OP 4.10
                              (Indigenous Peoples) is triggered. A Social Assessment was conducted as per OP 4.10 to (a)
                              explore potential positive and adverse impacts of the project (to inform the project design and to
                              design mitigation measures) and (b) to consult with ethnic minority peoples present in the project
                              area and to confirm if they provide a broad community support for project implementation. In
                              addition to the SA, various consultative workshops (in Hanoi, Quảng Nam, Lâm Đồng and Ninh
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Binh) and other local consultations have taken place since early 2012. The SA confirms that the
                              overall project impact is positive and that there is broad ethnic minority community support from
                              ethnic minority peoples in the project areas for the project activities.

                              There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts of the project
                              interventions identified. The SASSP will not finance any civil works and is, therefore, not
                              expected to have any significant, irreversible or minor environmental impacts. This is a Category
                              C Project. The results of the Social Assessment also indicate no potential large scale, significant
                              and/or irreversible impacts of the project interventions on ethnic minority groups.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              In terms of social impact, there is no potential indirect and/or long term adverse impact due to
                              activities to be done under the project. In the long term, the project will lead to positive impacts,
                              through improved social assistance delivery for the poor.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              There are no adverse impacts anticipated. Project alternatives are not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                           Various local consultations have taken place since early 2012, with the participation of the Kinh
                           and different ethnic minority groups from different potential project provinces. Using in-depth
                           interviews, focus groups discussions, and field observation, the consultation (which took the form
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of a Social Assessment) aims to understand the potential impacts of the SASSP (both positive and
                           adverse) on the project beneficiaries. The consultations with ethnic minority peoples, in particular,
                           were conducted on the principle of free, prior and informed manner - to solicit their feedback on
                           the basis of the project goal and its activities. The feedback was collected at both household and
                           community levels. The Social Assessment and consultation were conducted by the Ministry of
                           Labor, Invalids and Social Affairs (MOLISA) with guidance and supervision from the Bank.

                           As the majority of beneficiaries in the four project provinces are from ethnic minority groups, a
                           stand-alone Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) was not prepared. However, key elements
                           typically required for an EMDP were integrated into the overall project design as per OP 4.10.
                           Gender consultations were also conducted as part of the SA and findings integrated in project
                           design. All possible constraints (emerging from the consultations and SA), and possible measures
                           to address identified constraints have been incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual
                           (PIM), including the implementation plan for communication and outreach, household support and
                           grievance redress mechanism, to ensure effective implementation and inclusion of ethnic minority
                           people. For example, the use of local village social collaborators allows the support and
                           counseling to ethnic minority beneficiary households to be provided in their language, and in a
                           manner that is culturally appropriate to them. The PIM specifies that the communication strategy
                           and materials will be customized to address the specific needs of different ethnic minority groups
                           in terms of language and cultural relevance. and training programs will be culturally appropriate
                           and gender informed. Similarly, the training of local officials, social collaborators and service
                           providers will be culturally appropriate and gender informed. Grievance redress mechanisms will
                           be adapted to the needs of the specific ethnic minority groups in terms of language and cultural
                           norms on complaints. These monitoring and evaluation arrangements for the project will include
                           indicators that allow analysis disaggregated by gender and ethnicity. The PIM provides further
Public Disclosure Copy




                           details on how these actions will be incorporated during implementation.

                           MOLISA has prior experience with Bank’s social safeguards policies and has the capacity for
                           implementing safeguard policies. During the first year of project implementation, training will be
                           provided to Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) and Provincial Project Management Units
                           (PPMUs) to ensure that continued consultation with ethnic minorities peoples, and gender issues
                           are addressed when activities are unfold during project implementation. Training will be repeated,
                           particularly for PPMUs on the basis of training evaluation and application outcome.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include the following groups: (a) CPMU and PPMUs (responsible for overall
                           management, supervision and implementation support), (b) national and local social officers
                           (responsible for implementing the existing social assistance programs and the Opportunity
                           Program under this project), (c) actual and potential social assistance beneficiaries, and (d) target
                           communities and village leaders in the project provinces.

                           The consultations during project implementation will follow the same approach as that taken
                           during preparation. The consultations will take into account the social and cultural traits of target
                           ethnic minority groups to ensure their feedback is based on full understanding of the project goals,
                           activities, and their potential impacts. The consultation findings will also be shared with the ethnic


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           minority peoples and stakeholders consulted to get their feedback. The same techniques, including
                           in-depth interviews, focus groups discussions, and field observation techniques, will continue to be
                           applied to ensure validity and reliability of the consultation. For soliciting feedback from ethnic
Public Disclosure Copy




                           minority peoples, the principle of free, prior and informed consultation will be maintained. The SA
                           report will continue to be updated when needed to reflect feedback from the field as the project is
                           implemented.

                           The detailed SA report as well as a summary (prepared as per OP 4.10) outlining the key findings
                           of the SA and how the project complies with Bank’s OP 4.10 were disclosed locally in Vietnamese
                           and at Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi. The English versions were disclosed at
                           Bank’s Infoshop on 17 September 2013, prior to commencing project appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       16-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    17-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                           17-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The detailed SA report and a brief summary (prepared as per OP 4.10) outlining the
                                         key findings of the SA and how the project complies with Bank's OP 4.10 was
                                         disclosed in the local language on the MOLISA and the four provincial websites on
                                         September 18, 2013 and in English at the World Bank’s Vietnam Development
                                         Information Center in Hanoi and on Bank’s Infoshop on September 17, 2013.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Puja Vasudeva Dutta
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:       Name: Jehan Arulpragasam (SM)                    Date: 06-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 10 of 10
