                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8087
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Chad                               Project ID:    P148052
                            Project Name:      Mother and Child Health Services Strengthening Project (P148052)
                            Task Team          Aissatou Diack
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Apr-2014                        Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHW                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (90%), Other social services (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Population and reproductive health (35%), Child health (30%), Health system
                                              performance (25%), Other communicable diseases (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      15.79           Total Bank Financing:                    15.79
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  15.79
                              Total                                                                                        15.79
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           29.     The objective of the Project is to increase utilization and improve the quality of maternal and
                           child health services in targeted areas.
                            3. Project Description
                           Experience to date in Chad has demonstrated that: (i) specific, short term, high impact measures can

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         improve health service delivery in limited technical areas (such as immunization, ITN, etc.) and
                         geographic localities (such as the health districts supported by the Population and AIDS Control
                         Project 2 (PACP 2); but (ii) improvements cannot be expanded/scaled-up or sustained without
Public Disclosure Copy




                         addressing the systemic weaknesses which have plagued Bank-financed (and other) projects to date
                         in Chad.
                         Three elements have been shown to be essential for satisfactory project outcomes: (i) governance,
                         and specifically institutional arrangements for public resource management and service delivery; (ii)
                         flexibility and innovation (within a coherent national framework) at the point of service delivery; and
                         (iii) decentralized management for both the appropriation of new approaches to service delivery and
                         the political support and commitment of local authorities. For this reason, the project will support
                         activities known to improve maternal and child health in the short-term while simultaneously
                         focusing on the long-term systems strengthening in specific technical areas to ensure the future
                         sustainability of these health services.

                         Project components

                         1.       The proposed project will include service delivery and capacity-building components, based
                         on the need to: (i) support proven high-impact activities to improve maternal and child health in the
                         short-term; and (ii) strengthen specific technical and managerial areas in the medium-term to ensure
                         the future sustainability of these health services. Together, the components offer a means for
                         simultaneously supporting the Government’s health development strategy and expanding promising
                         initiatives to address the country’s serious administrative and technical problems in delivering health
                         services.

                         Component 1: Improving accessibility and quality of Maternal and Child Health Services through
                         Performance Based Financing and Community Health (US$16.8 million, of which IDA = US$12.8
                         million, HRITF = US$4 million)
                         2.       The component will improve the delivery of health services, particularly in remote areas
                         through a combination of facility-based, outreach, and community-based services. Facility-based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services will expand on the PBF approach piloted by PACP 2. Facility-based services: (i) comprise
                         the packages of essential and complementary health activities adopted by the Government; and (ii)
                         will include interventions to improve the quality and availability of preventive health services at
                         health centers and district hospitals, availability of drugs, and the capacity and motivation of human
                         resources.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Expansion of Performance-Based Financing for health facilities
                         3.       Building on the pilot experiences, the project will strengthen the PBF approaches in five
                         regions: Batha, Guera, Mandoul, Tandjile, and Logone Orientale. The project will finance grants to
                         health facilities based on: (i) the quantity of maternal and child health (MCH) services delivered to
                         the targeted population; (ii) the quality of those services; and (iii) geographical disparities to
                         strengthen the supply of health services in remote areas.
                         4.       The PBF grants will be used to: (i) improve the work environment of the health facility
                         (minor repairs in the facility, procurement of additional small equipment, drugs, etc.); and (ii) finance
                         performance-based bonuses to the health personnel. For health facilities that are located in highly
                         remote and poor areas (where it is more difficult to achieve results), additional “equity bonus”
                         adjustments will be made to allow for increased output financing to the worst off zones.
                         5.       A quantified quality checklist will be designed for each level of the service package and will
                         provide the foundation for measuring results (with increased weights given to process measures). The
                         quality checklist will introduce measures related to rational prescribing of generic drugs, essential

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         drug management and availability tracer drugs. Facility payments will be made quarterly: (i) on the
                         basis of a set of incentivized indicators (defined by the Ministry of Health) emphasizing
                         reproductive, maternal and child health (see Annex 2 for complete list of targeted services); and (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         after quantity and quality of services have been declared and verified (ex-ante and ex post).

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Governance, purchasing, coaching and strengthening the health system through
                         Performance Based Financing
                         6.       To support PBF implementation and supervision (capacity building, verification and counter
                         verification, IT system, etc.), the project will finance purchasing arrangements covering batches of
                         1,000,000 persons (2-3 regions per contractual arrangement). Given the technical challenges of PBF
                         implementation and the previous positive experience with external technical assistance for PBF
                         piloting, the project proposes to identify international non-governmental organizations (NGOs) with
                         demonstrated experience with PBF to act as purchasing and verification agencies. The contract
                         management and verification for PBF implementation is estimated to be at maximum 30 percent of
                         the total PBF budget, which is in-line with international experience.
                         7.       Performance frameworks will also be introduced for certain strategic entities (e.g., the PBF
                         Technical Unit, the General Directorate for Resources and Planning (DGRP) within the Ministry of
                         Health, the regional and district health administrations, etc.), which are accountable for services
                         through incentive mechanisms. Internal performance framework contracts will clearly outline the
                         expected performance of these entities vis-à-vis their roles in the health system and lead to
                         successfully scaled up PBF approaches. The performance frameworks will also be assessed quarterly
                         using a combination of internal and external verifications before payment is made (ex-ante), and are
                         randomly counter-verified after payment (ex-post) using a third party agent to ensure reliability of
                         the performance assessments. A system of tested penalties will be instituted to discourage gaming.
                         8.       Verification and counter-verification of the health facilities, drug regulatory authority/
                         Ministry of Health (MOH), Health Management Information System (HMIS)/MOH will occur every
                         quarter. The purchasing agent and the team of development partners will assess the performance of
                         the various entities being contracted to provide a set of services. Activities to be carried out include:
                         (a)      verification of the performance of the HMIS and drug regulatory authority/MOH;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      counter-verification of the quantity and quality of services provided by health facilities
                         through verification, including a community verification client satisfaction survey component;
                         (c)      counter-verification of a random sample of district and regional performance assessments;
                         and
                         (d)      counter-verify a random sample of health center quality checklists;
                         In the case of discrepancies surpassing 5 percent score in any of the verified samples (whether
                         quantity, quality or performance frameworks for the district), a significant penalty will be imposed
                         on the performance earnings of the institution that reported this performance. The penalties for fraud
                         will be clearly outlined in the various contracts and procedures and will be detailed in the PBF
                         manual.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Development of community-based approaches for MCH services
                         9.      To stimulate demand for the increased availability of improved health services resulting from
                         the expansion of PBF, the project will support for the development and implementation of
                         community-based approaches proposed by the relevant Ministry and its development partners.
                         10.     To date a draft National Community Health Policy has been formulated by the Ministry in
                         close collaboration with other concerned partners (UNICEF, UNFPA, EU, etc.); the policy will be
                         followed by the preparation of a budgeted medium-term strategic plan based on the three priorities of
                         the Policy. Once the national community health strategic plan is adopted, the project will support the
                         government in implementing the plan, based on the inputs of other donors, the funding gaps

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         identified, and the availability of project resources.
                         11.      Specifically, the project intends to finance a mix of national and project specific components.
                         Nationally, the project will: (i) support a systematic review of successful community strategies used
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the region to accelerate progress in MCH; and (ii) contribute to fora for the ongoing discussion of
                         the problems and possible solutions for community health services development.
                         12.      In the areas targeted by the project, the focus will be on developing the complementarity of
                         community-based health services and facility-based PBF. To this end, the project is expected to
                         finance: (i) adaptation of the existing training curriculum for community health workers; (ii) training
                         of the relais communautaire for the delivery of the defined package of community health services;
                         and (iii) support for the COSAN in the development of their additional role in community
                         sensitization.
                         13.      Because of the breadth and scope of activities envisioned by the new strategy, the project
                         intends to contract implementation of this subcomponent to UNICEF for a period of two years to: (i)
                         develop and test the elements of the policy; and (ii) to ensure the continued follow-up of the COSAN
                         by the relevant district and regional health staff. UNICEF will also be asked to examine the
                         feasibility of establishing regional networks of the COSAN in the project areas in order to share
                         experience and implement successful initiatives.

                         Component 2: Strengthening the institutional capacity to implement and sustain performance-based
                         financing and community-level health care services (US$3.2 million, of which IDA = US$2.2
                         million, HRITF = US$1 million)
                         14.      This component will: (i) strengthen institutional capacities for improved program and health
                         sector management; and (ii) strengthen capacity for better M&E, supervision and project
                         implementation.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening institutional capacities for improved program and health sector
                         management
                         15.      Within the overall framework of the expansion of PBF, project recognizes the importance of
                         health system strengthening. Capacity-building efforts will focus on enhancing strategies for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adequately financing the sector, deploying and motivating human resources, and strengthening
                         supply chain management. The project will support the Government’s efforts to implement PBF
                         through policy dialogue and reform. Activities may include discussions for regulatory reforms that:
                         (i) can improve the availability of quality essential medicines at all levels of the health system, (ii)
                         ensure better allocation of human resources for health by providing managerial autonomy for
                         contracting health personnel; and (iii) ensuring continuous review and assessment of bodies
                         regulating and implementing PBF.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening capacities for better M&E and supervision, and Project
                         Implementation
                         16.     This sub-component supports project management and supervision as well as monitoring and
                         evaluation of the PBF.
                         17.     Project management and supervision. A PBF Steering Committee and a Technical PBF Unit
                         have existed since 2010 and 2012 respectively. Given the experience of these structures and the
                         expanded tasks required for the PBF approach, MOH has proposed revisions to the existing
                         organizational texts to establish arrangements for project management and supervision. These
                         arrangements are described in detail in Section IV.A below.
                         18.     The project will support operating costs for the PBF Steering Committee and the Technical
                         PBF Unit.
                         19.     Monitoring and evaluation of PBF. Given the fragmentation, unreliability, and inaccuracy of

                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                         the existing routine reporting system for the health sector, the results cannot be used as the basis for
                         measuring health facility performance. However, since PBF payments are to be made based on
                         service volumes and quality, external reviewers will assess the declared results, ex post verification
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities will be conducted by an independent third party, and an external evaluation agency (EEA)
                         will be contracted by the MOH to check the veracity of the information provided by health services.
                         20.      The project will use a web-application to manage both the public front-end and the back-end
                         strategic purchasing. The backbone of the web-application for Chad currently exists, developed
                         during the previous pilot (http://fbrtchad.org/). The project will work closely with the HMIS
                         department to revamp the web-application. The Information and Communication Technologies (ICT)
                         solution is part of the system of intense monitoring and evaluation for PBF results. Verified and
                         purchased results including the results for the health administration will be visible on the public
                         website whereas the raw data will be downloadable from the website.
                         21.      The project will be regularly assessed so that lessons learned from the operation can be
                         rigorously documented and disseminated to Chadian stakeholders and abroad. The project will also
                         incorporate an experimental impact evaluation (IE) to generate evidence on the effectiveness and
                         impact of PBF in combination with training and recruitment of community health workers. As target
                         districts for the PBF intervention have already been identified, the experimental design will introduce
                         the rollout of the community health worker scheme (which may include performance contract
                         components) through randomized assignment at the health facility catchment area level. To measure
                         the effect of PBF on health outcomes of interest, PBF districts will be matched with non-PBF
                         districts through a quasi-experimental evaluation design. The details of the IE research questions and
                         identification strategy will be developed during the project preparation period.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Selected regions of Chad (Batha, Guera, Tandjile, Mandoul and Logone Oriental)

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project is classified as EA Category B as the
                          BP 4.01                                              project activities may lead to an increase in
                                                                               Health Care Risk Waste (HCRW). The indirect
                                                                               potential negative environmental and social
                                                                               impacts of the project are expected to be site-
                                                                               specific, small to moderate and easily mitigated.
                                                                               The national Medical Waste Management Plan
                                                                               which was updated under the Additional
                                                                               Financing for the PACP 2 project will serve as the
                                                                               safeguards instrument for this project. It was
                                                                               revised, reviewed, consulted upon during project
                                                                               preparation and was disclosed in country on April
                                                                               10, 2014, and at the InfoShop on April 21, 2014.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No



                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified as EA Category B as the project activities may lead to an increase in
                              Health Care Risk Waste (HCRW). The indirect potential negative environmental and social
                              impacts of the project are expected to be site-specific, small to moderate and easily mitigated.
                              These potential negative impacts are linked to the handling and disposal of medical and health
                              waste such as placentas as well as syringes and material used for delivery of pregnant women
                              (delivery kits) in health facilities covered by the project area. The national Medical Waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Management Plan which was updated under the Additional Financing for the PACP 2 project will
                              serve as the safeguards instrument for this project. It was revised, reviewed, consulted upon during
                              project preparation and was disclosed in country on April 10, 2014 and at the InfoShop on April
                              21, 2014. Key mitigation measures are outlined in the implementation action plan of the MWMP
                              and will also include refresher training of health workers and staff delivering health services in the
                              adequate handling and disposal of medical waste and maintenance of adapted incinerators and
                              equipment that were deployed between April and June 2013.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no significant or irreversible impacts due to the anticipated future activities in the project
                              area.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The PACP 2 project was originally given an environmental category “C” rating since it was not
                              expected to generate any adverse environmental effects and could even have some positive


                                                                          Page 6 of 8
                           environmental effects through the population component’s potential long term impact on fertility
                           reduction and a decline in the population growth rate. In 2004, the rating was retroactively
                           changed in the system to a B (along with all HIV/AIDS projects). The “B” rating was maintained
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for the Additional Financing (AF) due to the risks associated with the handling and disposal of
                           medical waste, and a Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP) was prepared in August 2007.
                           Because the Borrower's experience and ability to implement safeguards were limited, capacity
                           building on safeguards, particularly medical waste management, was built into the AF. In addition,
                           critical materials and equipment for medical waste management as well as safeguards supervision
                           was included to address weaknesses and enhance the implementation and systematic monitoring of
                           the MWMP by the MOH. Safeguards compliance was rated Satisfactory throughout the AF.
                           In July 2012, an environmental audit of the ten health facilities supported by the project was
                           conducted. The audit found that waste management capabilities remained limited and cited in
                           particular a lack of documentation to guide the disposal of bio-medical waste and insufficient and
                           inadequately trained staff. In addition, an assessment and update of the MWMP was conducted.
                           Among the issues identified were: (i) insufficient political support and legislative gaps; (ii)
                           inadequate organization of plan implementation including a lack of material support and
                           appropriate behavior among health personnel; and (iii) limited financial resources from the
                           Government and collaboration with the private sector.

                           A new MWMP was developed in July 2012 and proposed a comprehensive remedial plan and
                           budget. Over US$1 million was invested in buying adequate equipment for medical waste
                           management that was deployed in health facilities that will host the upcoming new project and
                           training was rolled out throughout the country. Under the proposed project, environmental
                           concerns have been included as elements for assessment of health facility performance and are
                           considered criteria for results-based financing. These criteria should lead to improved management
                           of medical waste in order for the health facility to receive the applicable points; if not, the project
                           will also have the means to increase the weighting of environmental criteria in order to trigger
                           increased attention and even to promote the acquisition of medical waste management equipment
                           with PBF funding.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Ministries of Health and Planning collaborated to develop and issue the Medical Waste
                           Management Plan (MWMP), with technical assistance of consultants and development partners
                           (WHO). The MWMP was shared with the press and key stakeholders such as NGOs and
                           associations as well as posted in the MOH website. The MWMP was updated as part of project
                           preparation to include a revised timeline for the roll-out of activities in the implementation action
                           plan. It was subsequently consulted upon and disclosed in country on April 10, 2014 and at the
                           InfoShop on April 11, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           27-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        21-Apr-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Chad                                                             10-Apr-2014
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Aissatou Diack
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 18-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                            Date: 18-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
