                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC12155

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                           Project ID:     P154523
                            Project Name:     Technical Education Quality Improvement Project III (P154523)
                            Task Team         Tobias Linden,Tara Beteille
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         18-Jan-2016                     Estimated       31-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEDDR                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Export development and
                                              competitiveness (10%), Technology diffusion (10%), Decentralizatio n (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    600.00                   Total Bank Financing:       300.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        300.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               300.00
                              Total                                                                     600.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the performance of technical education
                           institutions, in terms of efficiency, quality and equity.
                           C. Project Description
                           TEQIP III is expected to have 2 components:
                           (I)    Enhancing Institutional Quality, Equity and Governance (Bank support - $290 mill; Total
                           component cost - $550 mill.). There would be 3 sub-components:
                           (i) Institutional Development Grants to competitively-selected colleges. These grants would have a
                           strong performance element. Activities to be covered include: pedagogical and other training for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           faculty; new fields of study/curricula with better employment prospects; student placement cells;
                           mechanisms for tracking of graduates; supporting institutional autonomy; student placement;
                           incentives to increase enrollment of girls/disadvantaged groups; development of technology based
                           distance learning; and girls hostels.
                           (ii) Quality Enhancement Grants to competitively-selected affiliating universities: to support
                           curriculum reform, encourage institutions to acquire and exercise autonomy status, improve student
                           placement and enhance quality assurance procedures. Since affiliating universities cater to large
                           numbers of private colleges, this is an important mechanism to improve the quality of engineering
                           education across the board.
                           (iii) Centers of Excellence Grants to competitive-selected institutions to scale up innovation and
                           multi-disciplinary teaching and research partnerships with industry.

                           (II) Technical Assistance to the Ministry of Human Resource Development and State Governments
                           (Bank support - $10 mill.; Total component cost -$15 mill.)
                           Under this component, technical assistance will be provided to the Department of Higher Education
                           in areas in project management, monitoring and evaluation, and in the establishment of robust project
                           information systems. In addition, central initiatives to support institutional development, using the
                           IITs and IIMs, will be supported. These activities will be made available to non-TEQIP institutions.

                           In addition, for institutions and governments of low-income states, new activities need to be
                           developed during preparation to address their specific needs. The intention would be to build
                           capacity of groups of institutions for self-improvement and of governments to support institutional
                           development and technical education reform at the state level. These activities will impact non-
                           TEQIP institutions as well.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           Countrywide (India). Specific locations will be identified after competitive selection of institutions.
                           Around 250 institutions are expected to participate from across the country.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Borrower has experience in the implementation of phase I and II of Technical Engineering/
                           Education Quality Improvement Project and will have people dedicated to do so at the National and
                           State level. Ensuring adequate capacity will be part of project design and implementation. The
                           Client has established reasonable capacity to manage the social and environmental safeguards for the
                           proposed operation which shall be further strengthened during the phase-III. This was observed
                           during the implementation of TEQIP I and II projects that the safeguards implementation was varied
                           in quality and outcome at the local level and this requires enhancing capacity and monitoring results
                           at specific local levels. This will be emphasized in the safeguards management planning for the
                           Phase-III.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (GENDR)
                           Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment                                    Yes                        The project will support only minor repairs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 OP/BP 4.01                                                                             refurbishments of the existing infrastructure. An
                                                                                                                        Environment Assessment will be undertaken and
                                                                                                                        based on findings from this exercise, an Environment
                                                                                                                        Management Plan/Framework will be prepared to
                                                                                                                        guide/improve the management of environment,
                                                                                                                        health and safety aspects on the campuses of TEQIP
                                                                                                                        III institutions supported/covered under the project.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    Yes                        The policy is triggered given the project is country-
                                 4.10                                                                                   wide and the beneficiaries would also include
                                                                                                                        students belonging to Scheduled Castes (SCs) and
                                                                                                                        Scheduled Tribes (STs) and other disadvantaged
                                                                                                                        groups. A Social Assessment (SA) has been
                                                                                                                        commissioned and based on the findings, the project
                                                                                                                        will develop a Tribal Development Framework/ Plan
                                                                                                                        and equity guidelines to ensure that students from
                                                                                                                        tribal and other disadvantaged groups who enter the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        participating TEQIP III institutions are provided with
                                                                                                                        equitable benefits.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         This policy has not been triggered given that project
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                activities will focus on improving the quality and
                                                                                                                        access of technical education and will only support
                                                                                                                        minor repairs and refurbishments of existing
                                                                                                                        infrastructure. Therefore project activities are not
                                                                                                                        expected to require any land acquisition and are not
                                                                                                                        expected to cause any type of physical or economic
                                                                                                                        displacement or restriction of access to natural
                                                                                                                        resources.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             (a) OP/ BP 4.10 is triggered under the project. A Social Assessment (SA) has been commissioned
                             and based on the findings, the project will develop a tribal development framework/plan and
                             equity guidelines to ensure that students from tribal and other disadvantaged groups who enter the
                             participating TEQIP III institutions are provided with equitable benefits. A National level Tribal
                             Development Framework based on which state/ specific local level Tribal Development Plans and
                             Equity Plans will be prepared and implemented. The Tribal Development Framework will build on
                             the Equity Action Plan prepared for TEQIP II project and lessons learned from the implementation
                             of this Plan with addressing any gaps identified during the implementation process. The client
                             shall carry out free, prior, and informed stakeholder consultations with the primary beneficiaries
                             with special focus on the SC and ST groups and CSOs representing their interests and working
                             with them to prepare and validate the Tribal Development Framework. The client will establish
                             monitoring and evaluation information systems in the Department of Higher Education, to monitor
                             progress in achieving social inclusion with indicators disaggregated by gender, and ethnicity (SC,
                             ST).

                              (b) OP/ BP 4.01 is triggered under the project. An Environment Assessment will be undertaken
                             and based on findings from this exercise, an Environment Management Plan/Framework will be
                             prepared to guide/improve the management of environment, health and safety aspects on the
                             campuses of TEQIP III institutions supported/covered under the project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tobias Linden,Tara Beteille
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                            Date: 16-Mar-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Practice Manager/    Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)                               Date: 17-Mar-2015
                           Manager:
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
