INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA8363
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kenya                       Project ID:  P145559
Project Name: Coastal Region Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (P 145559)
Task Team       Gustavo Saltiel
Leader:
Estimated        18-Aug-2014                Estimated    16-Dec-2014
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(25%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (15%),
Irrigation and drainage (10%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (40%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
Delivery (30%), Climate change (20%), Rural services and infra structure (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     200.00             Total Bank Financing:   200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 200.00
Total                                                                       200.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of this project (KWSCRP-2) is to sustainably increase bulk water supply
to Mombasa County and Kwale County, and increase access to water and sanitation in Kwale
County.
Page 1 of 16


﻿3. Project Description
The Kenya Water Security and Climate Resilience Program adopts a long-term programmatic
approach, whereby a series of investment operations linked to the same overarching objective are
undertaken. This approach provides the necessary flexibility for the phasing of investment operations
to address opportunities and challenges as they emerge. It is expected that the program will be
implemented over a period of ten to twelve years, which demonstrates the Bank's long term
commitment to Kenya's water sector. The first operation in the series, the Kenya Water Security and
a        Climate Resilience Project 1 (KWSCRP-1) supports laying a strong institutional and legal foundation
for sector growth and sustainability and the roll-out of Kenya's vast water sector investment
program. The Coastal Region Water Security and Climate Resilience Project (KWSCRP-2) is the
second operation in the series, focusing on water security and climate resilience in the coastal region
and complements the first project that focuses on national capacity-building, investment pipeline
development, and a targeted irrigation investment in western Kenya.
The proposed Project would have three components, focusing on: Mwache Dam and Related
Infrastructure (C1); Kwale County Development Support (C2); and Project Management (C3). Each
component is briefly discussed below.
Component 1: Mwache Dam and Related Infrastructure (US$ 165 million)
Sub-Component 1.1: Civil Works and Related Infrastructure (US$ 160 million)
The priority development of Mwache Dam was conceived under the Water Supply Master Plan for
Mombasa and Other Towns Within Coast Province, prepared under the Water Supply and Sanitation
Improvement Project (WaSSIP), financed jointly by the World Bank and the Agence Franqaise de
D6veloppement (AFD). Ultimately, the dam is expected to provide 186,000 m3/day (67.9 MCM/
year) for urban water supply to Mombasa County and Kwale County
The dam site is located across the Mwache River at the Fulugani village (Kwale County), about 22
km west of the city of Mombasa in the coastal region of Kenya and near the coastline. The proposed
dam is a concrete gravity dam with height of about 78m and with a reservoir capacity of about 118
million m3. This component will finance the construction of the main dam (Mwache), one check
dam, raw water transmission lines (gravity-fed) to the treatment plant, transport infrastructure
(approach road to dam site and bridges), electromechanical equipment and buildings related to the
dam site i.e. all of the infrastructure needed to supply water (raw water, before treatment works) to
the water supply system in the coastal region. The component would also include implementation of
the environmental management plan and dam safety plans. Specific activities for the sedimentation
management plan will be developed under this Sub-component, while implementation of these
activities will be financed under Sub-Component 1.2 (refer below).
A GoK-appointed Dam Safety Panel of Experts (DSPE), consisting of experts in dam engineering
design and construction, geology, and hydrology / sedimentation and financed under KWSCRP-1,
are guiding the finalization of the dam design and safety plans.
Sub-Component 1.2: Mwache Catchment Management (US$ 5 million)
The Mwache watershed has undergone significant degradation as results of poor land use practices in
pursuing food production, resulting in a general decline in soil, livestock and crop productivity,
Page 2 of 16


﻿upstream erosion, downstream flooding, and sedimentation. These threaten the economic lifespan of
the proposed Mwache reservoir, and also threaten the livelihood and food security of the people,
many of whom already live in extreme poverty.
O
This Sub-component aims to improve sustainability of the Mwache catchment, integrating
conservation activities with the needs of local communities to develop sustainable economic
activities. Recognizing that a robust watershed management strategy entails addressing ecosystem
degradation at the watershed level, this sub-component support an integrated, participative approach
to water resources management, introducing sustainable livestock, agriculture, forestry and land
management practices, and integrating conservation activities with the needs of local communities to
develop sustainable economic activities. Activities under the sub-component will be based on
livelihoods, to ensure that communities will have incentives to play an active and engaged role in
conversation activities. Activities will involve promoting approaches to improve sustainable land and
water management of the catchment, in line with the agreed sedimentati on management plan. The
activities well target erosion-prone "hot spot" sub catchment areas in each of the three counties,
which are to be determined by the Regional Office of WRMA based on a transparent selection
criteria. In addition to community-led initiatives, the subcomponent will also fund the acquisition of
heavy machinery needed for removing the sediment loads from the check dams.
Component 2: Kwale County Development Support (US$ 25 million)
This Component will support development in Kwale County, where the Mwache Dam is located,
through investments in water supply and sanitation in rural communities and small towns; a
demonstration irrigation scheme to inform design and establish viability of a large scale irrigation
program in Kwale in the future, and livelihoods investments. By supporting these activities,
Component 2 will bring near-term and medium-term benefits to Kwale County, in parallel to the
planning and preparation for the large-scale infrastructure that would supply water to Kwale (from
Mwache, and other sources) in the long-term.
Sub-Component 2.1: Water Supply Investments (US$ 12 million)
This sub-component will support increased access to water supply in small towns and rural
communities in Kwale County. In terms of urban supply, priorities include increased supply to
a        Kwale and Kinango towns, both of which are currently supplied from Marere springs. Priority
investments include replacement of two old transmission lines from (i) Marere-Kwale town, and (ii)
Marere-Kinango town. The Coast Water Masterplan envisaged a total of about 4,000m3/d to be
supplied from Marere Springs to Kwale and Kinango towns by the year 2015, against a total demand
of about 6,000m3/d for the two towns. This supply would rise to about 8,800m3/d by 2035, when
supply to Mombasa from Marere springs is expected to have declined with the development of other
bulk water sources, including Mwache Dam. Other investments will include water distribution
network rehabilitation and expansion in Kwale, Kinango and Ukunda towns. This will ensure
maximum utilization of current supply to these towns, as well as develop capacity for additional
water supply after completion of the Mwache Dam. This sub-component will also finance
construction of new boreholes and extension of the distribution system in Msambweni town as an
immediate intervention. Preparation of designs and tender documents for these works, a water
resources master plan for Kwale County, and other relevant preparatory studies will be financed
under the ongoing KWSCRP-1.
In terms of rural supply in Kwale County, priority will be given to communities affected by the
Page 3 of 16


﻿construction of the dam. It will establish viability and support the construction of pipelines from off-
takes on main pipelines that are part of the bulk water system, kiosks or yard taps, and other low-cost
near-term options for rural water supply including point sources (boreholes, protected dug wells, and
protected springs); rainwater collection; and small dams across seasonal streams. These rural water
O
supply activities will be designed based on community priorities, and attention will also be placed on
strengthening the operation and maintenance system to enhance sustainability.
Investments to be supported under this sub-component will be selected and prepared in line with the
KWSCRP Investment Framework. Application of the Investment Framework, which will continually
be improved through application and refinements under KWSCRP-1, will help ensure that
transparent selection criteria are used for selection of sub-projects, and that selected sub-projects are
prepared according to agreed quality assurance standards, including on technical, economic,
financial, environmental, social and institutional aspects.
Sub-Component 2.2: Sanitation Investments (US$ 4 million)
This sub-component will support increased access to improved sanitation facilities in both urban and
rural areas. On the policy side, the project will support the development of a strategy to promote
house hold sanitation, taking into account cultural beliefs. In addition, communities will be trained
on sanitation and hygiene. Working together with the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), this sub-
component will support Kwale county to improve the enabling environment for scale up and
sustainability of rural sanitation and hygiene, and will support Kwale County to strengthen the
programmatic conditions to implement Community-Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) and sanitation
marketing at scale, which will be reinforced by continued Behavior Change Communication (BCC).
The core objectives of the campaign are to create a need for improved sanitation among the target
audience and educate the target audience on improved sanitation options and hygiene (including
handwashing with soap).
In terms of infrastructure, Kwale County has no piped sewer system. The urban population relies on
septic tanks while pit latrines are used in rural areas. Sanitation services and hygiene practice in rural
areas that include Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS) services are provided by non-
governmental organizations with funding from respective development partners. Investments under
this sub-component will include construction of public sanitation facilities in selected schools and
a        health facilities in both rural and urban areas, in line with post 2015 targets and indicators. Additional
activities will include construction of at least one sludge treatment facility for management of sludge
from septic tanks and pit latrines in urban areas and public institutions. Preparatory work for these
activities will include the preparation of a sanitation/sewerage master plan cover Kwale urban and
rural areas under KWSCRP- 1, and the sewerage master plan for Kwale town being prepared by
CWSB under WaSSIP.
Sub-Component 2.3: Sustainable Livelihoods Improvement (US$ 5.5 million)
This sub-component seeks to improve livelihoods in Kwale County the "area of influence" of the
Mwache dam, defined as those areas of the Mwache watershed that are located in Kwale County,
through support to benefit-sharing and sustainable livelihood paradigms for the largely rural
communities in the area. Focus will be where required catchment conservation practices are not
sustainable per se, such as in steep slope and river bank crop cultivation, where alternative
livelihoods need to be supported. In these areas, the component will aim to develop alternative
livelihood activities for common interest groups currently dependent on the unsustainable use of
Page 4 of 16


﻿natural resources, focusing on new income-generating activities.
This component will adopt a demand-driven approach, whereby proposals will be sought from
communities in the treatment catchments and forest perimeters to invest in livelihood enhancing
U         micro-projects which support the natural resource base. These could include opportunities to
establish afforestation schemes, development of private sector/community partnerships for timber,
fuel-wood and/or fodder production, production/sale of seedlings, introduction of productivity-
enhancing techniques of ago-forestry or conservation farming, beekeeping, and other investments in
farm agriculture development will be supported.
Sub-Component 2.4: Irrigation Demonstration Project (US$ 3.5 million)
This sub-component will support the final preparation and implementation of a demonstration
irrigation project for about 100 ha. The activities will identify intervention strategies for irrigation
development and implementing different agricultural practices. The demonstration project will also
establish the viability of developing a larger (around 2000 ha) irrigation scheme in the area. This
information will allow the GoK to make a decision on how to best allocate the potential additional
supply of water available from Mwache dam in the future.
This sub-component will entail the construction of the irrigation and drainage (I&D) infrastructure;
agricultural support services; value chain and marketing linkages development; and participatory
irrigation management (PIM) through the Irrigation Water User Association (IWUA). The
demonstration phase will include the advance construction of one check dam with a capacity to
deliver 3 million cubic meters (MCM) of water annually, which will allow commencement of
irrigation activities even while the main dam is being constructed. The check dam will also serve a
dual purpose to hold, remove and reduce the sediment loads to the Mwache dam site. The
demonstration project is expected to test land tenure and use aspects, the market for the high value
crops, different irrigation technologies, and farmers ability to adapt to innovative technology and
capacity to pay for O&M costs.
0
Component 3: Project Management
Component 3 will support effective project implementation through the completion of KWSCRP-2.
o        Specifically, this component will finance the required office space, goods (e.g., vehicles), equipment
(e.g., computers), staff, consultant services, travel, training and operating costs that will allow for the
successful implementation of project activities. These responsibilities include project management
and coordination, procurement and financial management, project monitoring and evaluation
(including impact evaluation), social and environmental safeguards management and oversight, and
strategic project communications and outreach.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project is located in Coast Province in Kenya, Kwale district and spans between
Kasemeni and Mwavumbo locations, approximately 22 km west of Mombasa Island by road. The
dam is proposed to be constructed on Mwache River, which lies in undulating terrain, between sea
level and 300 metres above sea level and drains into the Indian Ocean through Mwache Creek at Port
Reitz south of Mombasa Island.
Mwache river basin covers an area of 2,250 km2 and lies between 14m to 300m above sea level and
Page 5 of 16


﻿exhibits gentle slopes in the upper regions and flat in the lower regions. The proposed dam site in the
sub-catchment is located near Fulugani village of Kasemeni Division in Kinango District and falls in
a straight stretch of the river Mwache located inside a gorge. The Mwache dam site and surrounding
area comprises of sand rock formation, considered to be sound and suitable for construction of any
O
U         type of dam
In general the project area has a bi-modal rainfall pattern with well drained loamy sand soils. The
long rainy season (long rain) starts in March and extends up to July. The short rainy season which
starts in October and extends up to December have less rain than long rain season. The annual rain is
about 1074 mm. The area experiences significant heavy flows during the wet season with notable silt
deposition and riverbed scouring from strong storm flows. The riverbed is characterized with pools
of stagnant water that are beneficial to the farmers, watering livestock as well as limited fishing.
Further downstream is the Mwache River estuary that begins from the Bonje Bridge into the dense
mangrove forest of Mwache Creek that gives way into the sea at Port Reitz.
The project area is homogeneous with respect to the social setting, vegetation cover and economic
characteristics. The physiography, however, varies over short distances from ragged and undulating
landscape to steep valleys towards the sea and flat zones to the north and west. Land gradient is one
of major land characteristic which plays an important role in determination of its suitability for
farming activities and type of irrigation in view of high erosion risk and low workability.
The site is characterized by a mixture of environmental features including forests, deep valleys, open
lands, cultivated lands, variety of reptiles and rodents, etc. There are also social and economic
features such as settlements, institutions, cultural sites, watering points, grazing areas and sand
harvesting locations on Mwache river.
With respect to social aspect, the project area is inhabited by the Durumas, a sub-tribe of the
Mijikenda and categorized as vulnerable and marginalized by the Constitution of Kenya. They are
mostly engaged in subsistence farming, fishery, livestock, sand harvesting, among others. Land
ownership in the project area is clan based, and this influences the settlement trends. Family
homestead clusters are generally distributed on all sides of the dam site, creating a significant
interaction and potential conflict with the dam components. Kasemeni of Kinango District (project
location) is among areas least developed in terms of infrastructure such as road network, electricity,
a         sanitation and water supply.
The RAP has estimated that approximately 4,250 people, constituting about 746 families/households
in 18 villages, would be resettled due to the construction of Mwache Dam.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Zarafshan H. Khawaja (GSURR)
Helen Z. Shahriari (GSURR)
John Bryant Collier (GENDR)
Hocine Chalal (GENDR)
Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes          Construction of the dam related infrastructure on
Page 6 of 16


﻿OP/BP 4.01                              river Mwache is likely to reduce environmental flow
downstream of the dam with negative consequences
on the productivity and ecological integrity of the
Mwache creek and its dependent biophysical and
socio- economic environment. Based on the
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) for the KWSCRP -1 an Environmental and
Social Management Impact Assessment (ESIA) has
been prepared for the project, which will be the basis
of an Environmental and Social Management Plan
that will prepare detailed measures to mitigate
identified impacts.
The ESIA has establish potential positive and
negative impacts, which include decreased water
quality due sedimentation; disruption of aquatic
habitat and ecological system downstream of River
Mwache.
Construction of the dam related infrastructure on
river Mwache is likely to reduce environmental flow
downstream of the dam with negative consequences
on the productivity and ecological integrity of the
Mwache creek and its dependent biophysical and
socio- economic environment. Based on the
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) for the KWSCRP -1 an Environmental and
Social Management Impact Assessment (ESIA) has
been prepared for the project, which will be the basis
of an Environmental and Social Management Plan
that will prepare detailed measures to mitigate
identified impacts.
The ESIA has establish potential positive and
negative impacts, which include decreased water
quality due sedimentation; disruption of aquatic
habitat and ecological system downstream of River
Mwache.
Since the Mwache dam is envisaged to bring 67.9
million cubic meters of water per year to Mombasa,
disposal of additional wastewater generated may
have environmental impacts. As a result, an ESIA
analysis, based on the ESMF for KWSCRP-1, will be
conducted for this additional wastewater in the
future, as needed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         Project activities related to dam construction may
Page 7 of 16


﻿lead to alterations in flow regimes of freshwater into
Mwache Creek, such as reduction in silt discharge,
which could cause changes in nutrient cycling in the
creek ecosystem effectively disrupting the marine
life trends and the associated productivity including
the mangrove development. Inundation of the area
can also change the ecological settings - biological
diversity, indigenous species of flora and fauna,
potential transformation of the ecological
characteristics due to invasive species including
vectors.
For this reason, the Natural Habitats policy is
triggered. The project will strive to retain the
ecological functions of the wetlands, which include
water purification, flood protection, habitat for
aquatic animal and plant species.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         Proximity of Mwache Forest and the associated
ecological importance as well as the climatic values,
is a factor that triggers the policy. Activities
proposed under Mwache Catchment Management
will involve promoting approaches to improve
sustainable land and water management in Kwale
and include afforestation of the catchment area to
reduce erosion and sedimentation of Mwache Dam.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         Although the project will not be financing pesticides,
support to development of an irrigation scheme
under Component 2 is likely to involve use of
different types of agrochemicals to control diseases
pests, and vectors. The project will promote the use
of integrated pest management approaches and seek
to reduce reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides.
An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) has
been prepared in accordance with the IPM
Framework for KWSCRP -1 to provide guidance on
the pest and pesticide. The IPMP provides guidance
on assessment of environmental and health risks
associated with the envisaged pesticide use and
integration of specific measures to these risks in the
project design.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         The project is likely to inundate cultural heritage
OP/BP 4.11                               sites/graves and /or encounter cultural resources
during the construction of the dam. The ESIA will
address impacts on physical cultural resources and
provide a cultural resources management plan,
including "Chance Finds". Guidance on addressing
chance finds for individual investment during project
Page 8 of 16


﻿implementation has been prepared as part of the
ESMF for KWSCRP-1.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         The project area is inhabited by the Durumas, a sub-
4.10                                    tribe of the Mijikenda and categorized as vulnerable
and marginalized by the Constitution of Kenya.
Thus, a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan
(VMGP) has been prepared is expected to be
disclosed in the country and Infoshop in August
2014. This document was prepared based on
Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework
(VMGF), which was prepared and disclosed under
KWSCRP-1 and in close consultation with the VMG.
A social assessment was undertaken to understand
sociocultural and other relevant social and economic
characteristics of Durumas and to ensure that the
grievance mechanisms reflect the availability of
judicial recourse and customary dispute settlement
mechanisms among the VMGs.
As with the RAP, the initial VMGP will cover all the
project components being financed by IDA whose
scope and activities are defined at this time. An
updated VMGP would incorporate the facilities
associated with the dam but not financed by IDA,
while specific VMGPs for sub-projects in water
supply, sanitation, catchment management and
livelihoods activities will be prepared once the exact
location and scope of these sub-projects are defined.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       The main sub-component under the project (Sub-
BP 4.12                                 Component 1.1) includes the construction of a dam
across Mwache River in Kasemeni Division of
Kinango District in Kwale County. This includes the
Mwache Dam and reservoir, related roads and
bridges, and the two check dams for sedimentation.
The main impacts on involuntary resettlement are
related to the dam, as these activities will require the
acquisition of the land and properties, impacting
assets and requiring physical resettlement of some of
the households.
Other project activities-particularly those pertaining
to water supply and sanitation investments, but also
possibly activities focusing on livelihoods and
catchment management-could also affect land and
assets.
To address the issues related to land acquisition and
Page 9 of 16


﻿resettlement, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has
been prepared and disclosed in the country and
Infoshop on August XX, 2014. This RAP was
prepared in accordance with the principles detailed in
the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), which
was prepared for the KWSCRP-1 and covers all the
components being financed by the IDA in this phase
of the project whose scope and activities are known
and defined at this time. This includes the Mwache
Dam itself (SC 1.1) as well as the 100 ha irrigation
pilot (SC 2.3).
Initial estimates for the dam and reservoir are that
about 4,250 people (746 families/households) in 18
villages would be displaced by the dam, requiring
resettlement. This figure is subject to confirmation of
the final design of the project. The figures for the
100 ha irrigation pilot are to be confirmed, following
completion of the RAP (expected by August 2014).
Safeguards documents for the facilities associated
with the dam (but not financed under the IDA loan)
-including the water treatment plant, pumping
stations, and transmission lines-would not be
included in the scope of the main RAP. However, the
RAP can be updated at a future date to incorporate
the impacts from these associated facilities, if
needed.
Specific RAPs for sub-projects in water supply and
sanitation (and, if applicable, for the catchment
management and livelihoods activities) will be
prepared once the exact location and scope of these
sub-projects are defined as part of implementation.
These specific RAPs will be based on the principles
of the existing RPF prepared under KWSCRP-1.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes         The proposed dam is a concrete gravity dam with a
height of about 78 m and with a reservoir capacity of
about 118 million m3. The dam is expected to supply
186,000 m3/day (67.9 MCM/year) for urban water
supply. An independent Dam Safety Panel of Experts
(DSPE) comprising dam design/construction,
geology/geotechnical and hydrology/sediment
experts has been established to review the concept,
design and construction of Mwache Dam. The DSPE
has held two missions in September 2013 and March
- April 2014, and has provided comments and
Page 10 of 16


﻿recommendations on the dam design, which will be
reflected in the final design.
Per OP/BP 4.37, four key Dam Safety Plans will be
prepared. These include (i) Quality Assurance and
Construction Supervision Plan; (ii) Instrumentation
Plan; (iii) Operation & Maintenance (O&M) Plan;
and (iv) Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP).
The Quality Assurance and Construction Supervision
Plan is currently under preparation, and is expected
to be completed by the finalization of appraisal. This
plan is being prepared as part of the preparation of
the Terms of Reference for the Owner's Engineer
(OE), whose consultancy will be process under the
ongoing Kenya Water Security and Climate
Resilience Project (KWSCRP-1). The
Instrumentation Plan will be finalized as a part of the
detailed design, and will be submitted to the DSPE
and World Bank for review. The final O&M Plan
and EPP will be prepared six months and twelve
months respectively prior to the first reservoir
impoundment during implementation. The outlines
for both of these documents have been prepared as
part of project preparation.
Projects on International   No          OP/BP 7.50 will not be triggered by the proposed
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    investment. The Mwache Dam is located on the
Mwache river, whose basin lies fully within Kenya's
borders.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No       OP/BP 7.60 will not be triggered by the proposed
BP 7.60                                 investment.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The long-term KWSCR Program is expected to have positive benefits through investments that
increase water storage for productive use and increase resilience to floods and droughts. However,
water resources development investments including infrastructure for bulk water supply (dam and
groundwater development), flood management, upstream catchment management, and
downstream productive water uses (irrigation and water supply development) may result in
adverse environmental and social impacts. Potential adverse impacts may include loss of land or
structures, loss of critical habitats, interruption to migratory patterns, displacement of people, loss
of access to areas for livelihood support and public safety issues. The selection process builds on
Kenya's legal framework for environmental management that is already in place and will underpin
Project implementation.
Page 11 of 16


﻿KWSCRP-2, which is financing the Mwache Dam and related infrastructure, has been assigned an
Environmental Assessment Category A. It triggers the following Safeguard Policies:
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01, Involuntary Settlement OP/BP 4.12, Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37, Pest Management OP/BP 4.09, Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10, Physical Cultural
O
Resources OP/BP 4.04, Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04, and Forests OP/BP4.36. A full
Environment and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Integrated
Pest Management Plan (IPMP), and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan have been
completed and disclosed both in country and through the World Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal
of the project.
Overall, the project is expected to have positive social benefits by improving the regular supply of
potable water to the coastal region, specifically Kwale and Mombassa Counties and improving the
livelihoods of communities surrounding Mwache Dams through local development and enhanced
agricultural production. Initial estimates for the Mwache dam and reservoir are that about 746
families (4,250 people) would be displaced by the dam, requiring resettlement. This figure is
subject to confirmation of the final design of the project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Construction of large dams provides ecological as well as social challenges even though the
ultimate facility is generally beneficial to the stakeholders and the country in general. Specific
impacts to be mitigated include loss of habitats and lands, degradation of land and water resources,
environmental degradation, and potential adverse impacts on health. Impoundment of large
volumes of water has implications on the upstream systems through shifting of ecosystem
boundaries upstream as a result of changes in flood regimes. At the dam site itself and the
inundated areas, implications ranges from slowed silt, nutrients and pollutant transportation rate to
downstream zones, potential loss and/or introduction of species (both plants and animals),
displacement of social and economic features and land use changes for the residual riparian
landowners. Finally, downstream impacts are associated with regulated flows of the affected
rivers/streams, shifting of species to upstream areas, safety risks and land use changes due to the
constant flows trends introduced by the dam.
O
The ESIA, RAP, IPMP, and VMGP prepared for KWSCRP-2 provide mitigation measures to
address potential negative impacts of the project. It is incumbent upon the MEWNR as
implementer of the the Project, and the Bank as financier, to ensure the mitigation measure
proscribed in the safeguards documents are implemented.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Mwache Dam has been selected as a priority source of water to meet demand and increase
water security for the coastal region as part of the Water Supply Master Plan for Mombasa and
Other Towns within the Coast Province, prepared under the Water and Sanitation Service
Improvement Project (WaSSIP). The Master Plan evaluated 5 development scenarios that included
different combinations of water resources. A multi-criteria analysis, consisting of four key
parameters (engineering, economics, environmental and social aspects, and political economy),
was used for comparison purposes. These scenarios considered several surface and ground water
alternatives to meet the demand for water in the region. The recommended scenario (Scenario
"B 1") includes three phases of development between 2015 and 2035, which would include water
supply from well fields (Baricho, Tiri), springs (Mzima, Marere), aquifers (Waambewni), and
dams (Mwache and Mkurumudzi). Phase 1 of Scenario "B 1" includes the development of Mwache
Page 12 of 16


﻿Dam.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The GoK has established the Environmental Management and Coordination Act (EMCA) of 1999,
which empowers the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) with an oversight
role on environmental compliance. In accordance with the EMCA, NEMA is responsible for
conducting annual environmental audits and carrying out due diligence on the projects that have
already undertaken EIAs, as well as those in the process of undertaking EIAs. MEWNR has been
implementing World Bank-funded projects, including KWSCRP-1, and has the necessary
structures in place for overseeing safeguard issues. However, overall capacity for implementation
of environmental and social safeguards policies is still low. Inadequate capacity to execute the
required social and environmental risk mitigation measures could lead to high negative social and
environmental impacts and undermine project results.
To mitigate this, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF), and a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework (VMGF) have
been prepared under KWSCRP-1. It applies to KWSCRP-2 and will guide project implementation
and preparation of site-specific environmental and social impact assessments and resettlement
action plans for specific project investments, particularly those being identified in components 2
and 3. The Project Management Unit (PMU), established under KWSCRP-1 will support the
executing agencies (CDA and CWSB) to prepare and supervise the implementation of
environmental and social instruments. The PMU includes social and environmental safeguards
specialists, and will be responsible for ensuring the application of social and environmental
frameworks (ESMF, VMGF and RPF) and supervising the implementation of safeguards
instruments.
For KWSCRP-2, the PMU has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, a
Resettlement Action Plan, a Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan, and an Integrated Pest
Management Plan for KWSCRP. While these instruments address the entire project, they focus
primarily on component 1, Mwache Dam and related infrastructure.
O
In order to enhance capacity of the PMU, CDA, and CWSB, training programs related to
preparation and the implementation of the Social and Environmental Management Plan, the
*           Resettlement Action Plan, and Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Plan will be provided. The
World Bank team will carry out close, field-based implementation support and supervision.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Potential stakeholders are found at throughout the coastal region and specifically in the Mwache
catchment, including WRUAs, farmers, municipalities, county governments, national ministries,
civil society, and others. The ESIA, RAP, and VMGP detail the stakeholder consultations
conducted to date as well as those to be carried out during and after project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Jun-2014
Page 13 of 16


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  15-Jul-2014
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    23-Jun-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Oct-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    04-Oct-2014
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-Oct-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    04-Oct-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Feb-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Feb-2013
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    13-Feb-2013
Comments: IPMP for KWSCRP-1 and the ESIA cover the anticipated PM issues for this project.
0
Disclosure dates are those of the IPMP that covers the Kenya Water Security and
Climate Resiliance Program.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
*         Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 14 of 16


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  ] No[X]    NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes[X]   No[        NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes X  No        NA
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[X] No[       ]   NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
O
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
0
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                    Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
Page 15 of 16


﻿Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader: Name: Gustavo Saltiel
Approved By
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)         Date: 11-Dec-2014
Advisor:
Practice Manager/    Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)      Date: 17-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 16 of 16


