                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7180
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                           Project ID:    P145617
                            Project Name:      PK Sindh Public Sector Management Reform Project (P145617)
                            Task Team          Zubair Khurshid Bhatti
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Jul-2014                        Estimated   05-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GGODR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (50%), General public administration
                                              sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (45%), Tax policy
                                              and administration (45%), Other accountability/anti-corru ption (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     279.00           Total Bank Financing:                  50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        217.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                50.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                     12.00
                              Total                                                                                     279.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to strengthen accountability and performance of public
                           finance in Sindh Province.


                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         3. Project Description
                         Lending Instrument
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed operation will be financed by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) loan of US$50
                         million to the Government of Sindh Province in Pakistan and will use a results-based financing
                         modality to support project implementation. Previous experience of use of this instrument has been
                         successful for difficult reforms in the Sindh Education sector. Lessons learned from the Sindh
                         Education Sector Project (P107300), as well as similar results-based SIL projects designed in Punjab
                         province and with the federal government and the Latin American region, will be incorporated into
                         the project design. It will include a large results-based component (US$ 40 million) which will be
                         linked to achievement of agreed-upon performance indicators (Disbursement-linked indicators, or
                         “DLIs”) and a smaller technical assistance component (US$ 10 million). The time horizon for this
                         operation is five years. The advantage of this approach is not only that it will ensure sustained
                         funding to priority programs and enable the achievement of identified policy objectives, but also that
                         it will contribute to developing a performance-based approach to public sector management in the
                         province. The TA component will complement the Eligible Expenditures Program (EEP) and
                         Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLI) part of the operation by providing the necessary capacity and
                         technology to achieve the identified development objectives. This approach also helps to address the
                         ownership, coordination, and authorizing environment issues by better aligning the incentives of the
                         different actors. Achievement of DLIs will help address the capacity challenges identified earlier.

                         The proposed IPF project design combines three critical and interrelated elements: (i) specific
                         Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) against which loan proceeds will be disbursed; (ii)
                         Disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) that establish a performance-based framework to measure
                         progress in sector reform implementation and to identify the operation’s contribution to the identified
                         development objectives; and (iii) technical assistance (TA) to support capacity building and
                         knowledge dissemination in the targeted areas. Credit proceeds will be disbursed to the Government
                         of Sindh against the execution of specific EEPs and the fulfillment of DLIs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Components

                         Component 1: Results-based financing to provide an incentive for achieving eligible PSM reforms
                         (US$40 million). Under the results based component, credit disbursements will reimburse
                         expenditures incurred by Sindh government in selected key budget line items referred to as EEPs.
                         The event and amount of project disbursements will be contingent on satisfactory achievement of
                         disbursement linked indicators. The EEPs include pay and allowances for departments of finance,
                         agriculture, irrigation, planning and development. The results-based component will include the
                         following four focus areas: Theses interventions will mainly focus on planning and development,
                         irrigation, education and agriculture departments in addition to the FD, Sindh Revenue Board, and
                         Sindh Procurement Regulatory Authority.

                         Increasing Tax Revenue Mobilization

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to increase collection of sales tax on services. It will support
                         the following three sets of interventions: firstly, institutional development of SRB, including
                         improved availability of resources to carry out reform activities, enhanced staffing, improved pre-
                         service and in-service training; increased automation for increased tax payers compliance and
                         facilitation; improved auditing practices; and structured coordination and communication among the


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         three tax collecting agencies; secondly, tax payer including communication, facilitation and
                         automation programs to build an affirmative tax culture; and promotion of evidence-led tax policy
                         and administration analysis; thirdly, improved management with improving monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         evaluation and increased transparency.

                         Enhancing Performance of PFM Systems

                         This sub-component aims to strengthen PFM systems by improving budget formulation and
                         execution processes and related oversight mechanisms. Interventions include: strengthening tools for
                         monitoring compliance and analysis; enhancing the predictability of availability of development
                         funds; improving debt management practices; and increased transparency in budget formulation and
                         execution.

                         Strengthening of Public Procurement Performance

                         This subcomponent aims to strengthen public procurement performance, transparency and
                         accountability to improve the timely delivery of government programs and efficient budget
                         management. The proposed interventions include: improving capacity of procurement professionals
                         with certification; improving performance monitoring and transparency with a MIS; and improving
                         competition, efficiency and transparency with an e-Government Procurement (“EGP”) system.

                         Improving Management of the Development Portfolio

                         This subcomponent aims to improve monitoring of the development portfolio. This subcomponent
                         will support the strengthening of the Monitoring and Evaluation Cell of the P&D department and
                         will improve information on: the identification of resource and other administrative bottlenecks in
                         the execution of the sectoral development programs to ensure flag raising and early intervention and
                         attention of senior officials of the department; the current state of the financial and physical
                         execution of each scheme to help improve development planning; the spatial understanding of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         spread of the development funds; the quality of construction and execution by regular photo
                         monitoring of schemes and also be seeking engagement of the beneficiaries. Interventions include:
                         the development of a full reporting system linking field supervision inputs with an online
                         management dashboard for improved delivery of the development portfolio; geo-tagging of
                         development schemes for improved spatial planning and quality of implementation; and seeking of
                         feedback of identified beneficiaries of selected schemes.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (TA) to support capacity building and institutional
                         strengthening associated with achievement of eligible PSM reforms (US$10 million). Technical
                         Assistance will be used to support achievement of results in all four eligible PSM reform areas. TA
                         will support capacity building and institutional strengthening activities related to improvement of tax
                         collection, PFM, procurement, and development monitoring. In particular, TA will fund activities to:

                         •        Support to the implementation of reform activities included in the Sindh Tax Reform Plan,
                         including: (a) ICT investments for internal business infrastructure; (b) analytical and programmatic
                         support to establish a new Tax Reform Unit (TRU) in the FD; (c) review critical aspects of Sale Tax
                         on Services (STS) administration; (d) conduct risk based tax audits in selective sectors; (e)
                         establishment of a state-of-the-art training facility in sales tax administration; and (f) initial studies
                         to increase tax morale in the province,.



                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                         •       Support the implementation of the Sindh Public Financial Management Strategy, including
                         (a) support for enhancing usage of the FMIS; (b) improving cash management mechanisms; (c)
                         trainings on usage of the FMIS reports; (d) support the preparation of the Budget Strategy Paper
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (BSP) and; (e) support to the preparation of “budget analysis paper.

                         •       Support the implementation of procurement reforms, including (a) developing and
                         implementing the e-procurement and MIS plans; (b) support in implementing training for building
                         procurement skills of procurement officials and; (c) overall support to SPPRA for their own capacity
                         building and strengthening their systems (implementing regulations, contract managements
                         guidelines etc.).

                         •       Support the management of the development portfolio, including (a) ICT based systems,
                         processes and dashboards and related capacity building activities; (b) photo-enforced monitoring;
                         and (c) proactive beneficiary feedback of government development schemes.

                         Efforts will be made to ut ilize an inclusive approach to capacity building and institutional
                         strengthening to ensure strong female representation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be located in Sindh province. No rehabilitation and/or construction works will
                         be conducted.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Miki Terasawa (GSURR)
                         Fouad Muhammad Khan (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               No. There are no civil works, rehabilitation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01                                              construction or physical works of any nature.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No potential loss or degradation of natural
                                                                               habitats
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No activities in areas with forest cover

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               No agriculture activity

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               No potential for impacts on physical, cultural
                          BP 4.11                                              resources
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               No known indigenous peoples living in the
                                                                               province
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               No resettlement or loss of livelihood envisaged
                          4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               No dam construction

                          Projects on International           No               Not applicable
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               Not applicable
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              NA
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              NA
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              NA
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              NA
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Pest management or physical cultural resources policies are not triggered.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?




                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Zubair Khurshid Bhatti
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)                 Date: 14-Oct-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
