                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8299
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Mar-2014, 28-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P144270
                            Project Name:      China Economic Transformation and Institutional Capacity Building (P144270)
                            Task Team          Chorching Goh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          26-Mar-2014                       Estimated   22-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPC                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (60%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Macroeconomic management (45%), Other public sector governance (15%),
                                              Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Social safety n ets (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      36.70           Total Bank Financing:                 35.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   1.70
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     35.00
                              Total                                                                                     36.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Project Development Objectives are to (i) inform China’s policy making and (ii) strengthen capacity
                           to implement priority reform areas articulated in China’s Five-Year Plans.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         Building on the experiences of previous technical cooperation projects, the proposed project intends
                         to establish a simpler and more manageable component structure to promote smoother
                         implementation. To allow flexibility to adapt to rapid changes in China’s economic and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         landscape in the coming years, the project is structured into two components: (A) Analytical outputs
                         (viz. knowledge product generation and dissemination); and (B) Implementation support, project
                         management, and capacity building activities.

                         Component A. Analytical Outputs (Knowledge products generation and dissemination)

                         Types of analytical outputs include sectoral research, technical studies, and topical reports. The
                         following six thematic areas will be priorities anticipated in China’s development:
                         1.      Fiscal and financial reform
                         2.      Economic restructuring
                         3.      Rural and urban integration
                         4.      Green economy
                         5.      Reforms in the innovation eco-system
                         6.      Public services (education, health care, and social welfare.)

                         Component B. Implementation Support, Project Management and Capacity Building Activities

                         Activities to be supported include:
                         1.       Various types of training and knowledge sharing (local/abroad)
                         2.       Overseas study in technical areas and scholarships for professional development of senior
                         officials in foreign universities/institutes.
                         3.       Secondment programs to international organizations
                         4.       Institution building (e.g., workshops, seminars, and courses)
                         5.       Information platforms and information systems Management
                         6.       Implementation support at the central and also subproject levels (e.g., financial management,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         budget oversight and disbursement, record keeping, procurement, monitoring and evaluation)

                         The project implementation is expected to take place over a five-year period.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         National wide.
                         Feng Ji ( EASCS )
                         Zeng Jun ( EASCS )
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)
                         Jun Zeng (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              See Section II.A(1)
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               According to the project design, the project will
                                                                                 not support policy studies in areas that indigenous
                                                                                 people communities as defined by the Bank’s
                                                                                 OP4.10 are collective attached to, or present in or
                                                                                 not.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               Due to the nature of the project, it is not expected
                            4.12                                                 that the project will support any civil works, or
                                                                                 directly lead to investment on any civil works.
                                                                                 Involuntary resettlement is not expected.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Environmental safeguards
                              The project mainly supports technical assistance activities on reform facilitation and policy
                              research. No civil works will be financed under the project. Samples of potential sub-projects
                              proposals (i.e. research/study) were reviewed by the Bank team. It is found that police
                              recommendations may have some environment and social impacts, especially on theme 3 (rural
                              and urban integration) and 4 (green economy). Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) is triggered.
                              The project is classified as a Category B project.

                             Social safeguards
                             Due to the nature of the project, it is not expected that the project will support any civil works, or
                             directly lead to investment on any civil works. Involuntary resettlement is not expected.

                              The project will be implemented in phases and the first batch is identified and selected during
                              project preparation. The first batch of project will not support policy studies in areas that
                              indigenous people communities as defined by the Bank’s OP4.10 are collective attached to, or
                              present in or not. However, it is not yet clear whether other batches of the project will support
                              policy studies in areas that IP communities are present in or not.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              See Section II A(1)


                                                                         Page 3 of 5
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Given that sub-projects will be identified and proposed for financing on an annual-basis during the
                           implementation, the project uses a framework approach, which is a flexible project design used
                           when the principles of a project and the criteria for sub-project selection are determined before
                           appraisal, but individual activities cannot be identified and appraised before the World Bank’s
                           Board of Directors approves the project. To support this framework approach, an Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and will be incorporated into the
                           Operation Manual.

                           The ESMF will guide the environment and social safeguard compliance during implementation of
                           sub-projects. All subprojects will be screened for potential environmental and social impacts, and
                           mitigation and management measures will be developed in line with the agreed ESMF.
                           Environmental and social impact screening, mitigation and management measures development
                           and implementation will follow these steps:
                           Step 1 - Screening for potential environmental and social safeguard impacts and proposing
                           safeguards documents required according to Chinese regulations and World Bank policies;
                           Step 2 -          Review of the safeguards screening and determination of the safeguards
                           documents;
                           Step 3 - Preparation of safeguard documents, consultation and disclosure;
                           Step 4 - Review and clearance of the safeguard documents, and supervision;
                           The ESMF defines the roles and responsibilities of the PMO, SMOs in implementation and
                           supervision of sub-projects. The PMO will be responsible for safeguards screening, for proposing
                           the categorization of each sub-project, and for supervising of the preparation of the safeguards
                           instruments. The choice of instruments for each sub-project depends on the nature and magnitude
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of its potential impacts. SMOs would be responsible for preparing all safeguards instruments.
                           Capacity building activities may include (i) engagement of experienced environmental and social
                           experts; and (ii) safeguards training on environmental and social safeguards policies, good
                           practices, implementation supervision and monitoring.
                           PMO, under the International Department of the Ministry of Finance, PRCs, have worked on
                           previous similar projects (e.g. TCC5). PMO is familiar with domestic environmental and social
                           safeguards policies which are close to Bank policies. A recent due diligence review of the
                           safeguards issues have been conducted for all sub-projects implemented under TCC5. It was
                           confirmed that no outstanding safeguard issues were found.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include central Governmental department, provincial and municipal/
                           prefecture level governments, academies, and sectors etc. During the project preparation of ESMF,
                           and the stages of the project design, public consultations were conducted. The ESMF specifies that
                           public consultation is requested for the safeguards documents for subprojects, where applicable.
                           The ESMF was locally disclosed on March 21, 2014 on the website of MOF and at the Bank
                           InfoShop on March 21,2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements



                                                                     Page 4 of 5
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Mar-2014
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              China                                                            21-Mar-2014
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Chorching Goh
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                     Date: 27-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Sudhir Shetty (SM)                             Date: 28-Mar-2014


                                                                      Page 5 of 5
