                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8482
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                             Project ID:    P144531
                            Project Name:     Climate Smart Staple Crop Production (P144531)
                            Task Team         Jiang Ru
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         28-May-2014                       Estimated   29-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Crops (80%), Agricultural extension and research (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         30.10               Total Bank Financing:    0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 25.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                         5.10
                              Total                                                                                    30.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The proposed project’s Project Development Objective (PDO) and its Global Environmental
                           Objective (GEO) is to demonstrate climate smart and sustainable staple crop production in Huaiyuan
                           County of Anhui Province and Yexian County of Henan Province.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         The proposed project will have four components: (a) CSA Demonstration; (b) Policy Development
                         and Knowledge Management; and (c) Project Management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: CSA Demonstration. This component will support (a) demonstration of GHG
                         emission reduction and efficient irrigation techniques; (b) demonstration of soil carbon sequestration
                         techniques; (c) new production technique pilots; (d) technical support for CSA demonstration; and
                         (e) monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

                         Component 2: Policy Development and Knowledge Management. This component will support (a)
                         development of national CSA policies, strategy and guidelines; (b) domestic dissemination of project
                         knowledge; and (c) promotion of international CSA cooperation.

                         Component 3: Project Management. This component will support project implementing agencies to
                         manage, implement, supervise and monitor project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project sites are in 12 villages of two townships of Huiyuan County of Bengbu
                         Municipality of Anhui Province and 28 villages of two townships of Yexian County of Pingdingshan
                         Municipality of Henan Province.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (GSURR)
                         Yiren Feng (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
                          BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             Yes

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              Among all 30 project villages, one Hui Minority
                                                                              village in Yexian County was identified during
                                                                              the Social Assessment (SA) process. It was
                                                                              confirmed that the villagers have their own
                                                                              religion and customs different from the dominant
                                                                              society. It was also noted that these villagers
                                                                              share the same political and economic institutions
                                                                              and use the same language (Mandarin) as the
                                                                              dominant society. As such, they are not qualified
                                                                              as Indigenous People per the definition of the OP
                                                                              4.10. Therefore, OP 4.10 is not triggered.


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                policy, and the project related irrigation activities
                                                                                will not rely on upstream dams or a dam under
                                                                                construction.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are overall positive as the project
                              will promote climate smart and sustainable crop production techniques and practices. Positive
                              environmental benefits include reduced emission of greenhouse gases, reduced uses and releases
                              of agricultural chemicals into the environment, and improved soil organic matters. In addition to
                              these environmental benefits, successful implementation of CSA demonstrations is expected to
                              generate positive social economic and health benefits to project farmers as these activities will
                              improve crop productivity, reduce the use and release of pesticides and fertilizers, and promote
                              professional crop production and pest management services.

                             Project preparation confirms that (a) there are no sensitive locations and social and environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                             issues; and (b) CSA demonstration activities under Component 1 trigger OP4.01 (Environmental
                             Assessment), OP4.09 (Pest Management), and OP4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                             OP4.01 is triggered as some negative and short-term construction impacts may result from
                             rehabilitation and construction of small-scale on-farm infrastructure (such as farm roads and
                             irrigation channels) financed by counterpart fund. The potential impacts (e.g. noise, air,
                             wastewater, solid wastes etc.) will be short-term, temporary, limited and local in nature, and can
                             be readily managed with cost effective mitigations measures.

                             OP4.09 is triggered as the project will promote IPM practices as part of CSA demonstrations and
                             will support the review and development of technical codes and standards related to applications
                             of agricultural inputs (including pesticides). Implementation of the project promoted IPM practices
                             will generate positive environmental and health impacts as such efforts will reduce the use of
                             pesticides.

                              OP4.12 is triggered as the small scale on-farm infrastructure construction may require limited land
                              acquisition.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              It is anticipated that successful implementation of this project will cause that climate smart and


                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                           sustainable crop production techniques demonstrated under the project will continue in the project
                           area after project completion. Demonstrated positive social, economic and environmental benefits
                           of these techniques will promote wider adoption and replication of these CSA techniques beyond
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the project area and thus promote sustainability of staple crop production in these areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment Assessment (OP4.01). The client has engaged the Environmental Assessment Center
                           of China Agricultural University to prepare the ECOPs for the project in accordance with the
                           Bank’s requirements. A set of ECOPs were prepared for existing farm road improvements, and
                           rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, leveling of crop lands, installation of power
                           lines and pumping stations, and tree planting around farm lands. The ECOPs will be included into
                           the bidding documents and civil work contracts. ECOPs are prepared based on national norms,
                           proven practices in other Bank financed projects and practices recommended in Environmental
                           Health and Safety
                           Guidelines of World Bank Group. They specify all aspects of environmental management issues
                           during the entire project cycle, including but not limited to, site preparation, construction dust
                           management, air pollution control, noise impact control, water pollution control, solid waste
                           management, public and workers’ health and safety, as well as public consultations on the
                           environmental issues. It also includes the reporting and supervision arrangements for the project
                           implementation. With proper implementation of the proposed mitigation measures, the potential
                           adverse impacts will be avoided, eliminated entirely, minimize or mitigated to an acceptable level.

                           Pest Management (OP4.09). The project will promote IPM practices at the project site and will
                           support the review and development of technical codes and standards related to applications of
                           agricultural inputs (including pesticides) for climate smart staple crop production. A PMP has
Public Disclosure Copy




                           been prepared for the production of rice, wheat and corn in the two project counties. It includes
                           major pest issues, pesticide management methods, monitoring and evaluation activities, and
                           capacity building for project stakeholders. It incorporates the existing good pest management
                           practices from the project areas, outlines IPM based pest control and management methods, and
                           recommends various application approaches under different conditions such as promoting IPM to
                           reduce the use of toxic pesticides (e.g. improvement of pest forecasting, use of bait lamps, crops
                           rotation, pest resistant varieties, and balanced fertilization), training and capacity building for local
                           farmers and governmental agencies, introducing and promoting biological and botanical
                           pesticides, and strengthening monitoring. It also provides a list of pesticides that may be used
                           under the project in compliance with World Health Organization's recommended categories.
                           Implementation of the training and monitoring programs was budgeted in the project cost.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12). A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the entire project
                           was prepared by a team from China Agriculture University, covering detailed procedures on
                           preparation, review and approval of potential land acquisition activities, institutional and financial
                           arrangements, and a monitoring plan for resettlement implementation.

                           MOA has obtained operational experience with Bank policies and procedures from its cooperation
                           with the Bank on the Eco-farming Project (P096556). The MOA department in charge of
                           preparation and implementation of this project has been working with UN agencies in

                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           implementing a GEF operation and an operation under the Montreal Protocol on Ozone Depleting
                           Substances. However, the department has no prior experience with Bank operation. Training on
                           Bank project management, including safeguards, has been provided to the department and its
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project management office during project preparation. Additional project management (including
                           safeguards) will be provided under project implementation to improve the PMO's capacity to
                           properly implement this project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Extensive public consultation was performed during the SA, RPF preparation and ECOP
                           preparation processes. During the preparation of ECOPs, consultation, meetings and interviews
                           were arranged with the project's key stakeholders of different genders, socioeconomic and
                           educational backgrounds, social groups, and occupations. In total, about 404 people were
                           consulted in the ECOPs Preparation process. Similarly, during the preparation of SA and RPF,
                           expert consultations, questionnaire survey, meetings and interviews were conducted with the
                           project's stakeholders of different gender, socioeconomic and educational backgrounds, social
                           groups, and occupations. In total, 280 households were surveyed in the process. During these
                           consultations, the project information was disclosed at project villages and government websites.

                           The majority of consulted stakeholders have expressed their strong support to the project. The
                           ECOPs/SA/RPF have incorporated countermeasures to address the concerns of consulted
                           stakeholders. Such countermeasures (for example, support to farmer field schools to align project
                           training to the farmers' actual needs, support cropland leveling and transformers to improve
                           irrigation efficiency) have been fully incorporated into the project design.

                           In accordance with the Bank’s information disclosure policy, on April 24, 2014 the ECOPs and
                           PMP were made available in the project areas and on the websites of the local government
                           agencies, and are accessible at PMO and PMUs. The ECOPs, PMP, SA and RPF were disclosed at
                           the World Bank InfoShop on May 8, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       10-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                             24-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       11-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                             24-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            24-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:     Name: Jiang Ru
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:       Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                        Date: 26-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
