                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8733
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Jan-2014, 25-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P129791
                            Project Name:      Fujian Fishing Ports Project (P129791)
                            Task Team          Shunong Hu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          23-Dec-2013                        Estimated   03-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Flood protection (70%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%),
                                               Ports, waterways and shipping (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (90%), Education for all (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       103.47           Total Bank Financing:  60.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   43.47
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      60.00
                              Total                                                                                     103.47
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce the vulnerability of fishing communities to
                           extreme weather events in selected counties in Fujian Province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is designed in line with “Site Selection and Construction Plan of Fishing Ports

                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         along Fujian Coast (2009 to 2018)”, prepared by Fujian Department of Ocean and Fisheries (FDOF)
                         and in line with the 12th FYP of Fujian Province. The Plan identified suitable locations for the
                         construction of fishing ports. The Project has been divided into the following four components: (1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Construction and Upgrading of Fishing Port Facilities; (2) Improvement of Early Warning and
                         Emergency Response System; (3) Training and Capacity Building; and (4) Technical Support. The
                         different components of the project will foster and integrated and sustainable approach for port
                         management and operations, combining structural measures (such as investments in port facilities
                         and associated infrastructure) with non-structural measures (such as the development of an early
                         warning and emergency preparedness plan, the upgrading of systems for data collection the provision
                         of training to build capacity, etc.). A detailed description of each component follows below.

                         Component 1. Construction and Upgrading of Fishing Port Facilities (US$85.68 million). This
                         component focuses on building the infrastructure to provide shelters to protect fishing vessels from
                         being lost or damaged during typhoons and seasonal storms. Under this component, breakwaters,
                         berthing facilities, embankments, land formation, trestle bridges, anchorages, accesses and port
                         cottages are to be built or upgraded in six fishing ports located in Beishuang, Dajing, Fenghuo,
                         Lu’xia, Sansha, and Wen’ao of Xia’pu County in Fujian Province. Breakwaters, anchorages and
                         embankments are built to provide greater shelter areas, which allow more vessels, as well as some
                         critical port equipment and local communities, to be protected. Berthing facilities, access roads and
                         trestle bridges are built to provide accesses not only for evacuation, but also for production. This
                         component also provides emergency shelters and port management cottages ashore for fishermen
                         displaced by storms and accommodation for port management teams. This will also allow the port
                         operation teams to coordinate the emergency response.

                         Component 2. Improvement of the Early Warning and Response System (US$2.14 million). To
                         ensure the effectiveness of an integrated emergency preparedness and response system, this
                         component seeks to improve the early warning system and includes two sub-components. Sub-
                         component 2.1 aims at developing an Early Warning and Emergency Response Plan (ERP), which
                         will generate comprehensive lists of actions to be carried out at different typhoon warning states and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by both the government and fishery communities. The ERP will also identify those individuals,
                         communities and institutions responsible for the execution of these actions, and the tools they need to
                         carry out the ERP. Sub-component 2.2 focuses on the equipment necessary to aid officers the
                         Emergency Response and Command Center of Xia’pu County (ERCC) in the decision making
                         process during an emergency and to take the necessary actions. The sub-component will therefore
                         focus on the identification of suitable hardware, software and communications systems to
                         supplement or replace the current installed in the ERCC. In addition this component will determine
                         the basic specifications for communications required by each fisherman’s vessel to receive warnings
                         and position of storm and its track. Under this sub-component, a rescue vessel and a rescue vehicle
                         will also be provided for emergency rescue operations. The assessment to identify the necessary
                         hardware and software will take place during the preparation of ERP.

                         Component 3. Training a nd Capacity Building (US$8.43 million). To further ensure the
                         effectiveness of emergency preparedness system and awareness of fishermen’s skills to respond to
                         the emergencies, this component will focus on (i) broadening access to training for fisherman and
                         improving the quality of its delivery, (ii) facilitating the sector’s transformation from coastal to
                         marine fishing through the provision of the required additional skills, (iii) increasing the
                         understanding and compliance with safety and emergency procedures, and training fishermen of
                         required checklist of emergency preparedness actions to be followed in event of an impending storm,
                         and (iv) facilitating the safe production and sustainable development of the fishing industry. To

                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         achieve this, the component will have three sub-components as follows: 3.1 Capacity Building for
                         Administrators and Teachers, 3.2 Developing and Updating of Curricula, Textbooks and Delivering
                         of Training and 3.3 Upgrading of Facilities and Equipment. The achievement of these aims will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contribute to the overall PDO of this project as better trained fishermen will contribute to the better
                         functioning of the sector, and the implementation of an early warning and emergency preparedness
                         system.

                         Component 4. Technical Support and Project Management (US$2.22 million). This component,
                         delivered largely through the provision of technical assistance to the County, is designed to ensure
                         the quality project implementation through enhancing both project management skills and the day-to-
                         day management capacity of PMOs and implementation agencies at all levels. Four sub-components
                         are designed to be implemented under this component: 4.1) Project Management Consultancy
                         Services to assist the PMOs and PIUs in project implementation through the services of reviewing
                         designs and procurement documents, and preparing semi-annual progress reports; 4.2) Domestic and
                         Overseas Study Tours to build up the capacity of staff of PMOs and PIUs; 4.3) Port Management
                         Consultancy Services to develop a port management manual to enhance routine fishing ports
                         management capacity, as well as to help in the successful implementation of Component 2,
                         Improvement of the Early Warning and Response System; and 4.4) Independent External Monitoring
                         (funded by domestic funds) to monitor the implementation of RAP and EMP. This component will
                         ensure that all the project components are successfully delivered.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will support the construction and upgrading of six fishing ports located in Xiapu County,
                         the northeast of Fujian Province. Xiapu County has a total area of 1,716 km2 and a population of
                         more than 530,000 people. The climate along the coastal area of the province is semitropical—hot in
                         summer but cool in winter. Summer is dominated by a monsoonal (rain-bearing) tropical airflow
                         from the sea. Rainfall increases from the coast to the western mountains and averages between 50
                         and 80 inches (1,270 and 2,030 mm) a year. There is some precipitation in winter, which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         occasionally falls as snow in the northwest. The coast is subject to typhoons during late summer and
                         early autumn.

                         The six fishing ports are natural shelter waters developed over a long history with fishing villages
                         nearby. Four are located on the continental coastline, while two are on small islands. Depending on
                         the scale, each port serves one or more villages.

                         The project will also support the building of a training center for the Fujian Ocean Technical School
                         in Minhou County, a suburb of Fuzhou City.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Songling Yao (EASCS)
                         Peishen Wang (EASIN)
                         Ning Yang (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This is a Category A and a full environmental
                          BP 4.01                                             assessment was conducted. An EIA and EMP
                                                                              were prepared for Component 1, and an ECOP


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                                                         was prepared for physical activities under
                                                                         Component 3. All EA instruments were disclosed
                                                                         and public consultations were conducted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         according to OP4.01 requirements.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The project financed fishing ports are located
                                                                         along the coastal area, while one port (Wen’ao) is
                                                                         in a reserve. The potential impacts on marine
                                                                         ecology and natural habitats were analyzed.
                                                                         Mitigation and compensation measures were
                                                                         identified and included in EMP, and designs were
                                                                         adapted to prevent and minimize the conversion
                                                                         or degradation of critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not cause negative impacts on the
                                                                         quality of any forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve the procurement and
                                                                         use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           A tomb and a temple were identified in the
                         BP 4.11                                         vicinity of construction site in Dajing Fishing
                                                                         Port. Precautionary measures have been taken to
                                                                         avoid and mitigate potential impacts. PCR
                                                                         precautionary measures and chance-find
                                                                         procedures are included in the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            Based on available information, no ethnic
                                                                         minority villages are found present in the project
                                                                         areas. The social team also conducted a detailed
                                                                         screening that confirmed there are no ethnic
                                                                         minority villages present. Therefore, OP 4.10 is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project will require acquisition of land and
                         4.12                                            area in the relocation of aquaculture activities, as
                                                                         well as resettlement in six villagers in Xiapu
                                                                         County and use of land allocated by local
                                                                         government for a Training Center. Land
                                                                         acquisition is mostly related to access roads,
                                                                         which will also serve as emergency evacuation
                                                                         routes, borrow areas and the training center. In
                                                                         total, the resettlement includes acquisition of 207
                                                                         mu of land and the relocation of an area of 276
                                                                         mu used for aquaculture, as well as relocation of
                                                                         four small enterprises. So the OP 4.12 is
                                                                         triggered.

                                                                         The PMO, with assistance from Hohai University,
                                                                         prepared a Resettlement Plan, including RPF, and
                                                                         reviewed the procedures followed for the land
                                                                         acquired before preparation started.



                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project does not involve any dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                 The project does not involve any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              This is a Category A project. A full Environmental Assessment (EA) was carried out during
                              project preparation. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental Management
                              Plan (EMP) were prepared for Component 1, and Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) were
                              prepared for physical activities under Component 3. A social assessment and Resettlement Action
                              Plan (RAP) were prepared for the project. The World Bank Group Environmental, Health, and
                              Safety (EHS) Guidelines were incorporated into the EA and EMP.

                             OP4.01 Environmental Assessment
                             Scoping of environmental and social issues was carried out through detailed analysis of project
                             activities, baselines studies and alternative analysis. The nature and scale of proposed activities in
                             each fishing port was analyzed based on existing natural and social conditions and needs.

                             The EA baseline study covers about 2,000 km2 of marine and land area, including proposed port
                             infrastructure construction sites and ancillary facilities such as borrow pits, access roads and
                             disposal sites. Social assessment analyzed the socio-economic impacts of the project and, in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             particularly impacts on the livelihood of fisherman and cultural resources. A special study was
                             conducted for the Fuying Island Ecosystem Protection Area where the Wen’ao Class 2 fishing port
                             is located. Fishery is the main economic activity in the area, but with declining fish stock, catching
                             has been restricted over the past decades and aquaculture has gradually increased. There are some
                             villages located within the protection area, and marine and coastal habitats have been impacted by
                             intensive human activities over a long history. Nutrients levels in the sea are slightly higher than
                             the required quality standards for fishery water, which is common along Fujian’s coastal area, The
                             sediment, however, does not present hazardous characteristics.

                             The project is expected to have significant positive social-economic benefits by providing
                             sheltered area for the fishing boats and reducing vulnerability of fishing communities. Potential
                             environmental and social impacts related to the construction of infrastructure and operation of
                             ports, including: 1) impacts on marine hydrodynamics, siltation and erosion processes; 2) impacts
                             on marine and terrestrial habitats and water quality; 3) increasing disposal of waste from boats,
                             ports and other sources; and 4) disturbance of aquaculture and fisherman livelihoods, labor influx
                             into the project area, navigation safety, noises, etc.

                             While infrastructure investments are limited compared to commercial port, the project area is
                             considered ecologically sensitive as it involves fishery waters, marine ecosystems, natural habitats,
                             and protection and scenic areas. The EA have addressed these environmental and social issues


                                                                        Page 5 of 12
                         thoroughly, with particular attention being given to the impacts of Sansha Central Fishing Port and
                         Wen’ao Class 2 Fishing Port. In the case of Sansha Central Fishing Port, the EA also considered
                         indirect and cumulative impacts associated with fishing sector and linkages with the development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Sansha Township. The spoil from constructing the breakwater foundation in Sansha, about 1.6
                         million m3, will be used for 34ha of land reclamation adjacent to the project activities. Lvxia Class
                         2 Fishing Port will dredge about 13,000m3 of materials from the dock foundation that will be used
                         for 7.5ha of land reclamation. The remaining four Class 2 fishing ports are only used for
                         offloading and transfer of fish and do not require dredging nor spoil disposal.

                         Hydrodynamic models were used to configure the layout of breakwaters and docks and help
                         minimize impacts on sedimentation and erosion pattern, and ensure navigation safety. The existing
                         borrow pits and access roads will be used where possible, to minimize impacts on terrestrial
                         ecology and local communities. The impacts on water quality and benthic organisms in both inter-
                         and sub-tidal zones are limited, and mitigation measures can bring them to acceptable levels.
                         Social impacts and mitigation measures were developed through careful assessment and
                         consultation with potentially affected fishermen, aquaculture owners and relevant institutions.

                         For Component 3 the building of a training center, anticipated environmental impacts are mostly
                         associated with construction activities, such as soil erosion, nose and dust. The impacts are
                         assessed and considered limited. ECOPs were prepared with adequate measures to mitigate the
                         impacts.

                         OP4.04 Natural Habitats
                         The proposed physical activities will affect inter- and sub-tidal zone. In total, the project, including
                         port infrastructures and the land reclamation will permanently take 72 hectare inter- and sub-tidal
                         zone, which potentially will result in loss of about 18 ton of benthic organisms. Construction
                         activities that result in sediments suspension and explosion (which is only used in Lvxia Fishing
                         Port) will potentially cause temporary loss of indicator species, i.e. 4.84*107 fish eggs, 4.88*107
                         juvenile fishes and 16.19 ton fish and shrimps. This temporary loss can be recovered naturally
Public Disclosure Copy




                         within 1-2 years.

                         Of particular concern is the Fuying Island Ecosystem Protection Area where the Wen’ao Class 2
                         Fishing Port is located by a village which has a population of some 700 people. The reserve has a
                         total area of 8,702 ha (including Fuying Island, 4 small Islands and adjacent marine area). It was
                         officially established in 2005 with an aim to protect the island’s ecosystem, and, especially, the
                         gooseneck barnacle, Pollicipes, locally called Turtle Foot. The gooseneck barnacles are common
                         along the East and South China Sea, living in rock crevices in inter-tidal zone. It is not included in
                         national or international lists of endangered or rare species by, such as the IUCN Red List.
                         However, it is considered high quality seafood and collected regularly by villagers. Infrastructure
                         investments in Wen’ao only include the construction of 445m of breakwater that will affect a 3.1
                         ha of inter- and sub-tidal zone and result in an estimated loss of 1.6 kg barnacles. This is minimal
                         loss of habitat and species if compared to the estimated 20tons of barnacles in the Protection Area.

                         The Sansha Central and Fenghuo Class 2 Fishing Port will use existing quarries, while the
                         remaining three fishing ports of Lvxia, Wen’ao and Beishuang will need new quarries. These
                         quarries were carefully selected, taking into account environmental, social and economic impacts
                         at the sites and along the transport routes. A water and soil conservation plan has been developed
                         and included in the EMP to rehabilitate these sites upon project completion.



                                                                     Page 6 of 12
                         On the Dongchong Penisula Scenic Area, two stretches of sand beaches near the construction sites
                         of Dajing and Luxia Fishing Ports were identified as scenic spots. The project will not directly
                         impact the beaches and tourism activities. Consultation with responsible authorities and local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities were conducted to discuss the use of above-mentioned marine area, Fuying Island
                         Ecosystem Protection Area and terrestrial areas during EA preparation and approvals were
                         obtained from authorities and communities.

                         To address residual impacts on natural habitats, the project includes an ecological compensation
                         program which consists of the creation of a 40 ha artificial reef near the Dajing Fishing Port, to
                         serve as a new habitat for marine life. It is noted that the project sea areas are traditionally and
                         legally designated as fishery waters. The artificial reef will well serve the objective of restoring
                         and augmenting the ecological service functions that may be lost due to the loss of inter-tidal zone
                         caused by the project. According to the plan, this reef will have an estimated volume of 16,000m3
                         and increase fish harvesting by 160 tons, significantly outweighing the losses of habitat as a result
                         of the project. This compensation plan has been budgeted and included in the EMP. Xiapu has
                         gained experience implementing similar ecological compensation measures since 2011.

                         Due to the limited scale of infrastructure investments, the area of influence of the project is
                         limited. The project will not impact any known breeding, wintering, feeding, spawning ground or
                         migratory channel of marine species and birds. The construction activities in the Fuying Island
                         Reserve will not result in significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. With
                         the ecological compensation plan properly implemented, the residual impacts on natural habitats
                         can be adequately offset.

                         OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources
                         During EA preparation, a cultural relics survey was conducted. No Cultural Relics Protection Unit,
                         as defined by the Chinese law, was identified in the project area. Through further assessment and
                         consultations with local communities, a single tomb and a temple were found in the vicinity of
                         construction sites of Dajing Fishing Port. The tomb was built in the 1940’s and belongs to the Liu
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Family. The temple was used by local fisherman regularly to pray for safety on sea. Based on the
                         consultations, it was agreed to shift the alignment of seawall to avoid impacts on the tomb and
                         temple. Precautionary mitigation measures during construction have been agreed on with the local
                         communities and included in the EMP. Chance-find procedures have been included in the EMP.

                         OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
                         The project will require acquisition of land and relocation of aquaculture activities, as well as
                         resettlement activities in six villages in Xiapu County. An RAP with a RPF was prepared to
                         address the resettlement impacts, with technical assistance from Hohai University, an experienced
                         consultant on involuntary resettlement in China. The resettlement impacts are limited, not
                         requiring the relocation of any household and only the acquisition of 207 mu of land, and an area
                         of 276 mu used for aquaculture, and relocation of four small enterprises. A total of 274 people will
                         be directly affected by the project in six villages. The RP provided details on resettlement policies,
                         procedures and reporting requirements that have to be followed during project implementation.
                         Main restoration measures cover cash compensation, relocation of aquaculture activities, and
                         social assurance program. A due diligence review of land acquisition in Phase I of Sansha Port and
                         Provincial Training Center was conducted. Sixty five mu of collective land and area of 12 mu used
                         for aquaculture were affected by Phase I of Sansha Port expansion, and three mu of collective land
                         for the training center were acquired. The review concluded that affected people were fully
                         compensated and restored, and there are no any pending issues.

                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                           The training center in Minhou County will be built on public land allocated by the local
                           government, and there are no unresolved resettlement issues based on the result of a due diligence
Public Disclosure Copy




                           review.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           At a large scale, the six fishing ports are dispersed in Xiapu sea areas and far from each other, the
                           construction and operation of these ports will unlikely cause overlapping or cumulative impacts.
                           This is evident from the mathematical modeling of pollution dispersion scope.

                           At individual fishing port level, the EA assessed the cumulative impacts with considerations of
                           other major development activities nearby that are implemented or being planned to be
                           implemented in the foreseeable future, as well as indirect impact potentially induced by the
                           project.

                           In Sansha Township, the impacts of the project have been analyzed alongside the Sansha Central
                           Port Phase I Project and urban development plans. The cumulative and induced impacts assessed
                           include marine habitat loss, port siltation and water quality deterioration. The Sansha Central Port
                           Phase 1 Project was approved in 2011 and has been partially implemented. The Bank financed
                           activities in this port are considered an expansion of Phase I, but no further port expansion
                           activities are envisaged in the future. Due diligence review of EA and resettlement aspect of the
                           Phase 1 concluded the assessment and mitigation measures comply with national regulations. The
                           Phase 1 project includes a 57.25 ha reclamation area, of which 33.8 ha will use the spoil from the
                           breakwaters foundation and material from an existing commercial quarry. The reclaimed land will
                           be used to expand port operation and management facilities, a fish processing plant, municipal
                           infrastructure such as a wastewater treatment plant.

                           As a result of land reclamation, about 57.25 ha of inter-tidal and sub-tidal habitats will be lost and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           there will be an increase of wastewater discharge, and potential of accelerated siltation. To
                           compensate for the loss of habitats, an ecological compensation plan has been prepared, which
                           includes the creation of artificial reefs to create new habitats for marine life. The population of
                           Sansha Township is expected to increase from 34,400 people to 100,000 in 2030, producing
                           120,000m3 per day. A modern wastewater treatment plant will be in place to treat the wastewater
                           and ensure discharge compliance. In the short term, wastewater from port washing, fish processing
                           and other activities will be collected and treated through wastewater facilities included in this
                           Bank-financed project. Analysis of the combined discharge from the port’s and the township
                           wastewater treatment plants, indicate that sea water quality in the area will comply with applicable
                           standards. Siltation will stabilize in 10 to 15 years, by when the navigation depth will still be
                           adequate for safe navigation, and not requiring any dredging. The EMP includes a stakeholder
                           communication and engagement plan to ensure decision makers and communities are aware of the
                           ongoing developments, environmental and social impacts, and management plans.

                           The EA examined potential impacts of increasing fish offloading and transportation, as well as
                           processing waste on the surrounding environment, especially the ocean. Only Sansha Central
                           Fishing Port has fish processing facilities, while the others only have very basic facilities to
                           offload, temporary storage and transportation of fish. The EA includes an assessment of potential
                           impacts associated with increased wastewater and basic water treatment facilities will be financed
                           by the project. The conclusion is the impacts on ocean can be effectively mitigated.


                                                                      Page 8 of 12
                           Although the project is not supporting any economic or fishing activities directly, the EA included
                           an assessment of potential impacts of increased fishing over time. The Chinese and Fujian
Public Disclosure Copy




                           province have enacted policies, established institutions and enforced measures to restrict fishing
                           and help restore fishery resources. China has adopted a limit on the number and capacity of fishing
                           vessels since 1987. The latest ordinance of the Ministry of Agriculture indicates that during the
                           12th Five-Year Plan (2010-2015), the number and capacity of fishing boats in 2015 should not
                           exceed the number and capacity in 2010. Fujian Province has made continuous efforts and enacted
                           policies to restrict fishing, implement regular moratoriums on fishing, and promote public
                           campaigns. In 2013, the Province has issued a plan to further strengthen its enforcement capacity
                           and curb overfishing by 2020. Given the overall policy environment, existing enforcement
                           capacity and the scope of investments of this project, the impacts on fishery resources are expected
                           to be very limited.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Comprehensive alternative analysis was conducted during preparation of feasibility study and EA
                           preparation, including without project scenario, port configuration and layout and construction
                           techniques and materials.

                          The project is necessary in view of the fact that the project area is regularly affected by typhoons
                          and other climate disasters. Economic losses and reconstruction costs are substantial. The project
                          is expected to expand safer shelter areas for boats and reduce vulnerability of ports and
                          communities.

                          Models were used to examine the impacts of port layouts on water flows, erosion, and
                          sedimentation and navigation safety. For each port, three alternative layouts were analyzed. The
                          study shows sedimentation within each fishing port will happen and stabilize over 10-15 years.
                          Under all selected options, the navigation depths will continue to be adequate for safe berthing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          navigation, so no need for maintenance dredging. Changes in tidal speed change won’t impact
                          navigation safety.

                           In terms of construction techniques and materials for breakwaters, the four Class 2 Fishing Ports
                           and Luxia Class 1 Port will use packing sedimentation by throwing stones, while the Lvxia Class 1
                           will also use some blasting. Sansha Central Fishing Port will use excavation method. The methods
                           were selected based on the depth of sediments, impacts on environment and people, and overall
                           costs. The excavation option in Sansha was selected above blasting due to the nuisance for densely
                           populated villages around the port.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project owner engaged Fujian Provincial Environmental Science Institute (FESI), a Class A
                           EIA institute accredited by Ministry of Environmental Protection to prepare the EA. The FESI
                           prepared Bank-financed Fujian Meizhou Bay Channel Improvement Project during2011-2012. A
                           stand-alone EMP and ECOPs were prepared for Components 1 and 3 respectively. The EMP
                           includes implementation arrangements detailing the responsibilities and roles of each agency and
                           stakeholder, specific mitigation plans, ECOPs, monitoring plan, ecological compensation plan,
                           public engagement plan, capacity building and EMP implementation budget. The project owner
                           will engage an Environmental Management Consultant (EMC) to help manage the implementation
                           of EMP during project implementation.

                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                          The RAP/RPF provided details on resettlement policy procedures and requirements that will have
                          to be followed during project implementation, including compensation rates, mitigation measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                          to restore livelihoods, and institutional and monitoring arrangements. Main restoration measures
                          cover cash compensation, relocation of aquaculture activities, and social assurance program. Due
                          diligence review on previously completed land acquisition activities was conducted and found
                          acceptable with no pending issues.

                          A commitment letter from Xiapu County government on fully financing and exactly implementing
                          the prepared RAP/RPF was provided to the Bank on Sept 30, 2013 after local disclosure of the
                          RAP/RPF, and further a resettlement information booklet will be distributed prior to the project
                          implementation commencement.

                          A resettlement management system with proper staff and resources will be established prior to
                          resettlement commencement according to the RAP/RPF, to internally monitor the resettlement
                          progress and report semiannually to the Bank. A resettlement director will be appointed separately
                          in the County PMO and Investment Company to be responsible for the resettlement related
                          assignment. And an experienced external resettlement monitor will be engaged according to the
                          RAP/RPF to ensure regularly monitoring and reporting. Further, the training program in the RAP/
                          RPF will be conducted as early as possible to ensure capacity building.

                           Internal and external resettlement monitoring arrangements are in place and detailed in the RAP/
                           RPF, which cover the monitoring indicators, monitoring frequency, qualification and role of
                           independent monitoring consultant.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the project preparation, two rounds of public consultation were conducted. The project
                           owner and EIA institute disclosed all information and organized public consultation activities such
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as: surveys, interviews and public meetings in project counties, townships and villages. People
                           consulted included potentially affected villagers, local governments and agencies. Their comments
                           and suggestions were incorporated into project design and the EA. Full draft EA was disclosed on
                           the websites of FESI and Xiapu County and county governments disclosed hardcopies on
                           September 30, 2013. Newspaper announcement of the disclosure was made in Mindong Daily.
                           The English version EAs, including EIA, EMP, ECOPs and EA Summary, were disclosed at the
                           World Bank InfoShop on November 11, 2013. Regarding the social safeguards, the RP describes
                           in detail the extensive consultation activities during the preparation process, as well as a plan
                           during implementations. Stakeholder concerns and needs were integrated in the project design and
                           the resettlement plan.

                          A grievance redress mechanism was designed in the RAP/RPF, including a process and a
                          grievance record table, in which grievances can be filed both orally and in writing. The process
                          started from village and neighborhood committee level, can be elevated to county, city level if
                          they are not satisfied with the resolution at the lower level. Complainer also could file their cases
                          in court if not satisfied with the resolution by the project authority. All grievances and their
                          resolution will be recorded. This mechanism has been disclosed to the local population and will be
                          further disseminated through the Resettlement Information Booklet.

                          Relevant information on the project social aspects was distributed among the local communities


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           during the SA and RAP/RPF preparation. The prepared SA and RAP/RPF were disclosed locally
                           in Chinese on September 27, 2013 and the English versions of the documents were submitted to
                           the World Bank’s InfoShop on November 11, 2013.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      02-Jan-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            27-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?




                                                                   Page 11 of 12
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Shunong Hu
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                                Date: 23-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)                              Date: 25-May-2014




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
