                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC7796

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cote d'Ivoire                     Project ID:      P143332
                            Project Name:       CI- Productive Social Safety Net (P143332)
                            Task Team           Azedine Ouerghi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           23-Feb-2015                       Estimated        28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GSPDR                             Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         50.00                Total Bank Financing:        50.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     50.00
                              Total                                                                           50.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           24.     The project development objectives (PDO) are to (i) provide income support to poor
                           households in selected regions/areas, and (ii) support the country build key elements of a national
                           safety net system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will have three components: (i) cash transfer and accompanying measures for poor rural
                           areas; (ii) laying the foundations for a basic national safety net system and (iii) project coordination
                         and management. The total IDA allocation for the intervention is USD 50 million, allocated as
                         follows:
                         •       Cash transfer and accompanying measures in rural areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Laying the foundations for a basic national safety net system
                         •       Project management and coordination

                         Component 1: Cash transfers and accompanying measures for poor rural areas

                         This component will support the development and implementation of a cash transfer program to
                         serve as one of the cornerstones of Cote d’ Ivoire’s safety net.

                         Sub-component 1.1 – Cash Transfers

                         The cash transfers will support poor households in rural areas with young children up to 15 years of
                         age. The payments will be made on a regular basis to allow beneficiaries to use the transfers to
                         stabilize their food consumption and, indirectly, to encourage regular health check-ups, proper
                         nutrition and school attendance for these children. A top-up transfer conditional to maintaining girls
                         at school (where supply is adequate) will be piloted in areas where girls drop-out is high. The
                         program will use a cascading targeting mechanism that combines regional (regions with high poverty
                         incidence), income (using a simplified PMT to identify the poorest) and a community validation.

                         Sub-component 1.2 – Accompanying Measures

                         The program will include accompanying measures to sensitize households (beneficiaries and non-
                         beneficiaries in target areas) about the importance of sending children to school, particularly girls,
                         the systematic registration of children in the civil registry, the completion of regular vaccination
                         schedules, proper nutrition especially in the first 1,000 days of child's life, psychosocial stimulation
                         and awareness about disability. The disability measures would, in particular, account for the specific
                         needs and rights of PWD, major causes of disability, and disability prevention. The ultimate goals are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) to change public perception of PWD, moving from seeing PWD as vulnerable or harmful people
                         in need of charity or people that should be excluded from the community, to people with rights who
                         can fully participate in the country’s development process, (ii) to educate people about disability
                         major causes and prevention, since the majority of disabilities is acquired during the lifetime as a
                         result of diseases, wars, car accidents, etc. and (iii) to start creating an enabling environment by
                         removing basic barriers starting with barriers resulting from societal attitudes and discrimination.
                         The accompanying awareness measures will be run at the household, community and government
                         levels. This component will also help prepare policy notes and undertaking feasibility studies,
                         strengthening the data collection mechanisms, and building key stakeholders’ capacities in the
                         country.

                         Component 2: Laying the foundations for a basic national safety net system

                         This component will assist the country in designing and developing operational building blocks that
                         can be used for coordinating safety net programs and increasing their effectiveness through a
                         systemic approach. The objective is to contribute to the establishment of a long-term effective and
                         sustainable (institutionally, politically and financially) system of safety nets anchored in the national
                         social protection strategy. An important aspect of the proposed system will be the capacity to expand
                         and adjust the safety net in response to shocks by: (i) increasing the value of the transfer given to
                         current beneficiaries; and (ii) expanding the cash transfer program to additional beneficiaries, albeit
                           for a shorter period of time than for the regular beneficiaries. Because developing, testing,
                           implementing and updating systems takes time, this component will be implemented over the whole
                           project period.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3: Project management and coordination

                           This component will support the management and evaluation of the overall project. It will finance
                           project management, coordination, and monitoring and evaluation activities related to the first two
                           project components. In particular, this component would support impact evaluation of the cash
                           transfer program for learning more about what particular aspects of cash transfer programs are
                           important for improving and sustaining human development outcomes in Cote d’Ivoire. Very few
                           experiences and impact evaluations do exist in the country. The project will be the opportunity to
                           assess the impact of this tool on human development and poverty alleviation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project does not involve activities with environmental and social safeguards impacts.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         No
                           OP/BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09          No

                           Physical Cultural Resources      No
                           OP/BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP         No
                           4.10
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/     No
                           BP 4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project is expected to be category C, with no special studies needed. However, if the project is
                                      recategorized at PCN review, all necessary studies would be completed before Appraisal.

                                      Social (including Safeguards)

                                      The project is expected to have a positive social impact by improving household income and
                                      behavior related to nutrition and preventative health practices in targeted communities. On the
                                      basis of pre-determined criteria, the project will target the poorest and most vulnerable
                                      communities, specifically by providing cash transfers as well as by providing community
                                      awareness related to nutrition and other aspects of human capital and essential family practices for
                                      longer-term social benefits to adults and children in the area. As the cash transfers will be paid to a
                                      woman (see the EICVM definition of a household in footnote Annex 3) to receive the cash transfer
                                      positive impacts on the empowerment of women are also expected while both women and men
                                      will participate in the community events related to nutrition and family practices.

                                      Environment (including Safeguards)

                                      The project is a Category C project, because no civil works will be undertaken and no adverse
                                      environmental or social impacts are expected. The project does not require any land acquisition
                                      leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources and livelihood. No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      safeguards policies are triggered as indicated in the table below.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Azedine Ouerghi
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 10-Feb-2015
                                 Advisor:
                                 Sector Manager:      Name: Peter Ivanov Pojarski (SM)                                                                                             Date: 27-Mar-2015




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
