                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8472
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                            Project ID:    P132821
                            Project Name:      Central African Backbone SOP5 (P132821)
                            Task Team          Jerome Bezzina
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-May-2014                       Estimated   15-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General information and communications sector (20%), Information technology
                                              (30%), Telecommunications (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Regulation and
                                              competition policy (40%), State-owned enterprise restru cturing and
                                              privatization (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      92.10           Total Bank Financing:                  92.10
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                92.10
                              Total                                                                                      92.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to contribute to increase the geographical reach
                           and usage of regional broadband infrastructure and to reduce the price of services so that more
                           people in the DRC can access information and communication technology (ICT) services.

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         Overall project description. The proposed project will support the deployment of missing links in the
                         national fiber optic network in order to connect the country’s most populated disparate economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         clusters of Kinshasa (West), Goma (East) and Lubumbashi (South). By linking the three economic
                         clusters, this new network will provide telecommunications operators the opportunity to offer
                         seamless services nationwide. The project will also support the commercialization of the new
                         capacity through a Public-Private Partnership (PPP). By extending the network nationwide and
                         establishing the PPP, the project will facilitate competition between the operators at the national
                         level. Increase in competition and economies of scale is expected to lead to reduction in the price of
                         service, increase in the quality of service (i.e. Internet bandwidth capacity) and the availability of
                         value-added ICT services (e.g. mobile banking). Furthermore, the new network would connect to the
                         submarine cable landing in Muanda providing the DRC with international connectivity to and from
                         Europe and South Africa. The project would also provide Technical Assistance to strengthening the
                         MPTN&NTIC and ARPTC that would subsequently improve the governance of the sector.

                         Project Preparation Advance. A Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of USD 4 million was approved
                         December 9, 2013 to support (i) the establishment of the SPN of the recruitment of the Investment
                         Bank to finalize the PPP arrangements ; (ii) the identification of network investments to be funded by
                         the proposed project; (iii) the Ministry of Portfolio as the Implementation Agency through its
                         existing project management unit, the Comité de Pilotage de la Réforme des Entreprises Publiques
                         (Steering Committee in charge the Reform of the Public Companies, COPIREP); and (iv) the
                         preparation of appropriate safeguards instruments: Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF), Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) and Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF). As requested by the Government the PPA will also fund the study developing the
                         Government’s roadmap pertaining to the SCPT restructuring.

                         Infrastructure cost and financing. The construction cost of the proposed network is estimated at US
                         $84.540 million. Project funds will be used to finance the construction of the passive infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (civil works and dark fiber equipment). It is expected that the private operators will provide private
                         investment to the cost of the network to cover active equipment. Earlier discussions with private
                         operators showed strong interest from these operators to partly fund this project. Their overall
                         contribution will be comprised between $22.5 (active equipment) and $50 (active equipment and
                         maintenance). For clarity throughout the document, all amounts and project construction costs are
                         based on a contribution of US$ 22.5 million.

                         The project will be implemented through Public Private Partnerships (PPP). There are two main
                         reasons why the project should rely on PPPs. First, neither the government of DRC nor private
                         operators have the financial capacity on their own to support the high upfront investment required to
                         build a nationwide network. Second, (i) in the case of an aggregation of market players to operate t
                         he network it would reduce transaction costs for both the government and the private operators and
                         increase coordination capabilities for maintaining the network and determining wholesale prices in a
                         transparent manner (ii) in the case of an open competition bidding in each fiber it will maximize the
                         revenues for the Government.

                         A two-step approach for PPPs. As a prerequisite, a Société de Patrimoine National (SPN – wholly
                         public shareholding company) will be established that will own the infrastructure. It is proposed to
                         separate the tender process for (i) the passive infrastructure (i.e. fiber cables and ducts) and partial
                         active infrastructure (buildings, transmission technology neutral equipment that can be shared among


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         operators) from (ii) the rest of the active infrastructure and network intelligence that usually needs to
                         be operator-specific. In the first step the SPN will select a construction company under an ICB to
                         build the infrastructure and conduct civil work and lay down dark fiber on the ground. Once built the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure will be incorporated as equity into the capital of the SPN. In the second step the SPN
                         will contract an aggregation of operators or several operators separately (the “Concessionaire”) to
                         “light” the dark fiber (i.e. to invest in access network and active equipment) and a concession
                         contract would be prepared and concluded between the SPN and these operators for the maintenance,
                         management and commercialization of the infrastructure.

                         Advantages of the two-step approach. There are several advantages to this two-step approach. First,
                         by having one provider build out the passive infrastructure, network integrity can be ensured, and
                         regulatory supervision costs would be reduced. Further, by focusing the first tender on the
                         deployment of mainly the passive infrastructure, procurement under the project is simplified (under
                         ICB) and would ensure fast disbursement. The second important advantage is that technology
                         neutrality is ensured by allowing Concessionaire(s) to bring in their own equipment into the active
                         infrastructure layer through the second tender. This approach to network expansion through the
                         separation of passive and active infrastructure has been adopted in other countries such as the U.K.
                         and Singapore, and is currently being undertaken under the SAPMP Project in DRC , the CAB APL3
                         in the Republic of Congo and WARCIP 2 in Mauritania. Finally, the revenues collected by the SPN
                         through the concession contract(s) will be re-invested in the deployment of additional routes.

                         Defining the PPP arrangements. A legal and regulatory expert (Individual Consultant) and a
                         transaction advisor (Firm) have been recruited under the Project Preparation Advance (PPA). The
                         individual consultant supports the Government to prepare the establishment of the SPN (governance
                         structure, organizational chart, budget…) and identify the best suited PPP structures for the second
                         step. The transaction advisor will assist the Government (i) in finalizing the technical bidding
                         documentation and the process to recruit the equipment provider to build the passive infrastructure
                         and (ii) in implementing the transaction between the SPN and the selected operator(s) for the
                         operation of the infrastructure. Participatory approach: working with civil society.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will pay great attention to “softside” considerations in preparation of the terrain, to make
                         it investor-friendly but also to pacify any new tensions from construction and modernization amidst
                         desperation, isolation, lawlessness, and abject poverty. In order to do so, the project intends to work
                         with NGOs to ensure participative Monitoring & Evaluation and to involve stakeholders as well as
                         stay close to the communities, to understand grievances and passions on the ground that could
                         interfere with success of this operation. This operation will spawn a number of sustained public-
                         private consultative dialogue processes, starting at national, and then at subnational level to elicit
                         advocacy discussions and spread enthusiasm for the operation wherever it will changes lives,
                         alleviate extreme poverty and boost shared prosperity.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will support the deployment of fiber optic cables and the associated civil works and
                         transmission equipment along the specified routes. Most of the fiber will be laid alongside existing
                         roads, rails or other infrastructure. This infrastructure deployment will be coordinated with other
                         infrastructure projects in order to mutualize benefiting from the concept of cross-sector infrastructure
                         sharing .The total length of the missing links to be funded by the project is estimated to be 2,200 km
                         and consists of the following three links:
                         (a)      Western Cluaster – Link Kinshasa_Muanda. The link between Kinshasa and Muanda will be


                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         deployed in coordination with the Société Commerciale des Transports et des Ports (SCTP). It will
                         pass through Matadi and then follow the “Nationale 1” road to Muanda. In Muanda, connection will
                         be made to the international submarine cable and to the backbone in the neighboring Republic of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Congo through to Brazzaville. Other possible regional links include interconnections with Cabinda,
                         Kongo and Mbanza in Angola.
                         (b)     Eastern Cluster –Links Kalemie_Bukavu, Bukavu_Béni_Lubutu and Lubutu_Kisangani. The
                         link between Bukavu and Beni (via Goma) will follow the "Nationale 2" road. This link will provide
                         regional interconnections with Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda. The connecting link to Kisangani
                         could be considered in the Project CAB5.
                         (c)     Southern Cluster – Link Bukama_Kalemie. This part of the network will be twofold. The
                         link between Lubumbashi and Kananga will be constructed in coordination with the Société
                         Nationale des Chemins de Fer du Congo (SNCC). The second part of the link will be deployed
                         between Bukama and Kalemie following the “Nationale 33” road. This link will make possible the
                         regional interconnection to Zambia through Kasumbalesa in DRC.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Paula F. Lytle (AFTCS)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project under component 2 foresees three
                         BP 4.01                                            interregional links to neighboring countries
                                                                            including fiber optic cables, terminal equipment
                                                                            and switches. Furthermore, the construction of the
                                                                            e-waste center and the network is also foreseen
                                                                            under component 3. All these activities are
                                                                            expected to have potential adverse environmental
                                                                            impacts, even if on limited scale. Impacts will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            mostly be related to digging along the roads and
                                                                            across human settlements, forests and natural
                                                                            habitats.
                                                                            Although the components and activities of the
                                                                            project are relatively well known the exact areas
                                                                            where the activities will be implemented has not
                                                                            yet been determined. An Environmental and
                                                                            Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                            prepared, reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed
                                                                            within the DRC and at the Infoshop on May 23rd,
                                                                            2014.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             The project is not expected to be implemented in
                                                                            natural habitats. But as the Democratic Republic
                                                                            of Congo is known as being a forested country the
                                                                            probability to encounter natural habitats is not
                                                                            negligible. So, this policy is triggered in order to
                                                                            pay attention to these particular ecosystems
                                                                            during the implementation of the project.
                                                                            However, no specific safeguard instrument is



                                                                    Page 4 of 9
                                                                                required. The ESMF which will be prepared in
                                                                                accordance with OP/PB4.01 will take into
                                                                                consideration this issue. The ESMF has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                prepared, reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed
                                                                                within the DRC and at the Infoshop on May 23rd,
                                                                                2014 contain a chapter to take into account
                                                                                Natural Habitats matters.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project is not expected to have significant
                                                                                adverse impacts on the forest resources due to the
                                                                                weak space influence of the fiber optic cables and
                                                                                other equipment
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No              N/A

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             The ESMF has been prepared, reviewed,
                            BP 4.11                                             consulted upon and disclosed within the DRC and
                                                                                at the Infoshop on May 23rd, 2014. It includes a
                                                                                chapter on managing Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                                matters.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework has
                                                                                been prepared and disclosed in-country and
                                                                                through InfoShop on May 23rd, 2014.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             A Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                            4.12                                                prepared and disclosed in-country and through
                                                                                InfoShop on May 23rd, 2014.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                 N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is likely to involve nine (9) provinces: North Kivu; Bas-Congo; Katanga; Kasai
                              Oriental; Kasai Occidental; Kinshasa; Orientale Province; South Kivu; and Maniema. Some of
                              these areas include fragile ecosystems such as savanna areas, wetlands, and forests. These are also
                              areas with a dense network of rivers which contribute to fishing and agricultural activities.
                              Furthermore, there are hunting reserves along the course of the planned project route which raises
                              the risk of increasing access to them and subsequently poaching activities. Negative environmental
                              and social impact of the project will come mainly from the laying of the fibre optic cable through
                              the project route. Much of this route is expected to be alongside roads, however, there may be
                              instances where by the fibre and ducts go through human settlements, natural habitats, etc, and it
                              may affect physical cultural resources. In terms of socioeconomic impact, the project could


                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           involve land acquisition or temporary displacement of livelihood activities. Furthermore, the
                           project could directly impact Indigenous Peoples, as the project lays fibre close to or through their
                           villages. None of these impacts are envisioned to be irreversible, however, in light of the potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impact, five World Bank safeguard policies are triggered under the project: OP/BP 4.01 on
                           environmental assessment; OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats, OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural
                           Resources; OP/PB on Indigenous Peoples and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Taking into account the nature and the scale of envisioned activities, some adverse impacts linked
                           to civil works is expected. However, the Government has developed an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) that includes specific and stringent guidelines for contracting
                           companies who will be laying the fibre optic cable. In terms of positive impact, it is envisioned
                           that the project will trigger the provision of telecommunications services including for mobile
                           broadband Internet in the urban and semi-urban areas along the project route – benefitting
                           residents of these areas. It is envisioned that with the use of mobile networks, that
                           telecommunications services will be extended from the fibre backbone to more rural areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The use of existing infrastructure, including the power lines and along roads or rails being built
                           will limit the physical footprint or impact of the construction activities and possible land
                           acquisition.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to prepare for addressing the potential negative impact, the Government has prepared
                           three appropriate safeguards instruments: an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF), an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPF). The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for component's
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activities (which includes: Guidelines for an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                           (ESIA),an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP); Environmental Guidelines for
                           Contractors; and a summary of the World Bank's safeguard policies). It will also contain chapters
                           to take into account Natural Habitats and Physical Cultural Resources matters. That means
                           guidance and guidelines will be included in the ESMF to this end. The RPF has been prepared by
                           the government to address such circumstances and supervision and monitoring will identify if
                           abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans will need to be prepared during implementation to address
                           any land acquisition or temporary displacement of livelihood activities. The RPF has been
                           developed to address potential land acquisition or loss of economic activity on the part of
                           individuals or groups of individuals in project intervention zones. Similarly, although the routing
                           of the fiber optic and/or the use of microwave where terrain does not allow for fiber optic is
                           unlikely to have any impact on Indigenous Peoples, an IPPF has been prepared by the government
                           as the project is being implemented in areas near to or in which Indigenous Peoples are present. As
                           both previous documents, the IPPF also seeks to address potential adverse impacts on the
                           indigenous peoples. These three documents have be prepared, in full compliance with World Bank
                           and national safeguard policies, including a broad consultation framework involving all relevant
                           stakeholder groups, both public and private, as well as civil society. After consultations, these
                           three safeguard instruments have been disclosed within the country and at the World Bank
                           Infoshop in May 2014. During the project implementation, Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) will be
                           prepared if necessary to avoid, minimize, mitigate or compensate adverse impacts on these


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           specific groups of peoples.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The IPPF also seeks to address potential adverse impacts on the indigenous peoples. During the
                           project implementation, Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPP) was prepared to avoid, minimize, mitigate
                           or compensate adverse impacts on these specific groups of peoples. These three documents have
                           been prepared, in full compliance with World Bank and national safeguard policies, including a
                           broad consultation framework involving all relevant stakeholder groups, both public and private,
                           as well as civil society. After consultations, these three safeguard instruments were disclosed
                           within the country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal completion.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    23-May-2014
                           Comments: The ESMF was disclosed in-country on COPIREP's website: http://www.copirep.cd/
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    23-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The RI was disclosed in-country on COPIREP's website: http://www.copirep.cd/
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    23-May-2014
                           Comments: The IPPF was disclosed in-country on COPIREP's website: http://www.copirep.cd/
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?



                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jerome Bezzina
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 11-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                           Date: 12-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
