                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6610
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                         Project ID:    P133129
                            Project Name:      Argentina Youth Employment Support Project (P133129)
                            Task Team          Rafael P. Rofman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Nov-2014                       Estimated   13-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), Vocational training (25%),
                                              Other social services (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (33%), Social Inclusion (33%), Education for the
                                              knowledge economy (17%), Education for all (17%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     767.00           Total Bank Financing:                425.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    342.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       425.00
                              Total                                                                                       767.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed Project is to improve access of vulnerable youth
                           population to labor markets, increasing their employability by supporting the expansion and
                           strengthening of Government employment programs.



                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The lending instrument proposed is an Investment Project Financing Loan for US$425 million. To
                         achieve its objectives, the Project will support the following activities through three components: i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement of quality of orientation and training services offered to program participants and other
                         vulnerable youth aimed at increasing their employability and likelihood for job placement and job
                         mobility; (ii) coverage consolidation and operational strengthening of the JMyMT program; and iii)
                         strengthening and improving performance of the network of Municipal Employment Offices (OEM).
                         The proposed Project will include three components:

                         Component 1: Improvement and Provision of Orientation and Training Services Offered to Program
                         Participants. The activities to be supported under this Component are expected to contribute to the
                         Ministry of Labor's efforts to increase employability and employment opportunities of JMyMT
                         participants, as well as other youth who are unemployed or inactive and have a family income below
                         the minimum wage, by improving the knowledge, skills and behavior that will serve individuals as
                         they transition to the labor market.
                         This Component will improve the quality and relevance of orientation and training services, and
                         products offered to program participants, by financing the provision and improvement of these
                         services, including the design and implementation of workshops and training courses, development
                         of competency standards, training of evaluators, improvement and certification of training
                         institutions, curricular design, and teacher training. The goal of this Component is to ensure that an
                         integrated package of training services (basic skills and technical training) are offered to participants
                         by providers that are independently assessed and certified, following clear curricula and objectives.

                         Component 2: Coverage Consolidation of the JMyMT Program. The component will aim at
                         maintaining the program’s coverage at around 200,000 youth per year, reaching a total of 390,000
                         during the three years of implementation (as some participants are eligible during more than one
                         year) or about 35 percent of the 1.1 million potential beneficiaries, and improving the MTESS
                         capacity to implement the program. The component will finance cash transfers to eligible participants
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enrolled in the program including: i) monthly stipends of AR$600 when participating in program
                         activities, including labor orientation workshops, employment clubs, professional training courses, IT
                         courses, entrepreneurship training, and basic education completion; ii) monthly stipends up to AR
                         $2,000 when participating in on-the-job training activities; and iii) incentives linked to completion of
                         the program activities (up to AR$ 2,000 per year).

                         Component 3: Strengthening and Improving the Performance of the Network of Municipal
                         Employment Offices. This component will aim at strengthening the capacity and performance of the
                         employment services offered by the OEMs to program participants by incorporating new
                         methodologies and management practices in existing and new OEMs.
                         The Ministry of Labor will enter into an agreement with each participating municipality specifying
                         the characteristics of the services to be delivered by the OEM, including targets on performance
                         indicators and the administrative procedures to be followed to monitor implementation. Based on
                         these agreements, MTESS will transfer funds to OEMs to support their activities.
                         The component will support the MTESS goal to introduce an outputs based model in its support
                         strategy for OEMs. Since the creation of the first employment offices at municipal level, the Ministry
                         has been providing support by transferring funds and assets, as well as financing staff and providing
                         technical assistance, aiming at getting the offices to work and consolidated within each municipality,
                         offering some employment services but also a point of entry for social services.



                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project activities have national coverage. Municipal Employment Offices offering the “Youth
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with More and Better Jobs” Program exists in 360 locations. None will have environmental impacts.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Isabel Tomadin (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/      No              This policy is not triggered given the nature and
                          BP 4.01                                           scope of the proposed activities. Therefore, no
                                                                            impact to the environment is expected.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              This policy is not triggered since no impact is
                                                                            expected on natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                                            has no foreseen activities that will affect forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09           No              This policy is not triggered given that no Project’s
                                                                            activities will include pest use or procurement of
                                                                            pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              This policy is not triggered since the Project does
                          BP 4.11                                           not foresee any investment activities that require
                                                                            removal of soil.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             This policy is triggered given that this is a Project
                                                                            with national coverage and Indigenous Peoples as
                                                                            defined by OP 4.10 are present in Argentina.
                                                                            Indigenous Peoples are among the most
                                                                            vulnerable groups in the labor market, and they
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            could potentially benefit from Project activities
                                                                            given the focus on the inclusion of vulnerable
                                                                            youth in the labor market.
                                                                            Based on the results and performance of the
                                                                            Lifelong Learning and Argentina Basic Protection
                                                                            Project's Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) and its
                                                                            responsible institutional parties, a social
                                                                            assessment has been carried out, and a National
                                                                            Indigenous People Plan (NIPP) has been prepared
                                                                            by the MTESS, and is in process of consultation
                                                                            with organizations representative of indigenous
                                                                            peoples in order to receive and incorporate their
                                                                            advice and gauge their level of support, to ensure
                                                                            that indigenous peoples benefit optimally from
                                                                            the interventions supported by the Project.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              This policy is not triggered given that Project’s
                          4.12                                              activities will not result in involuntary
                                                                            resettlement nor require land acquisition.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              This policy is not triggered given that the Project


                                                                    Page 3 of 7
                                                                                will neither support the construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                investments which rely on the services of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                dams.
                            Projects on International        No                 This policy is not triggered given that no Project’s
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                activities will affect international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 This policy is not triggered since Project’s
                            7.60                                                activities will not take place in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project's components essentially involve institutional development and training and it is
                              anticipated that its implementation will achieve mostly positive social development outcomes and
                              impacts. It will improve social services, reduce inequality of opportunity, and enhance human
                              capital accumulation. Specially, the Project will allow increasing access to training opportunities
                              and learning materials for indigenous peoples in their main language, and strengthened social
                              integration through training for indigenous as well as non-indigenous youth. Thus, no potential
                              large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are expected.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Project's institutional and implementation arrangements will build on the arrangements
                              currently in place at the implementation entity, the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social
                              Security.

                             According to a survey conducted in June 2013, the Ministry of Labor already serves about 5,000
                             beneficiaries of indigenous origin in the 12 provinces where the IPPs are being implemented. Fifty
                             three percent are females, while 57 percent belong to the age group ranging from 18 to 34 years,
                             and 37 percent between 35 and 55 years old. The same survey highlighted that while the goal of
                             incorporating indigenous people was met (and surpassed) in the provinces surveyed, a large
                             number of beneficiaries – both indigenous and non-indigenous - could not enter the system due to
                             lack of employment offices and/or agencies in all municipalities. The proposed Project will take
                             this issue into account and consider barriers that indigenous peoples may experience.

                             A National Indigenous Peoples Plan (NIPP) and a Social Assessment have been developed as part
                             of the proposed Youth Employment Support Project; consultation processes were taken in the
                             provinces of Chaco, Jujuy, Salta, and Buenos Aires City with the rest of provinces. They were
                             built on the existing IPPF and IPPs under the above-mentioned projects, as well as on lessons


                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                          learned from the Projects' implementation, and existing institutional framework and stakeholder
                          mapping for IP. The assessment include gender focus and other discriminated people, concluding
                          that: (i) the coverage provided by training and employment services spreads to women who are
Public Disclosure Copy




                          victims of domestic violence; (ii) the coverage provided by training and employment services
                          extends to unemployed people whose gender identity is not coincident with the assigned sex at
                          birth; and (iii) there is awareness and capacity to manage gender issues at the JMyMT team at the
                          central level, as well as the Municipal Employment Offices (Youth Employment Areas).

                          In the case of the JMyMT activities, there are pro-active efforts to incorporate a gender focus. In
                          order to work specifically in this area, the MTESS developed materials to be used for the labor
                          orientation workshop as well as in the training for the municipal employment offices, aimed to
                          improve the quality of employment services provided to participants, particularly for young
                          women, to counsel female jobseekers, and to strengthen capacity to interact with employers.

                          The Project will continue articulating with existing programs in the Ministry of Labor, such as
                          Labor Training Program, Self-Employment Program, Labor Insertion Program and the Areas of
                          Indigenous Peoples at the provincial level as well as with Municipalities Employment Offices;
                          Bilingual Intercultural Education Areas (National Education Ministry), Instituto Nacional de
                          Asuntos Indígenas (INAI – National Institute of Indigenous Affairs) and INADI (Social
                          Development Ministry)

                          An assessment of the institutional capacity of the implementation agency was carried out during
                          Project preparation. In general, it was found that the teams of specialists within the MTESS are
                          competent to manage safeguards issues. The team in charge of implementing activities based on
                          the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPPs) for the above-mentioned projects has demonstrated strong
                          capacity in this area, and was assigned the same responsibility for the proposed Youth
                          Employment Support project. The implementations of the IPPs under LLLP, ABP and AF had
                          satisfactory results and the social assessments at provincial level are updated annually.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Effective participation of indigenous people was guaranteed during the different project stages and
                           information was registered and filed, and consultation activities took place; therefore, no problem
                           is foreseen in the continuity of this aspect during the Youth Employment Support Project
                           implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The NIPP will guide national level interventions and consultations with key national indigenous
                           peoples stakeholders, and will help the Project team to identify and address the specific barriers
                           that IPs face in entering the formal labor market in Argentina. In addition, the NIPP will propose
                           actions on how handle the intermediation services and the vocational and soft skills training
                           offered by the MTESS so it can reach IPs and be offered in a way that is relevant and culturally
                           appropriate.

                          Based on the principle of free, prior, and informed consultation, Project preparation documents
                          (including Project objectives, approach, activities, mechanisms, and the draft of the NIPP) were
                          presented to organizations representative of indigenous peoples. A process of consultations with
                          the INAI and the Consejo de Pueblos Indígenas (CPI – National Counsel of Indigenous People)
                          were organized in order to receive and incorporate their advice and gauge their level of support,
                          and will continue under implementation. The national consultation with the Mesa de Coordinación


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           Nacional del Consejo de Participación Indígena (CPI Coordination) took place in October 22,
                           2014, and there were also consultations with the Qom, Mbya Guaraní, Wichí, Huarpes y Mocovíes
                           communities during October and November 2014 (detailed descripted in the PAD). A version of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the NIPP, incorporating feedback from Indigenous People representatives and the Bank was
                           published on the MTESS website and on the Bank’s Infoshop on November 17 , 2014
                           The NIPP incorporated strategies of promotion and communication adequate for indigenous
                           communities in order to guarantee their full understanding of the Project. In particular, the
                           following is envisaged: (a) the use of existing material in the original language; (ii) training of
                           local agents to register participants in these communities; (iii) promotion and communication
                           campaigns; (iv) mechanisms to provide information and respond to complaints, at the national as
                           well as the municipal level; (v) training for tutors to work with the participants from these
                           communities; and (vi) a description of the specific modality that will be used to offer these
                           services in each indigenous community.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         10-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      17-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Rafael P. Rofman
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Edmundo Murrugarra (PMGR)                   Date: 18-Nov-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
