                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR11743
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Mar-2014, 14-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                                       Project ID:           P127723
                            Project Name:      Sao Paulo State Sustainable Transport Project (P127723)
                            Task Team          Eric R. Lancelot
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          06-Feb-2013                                  Estimated   14-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                                        Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (91%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (8%), Flood protection (1%)
                            Theme:             Infrastructure services for private sector development (46%), Trade facilitation
                                               and market access (46%), Natural disaster managemen t (4%), Environmental
                                               policies and institutions (3%), Land administration and management (1%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                        No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       729.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      300.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            129.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               300.00
                              MIGA Guarantee                                                                                      300.00
                              Total                                                                                               729.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                Page 1 of 10
                         The Project Development Objective is to contribute to improving the State’s transport efficiency and
                         safety while enhancing the Borrower’s capacity in environmental and disaster risk management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective is to be achieved through (a) upgrading selected key transport corridors including their
                         rehabilitation and expansion, and mainstreaming transport planning and management, (b) capacity
                         building in land use planning and territorial management and regulation focusing on addressing
                         environmental impacts in support of a greener and more inclusive growth, and (c) improvement of
                         the State’s capacity to manage disaster risk, particularly risks linked to climate change in the
                         transport sector in SoSP.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project Development Objective is to contribute to improving the State’s transport efficiency and
                         safety while enhancing the Borrower’s capacity in environmental and disaster risk management.

                         The objective is to be achieved through (a) upgrading selected key transport corridors including their
                         rehabilitation and expansion, and mainstreaming transport planning and management, (b) capacity
                         building in land use planning and territorial management and regulation focusing on addressing
                         environmental impacts in support of a greener and more inclusive growth, and (c) improvement of
                         the State’s capacity to manage disaster risk, particularly risks linked to climate change in the
                         transport sector in SoSP.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will be a US$729 million operation financed by a US$300 million Bank loan, US$129
                         million of counterpart funds and a US$300 million joint-financing from private banks covered by
                         MIGA’s NHSFO guarantee. The Project includes the following three components as described
                         below.

                         Component 1: Improving transport and logistics efficiency and safety (Estimated cost US$694.25
                         million of which US$275.45 million will be financed by the Bank Loan and US$300 million by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         private bank(s) covered by MIGA NHSFO and US$118.8 million by counterpart financing)
                         Provision of support to improve the State transport and logistics efficiency and safety, through the
                         carrying out of the following activities:
                         1.1      Rehabilitating and upgrading the Borrower’s transport networks (US$686.5 million, of
                         which US$269.5 to be financed by the Bank and US$300 by the private commercial bank Santander
                         which could be covered by MIGA’s NHSFO guarantee), in support to the Road Agency (DER) road
                         rehabilitation and upgrading program. Restore and upgrade the State’s transport networks to improve
                         connectivity, reduce logistics costs and improve road transport safety through the rehabilitation and
                         improvement of the existing transport infrastructures. Interventions will include, inter alia: (a) road
                         rehabilitation, construction of third lanes, duplications, slope protection and improvement of
                         intersections on a total of approximately 650 km of existing selected paved State roads identified for
                         their potential contribution to intermodality, (b) the reconstruction of two bridges with wider
                         clearance on the rivers Tietê and Piracicaba to enhance waterway navigability of these rivers, (c) a
                         pilot of Performance Based Contracts (PBC) for rehabilitation and road maintenance on about 100
                         km (see box 4 in annex 2 of the PAD on Brazil experience on PBC), (d) improving road safety
                         through pilot works based on the recommendations of World Bank GRSF Trust Fund financed iRAP
                         pilot survey (see box 3 in annex 2 of the PAD on iRAP).
                         1.2      Sustainable transport planning and management (US$8.5 million, of which US$5.95 million
                         financed by the Bank). Improvement of the State capacity to plan and manage the sector through
                         studies and the acquisition of goods to the benefit of the Secretariat of Logistics and Transport’s

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         (SLT) aimed at, inter alia (i) improving transport planning and management with a view to increase
                         multimodality, while embedding disaster risk management as an instrument of public policy, in
                         support to the State land use planning and territorial management agenda, (ii) greening transport in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the State through pilots notably based on the recommendations of the World Bank “Green Freight”
                         study, (iii) enhancing transport impact assessment understanding, (iv) improving road safety based
                         on the recommendations of the World Bank GRSF financed capacity assessment in road safety.

                         Component 2: Strengthening sustainable environmental and land use planning and territorial
                         management capacity (Estimated cost of US$18 million, of which US$12.6 million financed by the
                         Bank Loan and US$5.4 million by counterpart financing)
                         Provision of support in the area of land use planning and territorial management and environmental
                         management, through the carrying out of following activities:
                         2.1      Supporting sustainable land use planning and territorial management (US$5 million of which
                         US$3.5 million financed by the Bank). Improvement of the State capacity to plan and manage
                         sustainable land use and territorial development in an integrated fashion through studies and the
                         acquisition of goods aimed at, inter alia: (i) supporting the Planning and Regional Development
                         Secretariat (SPDR) in the establishment of an integrated land use planning and territorial
                         management for the SoSP, with an aim at articulating sector planning and management policies in
                         transport, environment and disaster risk management, and (ii) supporting the State Secretariat of
                         Environment (SMA) in the implementation of the Economic and Ecological Zoning (EEZ) with an
                         aim at providing objective orientation for public investments and development strategies;
                         2.2      Improving environmental enforcement and environment quality monitoring (US$6.5 million
                         of which US$4.55 million financed by the Bank). Improvement of the State capacity to manage and
                         monitor environment through studies, small works and the acquisition of goods aimed at, inter alia:
                         (i) improving environmental monitoring and control of the SMA with a view to strengthen
                         enforcement, through pilot initiatives focusing on innovation including the acquisition of equipment
                         on a pilot basis, and (ii) strengthening the capacity of the State Environmental Agency (CETESB) in
                         air and water monitoring in the Project area to ensure efficient and reliable data collections on air and
                         water quality;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.3      Supporting the modernization of the Environmental Licensing System (US$6.5 million of
                         which US$4.55 million financed by the Bank). Improvement of the State capacity to efficiently
                         process environmental licenses and environmental strategic assessment services through studies and
                         the acquisition of goods to the benefit of the CETESB aimed at, inter alia: (i) strengthening the
                         understanding of environmental impacts of public and private investments and activities, (ii)
                         upgrading and updating the management systems for processing environmental licenses and
                         simulating potential environmental impacts, and (iii) enhancing the capacity of the CETESB.

                         Component 3: Increasing State’s resilience to natural disasters (Estimated cost US$16 million of
                         which US$11.2 million financed by the Bank Loan and US$4.8 million by counterpart financing)
                         Provision of support to enhance the State capacity to plan for and manage disasters through the
                         carrying out the following activities:
                         3.1 Mainstreaming disaster risk management in the transport sector (US$5.5 million of which US
                         $3.85 financed by the Bank Loan). Improvement of the State capacity to mainstream disaster risk
                         management in transport planning and work execution through studies, small works and the
                         acquisition of goods to the benefit of the Geologic Institute (IG) aimed at, inter alia: (i)
                         mainstreaming disaster and climate change risk in the Borrower’s transport masterplan (PDLT),
                         including assessing sector vulnerability to natural disasters, notably resulting from climate events and
                         potential socio economic impacts, and developing an integrated disaster response plan for the
                         transport sector; and (ii) reviewing technical specifications for road design and maintenance to

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         improve resiliency of road infrastructure exposed to mapped risks.
                         3.2 Enhancing disaster risk management policy and institutional capacity (US$10.5 million of which
                         US$7.35 financed by the Bank Loan). Strengthening the State capacity for disaster risk management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through studies and the acquisition of goods to upgrade and support the implementation of the State’s
                         disaster risk management program (Programa Estadual de Prevenção de Desastres Naturais e de
                         Redução de Riscos Geológicos - PDN) to the benefit of the IG, including inter alia: (i)
                         mainstreaming disaster risk management practices at planning level, through supporting the design of
                         disaster risk management frameworks, improving comprehensive conceptual and practical
                         understanding of hazards, vulnerabilities and risks, assessing economic and social impacts of
                         particular disasters, and designing management tools for the resettlement of populations located in
                         immitigable high-risk areas; and (ii) improving policies and procedures to better and more effectively
                         respond to disasters, through the development of early warning systems, methodologies and sharing
                         of information and knowledge.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         For Component 1 – Transport: the Project will finance the rehabilitation and upgrade of a set of State
                         paved roads and the reconstruction of two bridges in the State of Sao Paulo. The planned road works
                         are located in the central and northwest regions of the State, and will mostly take place within the
                         rights of way (ROW) and in sites associated with the road projects. The ROW consists of the paved
                         strip and the entire area reserved for the construction, operation, and maintenance of the roadside.
                         The sites associated with road projects include deposits; borrow sites, materials treatment areas,
                         quarries, access roads, and facilities provided for project workers. The bridges will be reconstructed
                         in the same locations as the existing bridges, and depending on the construction technology chosen, it
                         will be possible to maintain use of the existing bridge during the construction period. Bridges will be
                         on SP-191, which crosses over the Piracicaba River and the other is on the SP-147 over the Tietê
                         River. Given the fact that no new road will be constructed and most of areas along the planned roads
                         have been developed as farms, it is not expected that the civil works would have negative impacts on
                         existing environmentally protected areas or indigenous people. These interventions will also be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         located within an area where there are isolated patches of natural vegetation and land use is
                         predominantly focused on agriculture (ex: sugar cane, soya bean, oranges, cattle ranching, etc.).

                         For Component 2 and Component 3 – Environment and Disaster Risk Management: Particular
                         activities may be relevant for specific geographical areas, such as regarding forest conservation in
                         pilot areas or action plans for resettlement of those in risk prone areas, near the coastal regions.
                         Salient physical characteristics

                         During implementation, the Project is not expected to cause any large scale, significant and/or
                         irreversible negative environmental impacts. As it supports a number of site specific investments in,
                         or near existing road infrastructure, the incremental environmental impacts resulting from
                         construction works will be limited in spatial extent and time, mainly during the execution of civil
                         works. Likewise, the environmental impact of the reconstruction of two bridges in replacement of
                         existing ones should be limited to the site of intervention with limited consequences on environment.
                         While most direct negative impacts on environment from the Project are expected to be limited in
                         time and localized near the civil works sites, other impacts, with potential positive effect on the
                         environment, will result from the improvements on territorial planning, environmental monitoring
                         and environmental licensing process. The expected enhancement on these activities has direct effects
                         on biodiversity protection, sustainable land use management, forests and other natural habitats
                         conservation and sustainable hydrological resources management. Also, increasing State’s resilience


                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                           to natural disasters brings benefits to the environment, for example through reorganization and
                           planning of land use, contributing to the preservation of sensitive areas, especially in the urban
                           environment of municipalities located in risk prone areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Jason Jacques Paiement (GSURR)
                           Marcio Cerqueira Batitucci (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies         Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment      Yes
                            OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP        Yes
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes
                            Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes
                            Physical Cultural Resources   Yes
                            OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes
                            4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement      Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
                            Projects on International     No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas    No
                            OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                During implementation, the Project is not expected to cause any large scale, significant and/or
                              irreversible negative environmental impacts. As it supports a number of site specific investments
                              in, or near existing road infrastructure, the environmental impacts resulting from construction
                              work are expected to be limited in spatial extend and time, mainly during the execution of civil
                              works. Likewise, the environmental impact of the reconstruction of two bridges in replacement of
                              existing ones (all of which have already been visited by the team), should be restricted to the site
                              of intervention with limited consequences on the environment.

                              The most commonly expected negative impacts would arise from the construction phase under
                              Component 1, which includes work interventions mostly within rights of way of existing roads,
                              although these impacts are expected to be small, transitory and of short duration. In this sense, the
                              social and environmental risks associated with this Project are limited due to the nature of the
                              proposed interventions, which will mostly take place within the existing rights-of-way of the road
                              and in sites associated with road projects (in very limited cases, for example, duplication works at


                                                                         Page 5 of 10
                           an intersection may require a small land beyond of the existing rights-of-ways to ensure safe road
                           alignment).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           While most direct negative environmental impacts from the Project are expected to be limited in
                           time and localized near the civil works sites, other impacts, with potential positive effect on the
                           environment, will result from the improvements on territorial planning, environmental monitoring
                           and environmental licensing process. The expected enhancement on these activities has direct
                           effects on biodiversity protection, sustainable land use management, forests and other natural
                           habitats conservation and sustainable hydrological resources management. Also, increasing State’s
                           resilience to natural disasters brings benefits to the environment, for example through land use
                           reorganization and planning, contributing to the preservation of sensitive areas, especially in the
                           urban environment of municipalities located in risk prone areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Rehabilitation and upgrading of the Borrower’s transport networks is expected to generate
                           significant positive social impacts. In addition to reduced transportation costs and increased
                           accessibility to markets and public services, the Project is expected to improve road safety
                           conditions, generate positive impacts on land values, create jobs, and raise incomes throughout the
                           state. By improving the efficiency of the State’s logistics, the Project is expected to strengthen
                           agriculture industry in the State and beyond, which in turn, might increase pressure to convert the
                           native environment for commercial use. Those potential impacts, assessed in detail in the ESIA
                           and the complementary assessment (Environmental and Social Impact Assessment - ESIA-
                           Complementary dated January 2014 which complements the original ESIA report on January
                           2013), are however expected to be limited because: (i) most of the native vegetation in the State of
                           Sao Paulo has already been modified and the State has a strong regulation and enforcement
                           capacity, which will be further strengthened under the Project second component, (ii) in the central
                           west region of the SoSP, where agricultural activities are more intense and where the interventions
                           of Project component 1 are also planned, the native vegetation fragments are often associated with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           water courses, critical to these activities, (iii) investments in research and technology ensure higher
                           productivity without necessarily expanding acreage, (iv) existing SoSP experiments show the
                           importance of preserving fragments of native vegetation to the health of monoculture crops like
                           sugar cane and (v) immediate neighboring States (some of which the Bank work with, including in
                           strengthening environment monitoring capacity, such as the State of Mato Grosso do Sul) and
                           beyond, the Federal Government, also dispose of a contingent of laws and regulations as well as
                           enforcement capacity to mitigate such impacts.

                           These positive impacts are expected to be further enhanced through the complementary
                           interventions proposed for Components 2 and 3. Activities under component 2 are expected to
                           have a positive impact on the environment, since the component seeks to promote environmental
                           compliance, planning and monitoring. It will support the SoSP’s efforts to strengthen
                           environmental management tools aimed at sustainable land use and reduce negative environmental
                           impacts. The Territorial planning and management will focus on promoting sustainable land use at
                           the State level. Activities under this subcomponent should lead to positive impacts on natural
                           habitats, through the identification of critical natural areas. In the preparation of the EEZ, multiple
                           consultations will be organized by the Borrower with regional committees in order to identify the
                           priorities and actions required to reach the expected results. At the same time, the Borrower will
                           implement an on-line public accounts system to facilitate public oversight of government actions.
                           Enforcement activities under the Project component could also lead to changes in the exploitation


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                           patterns of natural resources either by private companies and/or individual and communities.
                           From Component 3, the proposed activities also bring benefits to the environment in a sensitive
                           context, especially in the urban environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The project includes road improvement and rehabilitation on existing roads prioritized by the
                           State program. The alternatives would be different road segments but this would not change the
                           nature or scale of impacts significantly.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The State of Sao Paulo Road Agency (DER-SP) has considerable experience with World Bank
                           safeguard policies through implementation of two previous projects: State Highways Management
                           Project Sao Paulo (P006410-closed) and the Sao Paulo Feeder Roads & Additional Financing
                           (P106663-active) as well as an IADB Sao Paulo State Highway Rehabilitation Project (BR-
                           L1033). The ongoing World Bank project is focused on municipal road rehabilitation and includes
                           technical assistance for modernizing the State’s environmental management systems.

                          The implementation of the proposed Project would be undertaken through the same agency (DER-
                          SP.) which will be in charge of supervising all safeguards aspects for all components, including for
                          the other beneficiaries/participating entities. The DER-SP will centralize, coordinate and monitor
                          all Project activities, including the environmental and disaster risk management components. A
                          consulting company will support the environmental and social impact management capacity of the
                          DER-SP, and each participating entity will regularly report safeguard related information to DER-
                          SP.

                          The technical responsibility for preparation, supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project
                          outcomes and results will be shared between the different beneficiary agencies, in their respective
                          areas of responsibility, under the supervision of the UCPR within the DER. The UCPR/DER-SP
Public Disclosure Copy




                          will be responsible for final reporting to the Bank in terms of quality, timing etc. The diverse
                          project coordinators at each of the secretariats will be responsible for reporting to the UCPR
                          information on, among others, procurement planning, preparation of technical specifications and
                          terms of reference for procurement documents, bills, safeguards planning, implementation and
                          monitoring, among others.

                           The borrower has demonstrated adequate capacity and procedures to deal with environmental
                           mitigation measures. Environmental management of the works under the Project will be overseen
                           by independent consulting firms, following the best practices inherited from other transportation
                           projects in Sao Paulo and Brazil. The Bank Team found under a recent Project with similar works
                           that the supervision performance of the borrower has been satisfactory. The borrower is
                           responsible for all costs related to the design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of these
                           safeguard policy measures. These costs (additional staff at the UCPR, independent environmental
                           supervision, etc.) are included in the DER’s operational budget.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Among many potentially interested stakeholders of the Project are transport operators and users,
                           agribusiness and environmental resource managers, and private land owners and residents of areas
                           identified as vulnerable to natural disasters. Project details and the results of the Environmental


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) are posted on the Borrower’s website and were also
                           discussed during public consultations at the DER-SP office in Sao Paulo on December 12, 2012.
                           The complement to the ESIA specific to the road sections added to the Project was disclosed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the borrower on January 23, 2014 and submitted to InfoShop (03/14/2014. More than 70
                           government agencies, private sector groups and civil society organizations were invited to review
                           the ESIA and provide comments. Additional consultations were held with FUNAI – Brazil’s
                           National Indian Foundation – to assess the appropriateness of the Indigenous Peoples Planning
                           Framework (IPPF). Key recommendations regarding institutional responsibilities, access to project
                           products and benefits, and road safety issues were received and integrated into the project design
                           and impact management plans. The additional project activities assessed through the complement
                           to the ESIA are similar in scope and nature to those previously assessed for which the consultation
                           held during the original ESIA. The proposed civil works on the additional road sections do not
                           trigger any additional safeguards, and the client has demonstrated satisfactory capacity using
                           existing environmental and social frameworks to identify and manage probable impacts and risks.
                           These procedures are strengthened by independent environmental supervision of construction
                           activities and a well publicized toll-free information service.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Jan-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                            29-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Jan-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                            29-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Jan-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                            29-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes


                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          22-Jan-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       23-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Brazil                                                               23-Jan-2014
                           Comments: If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources
                                         policies, the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the
                                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?


                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Eric R. Lancelot
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name:                                                   Date:
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:      Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                            Date: 14-Jan-2015



                                                                       Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
