                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1036

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Paraguay                         Project ID:       P147278
                            Project Name:      PY Transport Connectivity (P147278)
                            Task Team          Veronica Ines Raffo,Maria Claudia Pachon
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          04-May-2016                      Estimated         21-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI04                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (85%), General transportation
                                               sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%), Export
                                               development and competitiveness (60%), Injuries and non-communi cable
                                               diseases (10%), Other urban development (10%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Total                                                                        100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to improve the efficiency in the management of the
                           country’s national road transport network, and contribute to improved road safety outcomes. This
                           will be achieved through (i) enhancing the institutional capacities of the MOPC for strategic planning
                         and management of the road network (ii); implementing more efficient mechanisms of road asset
                         preservation namely performance based contracts on selected national roads, and (iii) improving the
                         capabilities of the newly created road safety agency in order to positively influence road safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                         outcomes in Paraguay.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project components are as indicated below:
                         Component 1. Improvement and Maintenance of the Paved Road Network (proposed Bank financing
                         of US$75 million)
                         Sub-Component 1.1 Performance Based Contracting (US$ 70 million): This sub-component will
                         continue the implementation of the performance based maintenance contracting (under the GMANS
                         and/or CREMA models) of around 400km of main paved roads of Paraguay.
                         Sub-Component 1.2: Tolling (US$ 5 million) Under this sub-component initiatives started under the
                         MOPC tolling modernization system will be continued with the financing of Phase II (modernization
                         and establishment of at least 5 tolling stations) on the main paved road network to support cost-
                         recovery efforts for sustained road maintenance.
                         Component 2. Institutional Strengthening (proposed Bank financing US$15 million):
                         Sub-component 2.1 Institutional Strengthening MOPC (US$ 13.5 million): This component would
                         finance the strengthening of strategic planning (road inventory, road condition, road asset
                         management module, economic decision module), as well as a series of consulting services, training
                         and goods needed to improve the institutional capacity of MOPC. It will also support initiatives to
                         investigate the feasibility of alternative financing (e.g. fuel levies) for road maintenance in order to
                         ensure the sustainability of the road assets.
                         Sub-component 2.2: Routine Maintenance of unpaved roads (US$ 1.5 million): this sub-component
                         will continue the successful model of micro-enterprises, and finance the creation of at least 10 micro-
                         enterprises to carry out the routine maintenance activities of target road sections improved under
                         previous financing. This work has the potential to provide employment opportunities to particularly
                         vulnerable and disadvantaged groups like indigenous peoples, and women. Past experience has
                         shown this to have positive spillover effects in empowerment, agency, voice and participation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Road Safety (proposed Bank financing US$10 million):
                         This component is proposed to support the initial actions of this recently created lead road safety
                         agency and strengthen its technical capabilities in the areas of: (i) dissemination and awareness
                         raising campaigns; (ii) traffic control and regulation; (iii) traffic records and accident statistics; (iv)
                         accident black spots and risk map; (v) road safety education; (vi) training of professional drivers and
                         enforcement authorities; (vii) control over the issuance of the national driver’s license; (viii)
                         mandatory vehicle safety audit; (ix) uniform road signaling and road infrastructure; (x) emergency
                         response management; (xi) traffic legislation consistency; (xii) helmet equipment for motorbikes;
                         and (xiii) civil society participation in policy planning.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         •       Performance based contracting of around 400 km of main paved roads of Paraguay. Specific
                         Location to be defined during project preparation.
                         •       Modernization/establishment of 5 tolling stations: Specific Location to be defined during
                         project preparation.
                         •       Routine Maintenance of unpaved roads: Specific location to be defined during project
                         preparation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Institutional capacity (from technical, financial and human resources point of view) for
                           environmental and social sustainability of infrastructure investments, including roads, is weak at
                           sector, country and project levels. Weakness includes technical, human resources and funds
Public Disclosure Copy




                           dimensions.

                           At sector level, although the Environmental Management Directorate (Dirección de Gestión
                           Ambiental) of the MOPC has the formal mandate to undertake Environmental Impact Assessments
                           (EIAs) of infrastructure investments - in which indigenous, resettlement and other social aspects are
                           included – project implementation units are actively in charge of these EIAs.

                           The Secretary of the Environment (Secretaría del Ambiente – SEAM) is the national authority that
                           issues the environment licenses. Social aspects of proposed works are included in the review process
                           of the environmental license issuance. Although there is a new regulation related to the environment
                           licenses that would expedite process and enhance outcomes, this process has often taken longer than
                           expected and become a bottleneck for infrastructure development. Local governments and the
                           Paraguayan Institute of Indigenous Affairs (Instituto Paraguayo del Indígena) also participate in the
                           process of licensing, particularly when indigenous peoples are impacted by the project. All of these
                           instances often have weak technical capacity and are not adequately funded.

                           At project level, despite many years of concerted efforts to improve the capacity of assessing and
                           managing social risks and impacts of paved/unpaved works stemming from the current Bank
                           financed project, many issues – including resettlement and indigenous peoples- remain to be
                           addressed.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Claudio Luis Daniele (GENDR)
                           Graciela Sanchez Martinez (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            OP/BP 4.01 would be triggered because the physical
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      interventions resulting from the implementation of
                                                                           investments under Component 1 and 2 could have
                                                                           some negative impacts on the environment, mainly
                                                                           related to construction site management and public
                                                                           safety.

                                                                           The project is not expected to result in significant
                                                                           negative environmental impacts that cannot be
                                                                           mitigated. The majority of project activities are
                                                                           expected to have low to moderate impact.
                                                                           Potential negative environmental indirect impacts
                                                                           could include land use change or increased pressure
                                                                           over natural resources.

                                                                           As part of the EA process during preparation, the
                                                                           Borrower will finalize the project's Environmental
                                                             and Social Management Framework (ESMF-
                                                             MOASA).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             The ESMF includes guidelines for the preparation of
                                                             a Social and Environmental Management Plan to
                                                             address the mitigation of social and environmental
                                                             impacts of each specific subproject including, as the
                                                             case may be: waste management, environmental
                                                             protection measures (soil, air, flora, fauna, water, and
                                                             landscape), and public information, among others.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Given that specific sites have not been identified,
                                                             decision on whether this policy is to be triggered will
                                                             be made at a later stage during preparation.

                                                             Some sub-projects could be located in areas close or
                                                             connected to natural and/or critical habitat or
                                                             protected areas. If this is identified at the subproject
                                                             screening stage, the ESMF will include the criteria
                                                             and procedure to avoid negative impacts and
                                                             conversion and to support the strengthening of
                                                             associated natural habitat management instruments.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   Given that specific sites have not been identified,
                                                             decision on whether this policy is to be triggered will
                                                             be made at a later stage during preparation.

                                                             All infrastructure work of this project will go through
                                                             a process to screen the potential impacts on forests
                                                             and forest dependent communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD   OP/BP 4.09 will only will be activated if the use of
                                                             herbicides to control weeds are allowed in the road
                                                             right-of-way. This will be defined during project
                                                             preparation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   Project implementation is not expected to have any
                         OP/BP 4.11                          negative impact on physical cultural resources. All
                                                             project activities would be implemented on existing
                                                             roads in areas under agricultural production.
                                                             However, this policy is left as TBD as project may
                                                             involve chance finds of physical cultural resources
                                                             and, although unlikely, might involve impacts on
                                                             physical cultural resources as specific sub-projects
                                                             are identified. The ESMF will include screening
                                                             criteria to evaluate potential impacts on cultural
                                                             resources and provide guidance on chance finds
                                                             procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   The project triggers OP/BP 4.10 since approximately
                         4.10                                17,000 indigenous peoples are present or have a
                                                              collective attachment in at least three Departments
                                                              (San Pedro, Caaguazú and Caazapá), where activities
                                                              for improving and maintaining unpaved roads will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              held. For this specific area, lessons from the
                                                              Indigenous Peoples Plan of the ongoing roads
                                                              maintenance project will be taken.

                                                              There is no information about the location of
                                                              performance-based contracting and establishment of
                                                              tollbooths.

                                                              All potential infrastructure work stemming from this
                                                              project will go through a screening process to ensure
                                                              adequate identification of indigenous people’s
                                                              presence within the project areas as well as its
                                                              potential impacts. This screening will be carried out
                                                              according to information available on the project
                                                              works. Specific Indigenous Peoples Plan might then
                                                              be prepared and disclosed by appraisal.

                                                              An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                              will be developed to guide the preparation of specific
                                                              Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs) during project
                                                              implementation.

                                                              Indigenous peoples are considered as the most
                                                              excluded social group in Paraguay. Despite
                                                              representing only 1.7% of the country’s total
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              population, they are a very diverse social group, with
                                                              17 ethnicities divided into five linguistic groups.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The project triggers the Bank’s Involuntary
                         BP 4.12                              Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12). Experience
                                                              accumulated in the roads maintenance project has
                                                              shown that: (i) resettlement of households or small
                                                              businesses located (mostly illegally) in the road
                                                              right-of-way (ROW) of paved roads of Paraguay is
                                                              required; (ii) the assumption that no acquisition of
                                                              land would be needed since works would be carried
                                                              out along the current road alignments and ROW in
                                                              rural areas is false, actually private land was needed
                                                              to correct curves, widening, adequately fencing the
                                                              ROW, etc.

                                                              The task team will ensure that the borrower prepares
                                                              Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) as needed for any
                                                              specific works that are known at the time of
                                                              appraisal. A Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                                                                        prepared for those works in which the engineering
                                                                                                                        design will be developed /completed during project
                                                                                                                        execution.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance building or rehabilitation
                                                                                                                        of any dam and will not rely on the operation of an
                                                                                                                        existing dam.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project will not finance any activities near or
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   related to waterways or ports.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project will not finance activities that take place
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      April 15, 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Veronica Ines Raffo,Maria Claudia Pachon
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                  Date: 09-May-2016
                                 Advisor:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                  Date: 10-May-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
