                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7217
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Moldova                           Project ID:    P144103
                            Project Name:     MD Competitiveness Enhancement Project II (P144103)
                            Task Team         Melissa Rekas
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         14-Apr-2014                       Estimated   26-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSPF                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Industry and trade (17%), SME Finance (33%), General
                                              industry and trade sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Regulation and competition policy (34%), Other Financial Sector Development
                                              (33%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      45.00           Total Bank Financing:                45.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                15.00
                              Total                                                                                      45.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project’s development objective is to increase the export competitiveness of Moldovan
                           enterprises and decrease the regulatory burden they face.


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         This PDO will be achieved through a set of measures that aim to: (i) increase the competitiveness of
                         existing exporters, increase the export readiness of enterprises that are not yet exporting, and increase
Public Disclosure Copy




                         linkages with markets for both categories of enterprises; (ii) improve firms’ ability to access medium
                         to long-term finance; and (iii) improve the business enabling environment to reduce costs.
                          3. Project Description
                         The project is composed of three components: (a) Regulatory Reform Component: Moldovan
                         Government agencies and institutions will benefit from project activities to improve the
                         implementation of business enabling environment reforms . These activities will improve
                         accountability and monitoring of reform strategies that GoM has adopted – including the Business
                         Roadmap, Regulatory Reform Strategy and its accompanying Action Plan, and Competitiveness
                         Strategy, and others as appropriate throughout the life of the project. Select institutions will benefit
                         directly from assistance to implement priority reforms; (b) SME Development Component: The
                         Organization for the Development of Small and Medium Enterprises (ODIMM) and Moldovan
                         Investment and Export Promotion Organization (MIEPO) will benefit directly from activities to
                         improve the targeting, design, delivery mechanisms, and capacity to implement programs to facilitate
                         SME development and exports. The project will focus on the roles that these public institutions
                         should play as providers of public goods and with an aim to overcome market failures. The project
                         will also build in activities to make these gains sustainable after the end of the project. The project
                         will also provide a matching grant facility to increase SMEs’ export competitiveness. Approximately
                         280 enterprises will participate directly in the matching grant facility, and we assume that on
                         average, each enterprise will receive approximately two business development services to implement
                         a business improvement project; and (c) Access to Finance Component: Moldovan export oriented
                         private enterprises eligible for financing will benefit directly from funds on-lent through the
                         participating financial intermediaries (PFIs) under the line of credit (LoC). Along the same lines,
                         Moldovan banks eligible to participate as PFIs will benefit directly from access to medium- to long-
                         term funds under the LoC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented countrywide based on demand by beneficiary enterprises for
                         services and credit. Project activities will not be located in protected or culturally/socially sensitive
                         areas.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                         Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09              Yes



                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              In accordance with the Bank's safeguard policies and procedures, including OP/BP/GP 4.01
                              Environmental Assessment, the project relates to the Bank's FI Category which is applied to all
                              proposed projects that involve investment of Bank funds through a participating financial
                              intermediary (FI) to be used for subprojects, environmental impacts from which cannot be
                              determined during appraisal of the World Bank project.

                             The project will support different types of matching grants to enterprises and subprojects ,
                             including in the area of industrial and agricultural production, agro-processing and manufacturing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The grants and subprojects might cause some environmental and social impacts that can be
                             summarized as follows: (a) agricultural production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity,
                             soil compaction, soil pollution, surface and underground water pollution, health and environmental
                             risks associated with agro-chemicals use, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: contribution to
                             surface water pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) manufacturing: air pollution, waste waters,
                             hazardous wastes and solid waste generation, labor safety; (d) construction: soil and air pollution;
                             acoustic, aesthetics impacts, etc. Overall all these impacts will be site specific and mostly
                             temporary and can be easily mitigated through good projects design and implementation practices.

                             All grants and subprojects to be supported under the project will be subject to environmental
                             screening as per criteria established in the CEP II EMF. In cases where these may cause
                             significant impacts which require a full EIA (Category A projects), such subprojects will be not
                             financed under the project. Additionally, the project will not fund subprojects located in protected
                             areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas, along with subprojects which might
                             have impacts on international waterways. Most of the subprojects will fall under Category B
                             projects, which will require a simple Environmental Impact Assessment and/or preparation of a
                             simple Environmental Management Plan (EMP). It is also expected that many grants and
                             subprojects will have insignificant environmental impacts and will fall under Category C projects,
                             which will require only an environmental due diligence procedure. As the project will support
                             agricultural activities it may stimulate more use of agro-chemicals and thus it potentially triggers


                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                          OP 4.09 on Pest Management.

                          Importantly, the subprojects to be supported under the Access to Finance Component will generate
Public Disclosure Copy




                          a great number of both direct and indirect positive social impacts. Direct positive impacts will be
                          generated by increased production, products and goods which would result in creation of new jobs
                          and respectively, more employment and increased income. Indirect positive impacts will relate to
                          overall improvement of business environment, increased exports and improved market position of
                          enterprises, introduction of advanced technologies and techniques, creation of new opportunities
                          for access to foreign markets, enhancement competitiveness of domestic production and products,
                          contribution to poverty reduction and food safety, and improvement of country's socio-economic
                          conditions.

                          As all proposed activities are to be implemented within existing agricultural land and settlement
                          boundaries, the financing will not have impacts on wildlife and natural habitats and thus OP/BP
                          4.04 “Natural habitats” is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact on physical
                          cultural resources, and therefore OP/BP 4.11 “Physical Cultural Resources” is not triggered.

                           Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that they
                           have not acquired and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with the
                           project proceeds through a process which involved and/or would involve officially supported
                           expropriation. Additionally, project funds will not support any sub-loans used to invest in a
                           business which would require the involuntary displacement of existing occupants or economic
                           users of any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or loss of or damage to assets
                           including standing crops, kiosks, fences and other. The LoC operational manual will define a
                           screening procedure to be filled by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely monitor the
                           screening procedure, with the support of the Bank task team. With these restrictions in place, the
                           project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 “Involuntary Resettlement”.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The expected cumulative impact of the activities which might be supported by the financing are
                           mostly positive and include improved knowledge on best agricultural, agro-processing and
                           manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the status of the environment in the
                           country.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The task team has analyzed the possible implications of a “no project” scenario and concluded that
                           in the absence of the financing there is an increased probability for negative economic and social
                           consequences in the country, stemming from an inability of companies to increase their
                           competitiveness given changing market conditions.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to address safeguards policy issues, the borrower hired an independent local consultant
                           who updated the Environmental Management Framework (EMF), prepared for the CEP I project.
                           The EMF outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for the
                           subprojects which will be supported by the CEP II. It also provides details on procedures, criteria
                           and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing and monitoring.
                           Furthermore, the document includes Environmental Guidelines for different types of proposed


                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                         matching grants and subprojects. These guidelines provide guidance on potential impacts and
                         generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for sub-projects in agricultural production, agro-
                         processing and manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and selection, through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results. Furthermore, the
                         EMF provides a monitoring plan format that includes monitoring indicators, timing, methods,
                         institutional responsibilities, etc. in all phases of projects’ implementation. Lastly, the EMF
                         includes a section describing measures that will be used to ensure compliance with national laws
                         and World Bank requirements relating to pesticide purchase and use, and also measures to
                         promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approaches and safe pesticide handling and disposal
                         practices to reduce human and environmental exposure.

                         The project will be implemented by the MoE which has been a counterpart of World Bank
                         investment loans focusing on private sector development for over a decade. This includes the
                         2006-2013 CEP I project as well as prior private sector development projects. It has implemented
                         projects using Project Implementation Units (PIUs), established as separate legal entities under
                         MoE, and staffed with professionals who know how to apply Bank procurement, financial
                         management, safeguards and other rules. Implementation of CEP II, including its fiduciary
                         aspects, will be managed by the same PIU that managed CEP I project activities. For the purpose
                         of implementing environmental safeguards, a full-time Environmental Specialist (ES) will be hired
                         within the PIU for the first year of project implementation. Thereafter, ES would be hired on full
                         or part-time basis, based on periodic assessment of project environmental arrangements, and the
                         associated level of effort required to sustain them, by World Bank supervision team. The ES
                         main goal will be to coordinate all Environmental Assessment activities and ensure adequate
                         implementation of Environmental Management Framework requirements.

                         The PIU will be responsible for implementing the matching grant sub-component under the second
                         project component (SME development) with technical inputs from ODIMM and MIEPO. This
                         component is targeted at improving enterprises’ export competitiveness, by providing matching
                         grants for relevant business development services. Since the PIU does not currently have expertise
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on environment, it was agreed that they will hire an Environmental Specialist. The PIU
                         Environmental Specialist should have good knowledge and experience in applying WB
                         environmental safeguards and environmental management. The ES will focus on the following:
                         (i) assessing any potential negative environmental or social impacts of the business development
                         proposals, (ii) conducting matching grants environmental screening and assessment, (iii) creating
                         and/or strengthening Environmental Management Systems (EMSs), (iv) looking for opportunities
                         to recommend environmentally and/or socially positive options (e.g. energy efficiency, recycling
                         and reducing waste generation, etc.) to support the activities presented in the matching grant
                         application, (v) providing TA on environmental management to ODIMM and MIEPO as required
                         given their role in the MGF process; and (vi) providing inputs on environmental management into
                         the Matching Grants Manual. If administration of technical aspects of the MGF is transferred to
                         ODIMM later in the project, the ES will provide additional TA to ODIMM so that they can
                         adequately screen the MGF applications for environmental issues, per the requirements in the
                         MGF Manual.

                         The implementation of Line of Credit under component 3 (Access to Finance) will be done by the
                         Credit Line Directorate of Ministry of Finance. This is the same implementing agency as under
                         CEP I and CLD has extensive expertise in application of Bank Safeguard policies (in addition to
                         CEP I it has managed several other line of credits financed under World Bank’s Sector Rural
                         Investment and Services Project). Furthermore, the CLD received adequate training to conduct

                                                                    Page 5 of 7
                           screening of sub-loan applications for compliance with safeguards procedures. Based on
                           information gathered during WB implementation support visits, safeguards implementation in
                           CEP I was considered overall positive. The EMF was implemented successfully - all submitted
Public Disclosure Copy




                           subprojects were preliminarily assessed from environmental point of view and were assigned an
                           environmental category as well as required relevant environmental authorizations, licenses and
                           permits. Furthermore, all approved subprojects have relevant supporting EA documents –
                           Environmental Screening Checklist and/or simple Environmental Management Plan and if needed
                           per national legislation – approvals from local environmental authorities and from the State
                           Ecological Expertise (SEE) along with the environmental permits and licenses.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The PIU disseminated the draft summary EMF to the Ministry of Economy , Ministry of
                           Environment, and other relevant ministries for their review and comments. On March 7, 2014, the
                           document was posted on the website of the Ministry of Economy (www.mec.gov.md) for its
                           access to wide public. On March 21, 2014, the PIU organized a consultation on Draft EMF. After
                           the consultation, the draft document was revised to consider inputs from consulted parties. On
                           March 25, 2014, the final draft EMF was posted on the website of the Ministry of Economy and
                           submitted to the World Bank for its disclosure in the Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Moldova                                                          25-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Final version of the EMF was posted on the website of the Ministry of Economy
                                         (www.mec.gov.md)
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Moldova                                                          25-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Final version of the EMF with a special section on Pest Management issues has been
                                         disclosed on : www.mec.gov.md
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Melissa Rekas
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Paloma Anos Casero (SM)                      Date: 13-Apr-2014




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
