                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1072
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nicaragua                          Project ID:    P148809
                            Project Name:      Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)
                            Task Team          Augusto Garcia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Oct-2014                        Estimated   30-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Agro-industry, marketing,
                                              and trade (20%), Health (10%), Public administrati on- Agriculture, fishing and
                                              forestry (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Nutrition and food security
                                              (40%), Rural non-farm income generation (10%), Managin g for development
                                              results (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      33.90           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                               33.90
                              Total                                                                                      33.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to enhance food and nutritional security in select
                           communities of the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua.

                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         The PDO will be achieved by (a) enhancing productive and marketing capacities of farmers and rural
                         enterprises through supporting the design, financing and implementation of Innovation Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Plans (IDPs); and (b) providing cross-cutting services to IDP beneficiaries in the areas of technology
                         generation/transfer and nutrition education and communication.
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Innovation Development Plans (IDPs) for strengthening productive and marketing
                         capacity (US$31.85, GAFSP Grant US$26.50 million). This component will enhance the productive
                         and marketing capacities of farmers and rural enterprises. It will do so by supporting the participatory
                         design of business proposals known as Innovation Development Plans (IDPs), and financing their
                         implementation. These IDPs will support groups of beneficiaries organized in different ways and to
                         achieve goals related to production improvements, innovations, and the consolidation of market
                         opportunities. The beneficiary mobilization and design of the IDPs, and the types of IDPs to be
                         financed are briefly described below.

                         Beneficiary mobilization and design of IDPs. MEFFCA will identify and mobilize eligible
                         beneficiaries through local consultations and promote the participatory design of IDPs investments.
                         The activities will include inter alia: (i) the carrying out of communication and dissemination
                         campaigns in targeted areas; (ii) technical support for the design of IDP proposals, including rapid
                         and participatory value-chain assessments and territorial diagnostics; (iii) the provision of training to
                         officials of eligible municipalities and technical service providers on critical areas of IDP
                         preparation, implementation and monitoring; (iv) financial, social, environmental and technical
                         assessments associated with IDP investments; (v) strengthening organizational and business
                         capacities of producer groups, communities and small rural producer organizations as well as broad
                         activities fostering smallholder linkages to markets; and (vi) the mobilization of technical assistance
                         (TA) for sanitary and phytosanitary surveillance/services required to support the IDPs during the
                         production and processing stages.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Typology of IDPs. The IDPs will receive project financing to cover investments for natural and non-
                         natural resource-based activities and services with nutrition considerations. Natural resource-based
                         IDPs will focus on the promotion of sustainable production, processing and/or commercialization
                         improvements and innovations around family agriculture (including livestock) and artisanal fisheries.
                         Non-natural resource-based IDPs will support innovative small and micro family and community
                         enterprises and will strengthen their capacity to access markets and self-employment opportunities,
                         emphasizing opportunities for women and young adults. The specific targeting and eligibility criteria
                         for each IDP category are included in the Operational Manual, reflecting the particularities of the
                         target groups and the different types of support. Four types of IDPs will be supported by the project:

                         (i)      Family agriculture (including livestock). IDPs will seek to improve productivity that is
                         diversified and climate smart. A mix of short-, medium- and long-term investment models will be
                         supported (short term: vegetables and food crops; medium term: diversification through perennial
                         crops; long term: agro-forestry/silvopastoral systems). Producers will be supported in the purchase
                         and use of quality inputs (e.g. certified or improved seed/seedlings), the purchase of equipment and
                         the adoption of good production/management practices and technologies (e.g. storage). For producers
                         with commercialization potential, market linkages will also be supported.

                         (ii)    Artisanal fisheries (and aquaculture). These IDPs will support improvements in production
                         through financial and technical support to small-scale fisheries. The project will finance the


                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         acquisition of equipment and boats suitable for small-scale fisheries; it will facilitate access to fishing
                         supplies and seed capital. It will also support the adoption of environmental management practices; it
                         will fund activities to add value to the production and encourage the establishment of partnerships
Public Disclosure Copy




                         between processing plants and beneficiary families.

                         (iii)   Agricultural/agro-industrial ventures. These IDPs will focus on supporting agricultural/agro-
                         industrial ventures from organizations of producers seeking to improve processes of value addition at
                         the farm and collective level (selection, cleaning, washing, etc.) and fostering market linkages
                         (partnerships/agreements with buyers).

                         (iv)    Non-agricultural microenterprises. These IDPs will support gender-sensitive TA and training
                         for production, marketing, business and environmental management, and investments in equipment/
                         supplies needed to strengthen the productive capacity of microenterprises.

                         Component 2: Strengthening service provision for sustainable production, f ood security, and
                         nutrition (US$6.42, GAFSP Grant US$4.10 million). This component will strengthen sectoral
                         capacities for the provision of services in support to IDP beneficiaries in two broad areas:

                         (i) Technology generation/validation and transfer. These are activities to improve productivity and
                         quality of agriculture production. The component will therefore enhance the institutional capacity of
                         the Nicaraguan Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) to generate/validate and transfer
                         sustainable technologies, encourage methodologies to support demand-driven approaches and
                         farmer-to-farmer exchanges, and promote the adoption of sustainable production technologies and
                         practices. The main activities include: (i) rehabilitation of two INTA Technological Development
                         Centers in the Caribbean Coast and (ii) training of technical professionals and local lead producers
                         (promoters) to support technology transfer to farmers benefiting from the IDPs.

                         (ii) Nutrition education and communication and nutrition-sensitive agriculture. These are activities to
                         promote nutritional education and communication for diversified production and consumption. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component will finance nutrition education and communication activities that will promote improved
                         feeding and food handling practices with specific emphasis on pregnant and breastfeeding women
                         and children. Activities related to nutrition education and behavior change communications (BCC)
                         will aim to raise awareness and knowledge about nutrition and the role of agriculture in improving
                         nutrition outcomes, ensuring that appropriate channels are used to reach out both women and men.

                         Component 3: Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$3.73, GAFSP Grant US$3.30
                         million). This component will finance incremental and operating costs, equipment and goods for
                         MEFFCA, including a comprehensive M&E system. Activities will include project reporting,
                         monitoring and evaluation with gender-differentiated aspects (monitoring IDPs, baseline, final
                         evaluation, and rapid impact evaluation), financial management (including project audits) and
                         procurement
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project area is the Caribbean Coast region of Nicaragua, given its high poverty rate, high profit
                         potential and opportunities for efficiency gains. The project will target approximately 246 indigenous
                         and mestizo communities in the municipalities of Puerto Cabezas, Bonanza, Rosita, Waspam, Siuna,
                         Prinzapolka, Waslala, and Mulukuku in the North-Caribbean Autonomous Region (RACN), and
                         Bocana de Paiwas, Bluefields, Kukra Hill, El Tortuguero, La Desembocadura de Rio Grande, Laguna


                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         de Perlas, and La Cruz de Rio Grande in the South-Caribbean Autonomous Region (RACS).

                         The project municipalities were selected based on their high levels of poverty and malnutrition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Agricultural potential and the existence of similar projects were also considered in the selection of
                         these 15 municipalities. The same criteria (poverty, malnutrition, agricultural or non-farm potential,
                         and equitable geographic coverage) will guide the selection of beneficiary communities at the intra-
                         municipal level.

                         In terms of surface extension, the project area covers a mayor part of the country's protected areas,
                         including for example the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve and Indio-Maíz Biological Reserve. The
                         project area suffers from ongoing environmental degradation due to the rapidly advancing
                         agricultural frontier and other land use changes that are partly induced by immigrants from other
                         parts of the country who are generally perceived as merely interested in short-term economic gains.
                         Further, negative impacts of increasing climate variability and the overall low technical capacity
                         amongst the population add to environmental vulnerability of the project area. Indigenous and Afro-
                         Nicaraguan peoples living in the project area are expected to benefit from the project activities.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jason Jacques Paiement (GSURR)
                         Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Regarding socio-environmental management and
                         BP 4.01                                              safeguards needs, the project is classified as
                                                                              Category B and requires a partial Environmental
                                                                              Assessment (EA). Due to the small-scale and
                                                                              dispersed nature of the eligible investments, no
                                                                              large scale, significant and/or irreversible
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              negative environmental or social impacts are
                                                                              foreseen. Beyond financing agricultural or other
                                                                              productive inputs, investments can entail minor
                                                                              facility/storage works and purchasing equipment
                                                                              that will require socio-environmental
                                                                              management. An Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                              prepared to guide demand-driven project
                                                                              implementation. Compared with the general
                                                                              baseline situation, the project is designed to
                                                                              promote an overall positive environmental impact
                                                                              through promotion and application of climate-
                                                                              smart agriculture and sustainable production/
                                                                              fishing practices. The ESMF includes a negative
                                                                              list to secure exclusion of any large scale,
                                                                              significant and/or irreversible negative
                                                                              environmental or social impacts. Particularly, no
                                                                              activity that would imply advancing the
                                                                              agricultural frontier will be eligible for project
                                                                              funding.


                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The project area includes various protected areas,
                                                                         including the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve and
                                                                         Indio-Maíz Biological Reserve. The project can
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         fund activities that would impact positively said
                                                                         areas or other natural habitats, e.g. by engaging in
                                                                         sustainable use of their resources through
                                                                         participatory identification and development of
                                                                         alternative livelihood sources for people who
                                                                         depend on said areas for subsistence. Any project-
                                                                         funded activity that would impact a protected area
                                                                         requires that said area has a valid Management
                                                                         Plan and that the activity is compatible with the
                                                                         same. The ESMF includes a negative list that will
                                                                         exclude any activity that could lead to conversion
                                                                         or degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           OP/BP 4.36 is triggered taken the project's focus
                                                                         on rural areas and a potential of IDPs related with
                                                                         sustainable forestry being proposed for project
                                                                         funding. Forestry doesn’t belong to the core
                                                                         activities financed by the project, but taken its
                                                                         demand-driven nature and the local context and
                                                                         threats, awareness raising and capacity building
                                                                         on sustainable forestry and use of non-timber
                                                                         forest products (NTFP) will be embedded into
                                                                         IDPs design. Financing of timber production or
                                                                         harvesting is not expected, but the non-farm
                                                                         income activities could entail small investments
                                                                         for manufacture of articles made of legally logged
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         wood. Project activities aim at reducing pressure
                                                                         to deforest for agriculture and/or livestock
                                                                         purposes and promoting agroforestry. Due to
                                                                         demanding socio-environmental management
                                                                         needs and lack of support at the community level,
                                                                         financing palm oil production with project funds
                                                                         will not be eligible.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The project will finance agricultural activities
                                                                         where baseline conditions involve different types
                                                                         of agrochemicals and levels and practices of their
                                                                         usage. The project will promote Integrated Pest/
                                                                         Crop Management through project-provided
                                                                         extension services. The ESMF provides the
                                                                         necessary initial guidance for said management.
                                                                         During implementation, concrete cases will need
                                                                         to be assessed in detail and managed accordingly.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project design does not particularly aim at
                         BP 4.11                                         financing activities related with physical cultural



                                                                 Page 5 of 11
                                                                        resources. However, taken its demand-driven
                                                                        nature and location in primarily indigenous
                                                                        territories, OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to make sure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        that component 2 on non-farm rural livelihoods
                                                                        will be able to address potential PCR/tourism-
                                                                        related IDPs. The project will only allow positive
                                                                        impacts on PCRs; the ESMF’s negative list will
                                                                        exclude any activity that could lead to their
                                                                        degradation or destruction. The ESMF also guides
                                                                        for applicable archaeological chance find
                                                                        procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes           OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples will apply, as
                                                                        roughly 20 percent of eligible beneficiaries are
                                                                        likely to be indigenous or afro-descendent. As the
                                                                        exact nature and location of the project funded
                                                                        activities within the selected 15 municipalities of
                                                                        the Atlantic region will only be determined during
                                                                        project implementation, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                        Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared.
                                                                        During project implementation, the IPPF will
                                                                        assist MEFCCA to determine whether Indigenous
                                                                        Peoples or Afro-descendants are present in any of
                                                                        the project areas, and if so, to ensure that the
                                                                        interested communities support the proposed
                                                                        activities as well as any additional measures
                                                                        required to maximize their culturally appropriate
                                                                        benefits and/or avoid potentially adverse impacts.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No            Due to the limited physical footprint of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                           proposed investments, no land acquisition or
                                                                        displacement of assets will be required. All
                                                                        technical assistance and equipment investments
                                                                        will be restricted to either lands privately owned
                                                                        by the participating producersand/or unoccupied
                                                                        municipal or communal lands.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            The project will not finance any mayor dam and
                                                                        is not expected to finance IDPs that would depend
                                                                        on an existing dam.
                         Projects on International        No            Project activities supporting artisanal fisheries
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           and aquaculture will be located in coastal lagoons
                                                                        and, thus, no such activities will be located in the
                                                                        Wangki or Coco River Basin nor affect the
                                                                        riparian country of Honduras. Both the Legal
                                                                        Agreement and the Operational Manual will
                                                                        include a provision stating this.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No            There are no disputed areas within the project
                         7.60                                           area.



                                                                Page 6 of 11
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Regarding socio-environmental management and safeguards needs, the project is classified as
                              Category B and requires a partial Environmental Assessment (EA). Due to the small-scale and
                              dispersed nature of the eligible investments, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
                              impacts are foreseen. Instead, it has a remarkable potential for environmental value added. This
                              potential will be promoted through a special emphasis on socially appropriate capacity building
                              and TA on environmentally friendly and climate-smart agricultural practices (e.g. agro-
                              silvopastoril systems). Compared with the general baseline situation, the project is designed to
                              promote an overall positive environmental impact. Despite the positive expectations on the project
                              ´s direct environmental impacts, its environmental risk is considered substantial as it promotes
                              improved gains from agricultural production and could thus cause undesirable indirect impacts.
                              Further yet overall minor environmental risks relate with potential small scale contamination
                              derived from inadequate or even prohibited use of agrochemicals or deficient management of
                              animal manure. Soil degradation might also occur in case sustainable agricultural practices were
                              not followed. Taken the vulnerability of the project area to environmental degradation and related
                              negative impacts of climate variability, it is critical that environmental sustainability and use of
                              locally validated good practices are key factors in designing and approving IDPs and planning for
                              the related capacity building and TA.

                              Regarding social risks, the project will operate within multiple complex social, geographic and
                              political orders that present a substantial risk that local elites could attempt to capture project
                              benefits thereby preventing the poorest from participating in the design of the IDPs that are
                              expected to contribute to enhance their food and nutrition security. To manage this risk, the project
                              will do two things: i) implement a communications and public engagement plan to improve access
Public Disclosure Copy




                              to and feedback about project related information and activities, and ii) implement a participatory
                              IDP design process with opportunities for beneficiary inputs at key decision points. Furthermore,
                              there will likely be considerable pressures from community leaders and local beneficiaries for the
                              project to achieve quick results, which in turn could lead to frustration and conflict if such
                              expectations are not met. The communications plan will also be crucial to manage the additional
                              risk that normal project planning and implementation time frames could cause expectations to turn
                              to frustrations. The project will also use feedback mechanisms such as local radio talk shows in
                              order to understand evolving expectations during implementation, and to address these in a
                              proactive manner.

                              OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples will apply, as roughly 20 percent of eligible beneficiaries are
                              likely to be indigenous. As the exact nature and location of the project funded activities within the
                              selected 15 municipalities of the two Caribbean Coast regions will only be determined during
                              project implementation, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared. The
                              IPPF will assist MEFCCA to determine whether Indigenous Peoples are present in any of the
                              project areas, and if so, to ensure that the interested communities support the proposed activities as
                              well as any additional measures required to maximize their culturally appropriate benefits and/or
                              avoid potentially adverse impacts. A draft IPPF was presented during regional public consultations
                              with potential beneficiaries in Siuna, Bilwi, Waspam, and Bluefields. Participants raised concerns
                              during these consultations including the range of eligible productive activities, the role of local


                                                                         Page 7 of 11
                           officials in the administration of project funding, and the need for complementary investments in
                           access roads, communications and capacity building. These concerns have been addressed by the
                           inclusion of broad sectorial eligibility requirements, inviting local officials to participate in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Regional Coordination Comities that review PDIs, and coordinating the locations of project
                           investments with other World Bank and development partners’ investments in the two regions.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Government of Nicaragua is investing in roads and telecommunications throughout the
                           Atlantic regions. This infrastructure should contribute to supporting long term food and nutrition
                           security by reducing transport costs and improving access to markets, services and information.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not really relevant due to the small-scale and dispersed nature of the eligible investments. In every
                           case, as the financed activities will be demand driven and not known during project preparation,
                           considering alternatives only becomes relevant during project implementation. Regarding
                           alternatives in terms of land use, all infrastructure and equipment investments will be restricted to
                           either lands privately owned by the participating beneficiaries and/or unoccupied municipal and
                           communal lands. This restriction on the available land use alternatives is aimed at avoiding
                           adverse impacts caused by potential involuntary taking of land.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project’s main implementing agency will be the Ministry of Family Economy (MEFCCA),
                           which was created by Presidential Decree in 2012 on the basis of the previously existing Rural
                           Development Institute (IDR). The MEFCCA is also the main implementing agency of
                           PRORURAL’s National Agro-Industry Program and has extensive experience implementing large
                           rural development projects with financing from International Fund for Agricultural Development
                           (IFAD) and Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), as well as bilateral donors. Nonetheless,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           its experience with World Bank projects is rather recent; based on one of the components of the
                           Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Development Project (P109691).

                           The MEFCCA has leaded the preparation of the ESMF and IPPF through an inter-institutional
                           technical working group composed by three of the project’s supporting agencies: the Ministry of
                           Agriculture (MAG), Nicaraguan Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA), and Nicaraguan
                           Institute of Fisheries (INPESCA). MAG and INTA have extensive experience with World Bank
                           projects and implementing relevant safeguard policies, and all four agencies have an
                           Environmental Unit. All of them have also institutional presence in the two Caribbean regions, yet
                           limited to certain areas and reduced staff. The World Bank project team actively engaged with the
                           referred technical working group throughout the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                           (ESIA) process to refine the data collection and analysis instruments, consultation schedules and
                           the disclosure of the final product - an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                           MEFCCA and the supporting agencies will use the ESMF to manage environmental and social
                           impacts during project implementation, as pertinent to their respective scope of activities.

                           To promote efficient implementation of the ESMF, MEFCCA will contract three additional Social/
                           Gender Specialists; two specialists will be based in its delegations in the RACN and RACS and
                           one specialist will support monitoring and evaluation of the project’s social impacts and mitigation
                           measures from MEFCCA’s national office in Managua. Regarding environmental management,


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           MEFCCA will recruit two environmental specialists based on its delegations in the RACN and
                           RACS. At the central level, the Environmental Unit of MEFCCA will be responsible for leading
                           and coordinating the project’s environmental management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The initial ESMF implementation will include contracting a technical consultant to compile/
                           prepare a regionally adapted Manual for Good Environmental Practices, including guidance for
                           climate-smart agriculture. At project mid-term, the project will contract an external environmental
                           audit at project midterm, as deemed necessary.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Project stakeholders include: male and female small- and medium-size landholders, male and
                           female rural laborers, existing producers organizations, youth, and artisanal fishers with no or
                           limited assets and equipment. It is estimated that the project will support approximately 14,000
                           families, of which approximately 4,800 are afro-descendent and indigenous communities and
                           approximately 9,000 are mestizos.

                           The Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including a draft Indigenous
                           Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), was presented during regional public consultations with
                           potential beneficiaries in the towns of Siuna, Bilwi and Bluefields between April and October
                           2014, as documented in detail in the ESMF. The ESMF was disclosed in-country and by the Bank
                           InfoShop prior to project appraisal and updated prior to negotiations. The communications plan,
                           participatory IDP methodology and grievance redress system will provide additional opportunities
                           for stakeholder feedback during project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   14-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                25-Nov-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nicaragua                                                     25-Nov-2014
                           Comments: The final draft ESMF was disclosed in the following institutional website: http://
                                         www.economiafamiliar.gob.ni/images/documentos/GAFSP-PAIPSSAN%20Nov%
                                         202014%20rev%20BM%20Nov25.pdf
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   14-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                25-Nov-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nicaragua                                                     25-Nov-2014
                           Comments: The final draft ESMF was disclosed in the following institutional website: http://
                                         www.economiafamiliar.gob.ni/images/documentos/GAFSP-PAIPSSAN%20Nov%
                                         202014%20rev%20BM%20Nov25.pdf
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                Yes


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Oct-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nicaragua                                                        25-Nov-2014
                           Comments: The final draft ESMF was disclosed in the following institutional website: http://
                                         www.economiafamiliar.gob.ni/images/documentos/GAFSP-PAIPSSAN%20Nov%
                                         202014%20rev%20BM%20Nov25.pdf
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?


                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Augusto Garcia
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Laurent Msellati (PMGR)                       Date: 26-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
