INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 128
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Ecuador                    Project ID:   P152096
Project Name:    Supporting Education Reform in Targeted Districts (P152096)
Task Team        Marcelo Becerra
Leader(s):
Estimated        01-Jul-2015                Estimated     24-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General education sector (100%)
Theme(s):        Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     170.00             Total Bank Financing:   167.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          3.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           167.00
Total                                                           170.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve enrollment in early education
(Inicial II) and reduce dropout rate in lower and upper secondary education in the targeted districts.
C. Project Description
Proposed Instrument: The proposed loan instrument would be a Specific Investment Loan in the
amount of US$ 167 million. Preliminary discussions have led to a Project structure consisting of two
components.


﻿Component 1. Provision of inputs in the targeted districts of Zone 5 (Bank: US$ 163 million). This
Component would support the full implementation of the MINEDUC Education Strategy/Program:
reorganizing the school supply (educational opportunities), upgrading the infrastructure and facilities,
O
U       teacher training, the implementation of CEL, special education and programs for children with
disabilities.
Sub-Component 1.1. Reorganizing School Supply and Expanding School Infrastructure (US$ 150
million). This sub-component would finance the construction, equipment, and materials for around
32 schools in the targeted districts. The interventions would include 8 new "major" schools
(Unidades Educativos del Milenio Mayores) and 26 renovated schools ("Repotenciaciones"). Most of
the sites have been already identified, per the aforementioned criteria. Once built, the 32 schools
would absorb around 45 percent of total enrollment of the 4 targeted districts.
Sub-Component 1.2. Strengthening Professional Development for Teachers (US$ 7 million). This
sub-component would support: (i) universal in-service teacher training in the targeted districts
(around 8,000). This training would consist in 330 hours of in presence and virtual instruction to be
provided by selected accredited higher education institutions; (ii) the provision of pedagogic
materials, guides; (iii) the financing of (TBD) full scholarships for teachers belonging to the targeted
districts to study in a master's degree program provided by select accredited institutions.
Sub-Component 1.3. Implementing the Academic Management System - CEL - (US$5.5 million).
This sub-component would finance the full implementation of CEL in the targeted districts, including
the provision of personal computers, internet connectivity, and training to all teachers.
Sub-Component 1.4. Supporting Students with disabilities and Special Education (US$ 1 million).
This sub-component would support: (i) the renovation and/or construction of four Model Schools,
fully adapted for students with disabilities (related to physical disabilities, e.g. vision, hearing, among
others), in the targeted districts; (ii) the full implementation of one school specifically for students
with disabilities; and (iii) the provision of a kit for all students with disabilities in the targeted
districts.
c5 Component 2. Strengthening Planning, Management and Evaluation Capacity at MINEDUC (Bank
US$3,5 million; GoE: US$ 3 million).
Sub-Component 2.1. Management and Information Systems (US$ 2 million). This sub-component
would finance the completion of the development and implementation of a fully integrated Education
a      Management Information System (EMIS), including modules for: (i) EducarEcuador; CEL; (ii)
student record, allocation and management; (iii) teachers management; (iv) institutions
(infrastructure, etc.); (v) curriculum management; (vi) school supply management.
Sub-component 2.2. Management, Monitoring and Specific Studies / Impact Evaluation (IBRD US
$5.5 million and MINEDUC $4 million, total of US$ 9.5 million). This sub-component would
support: (i) the financing of the Project Implementation Team at MINEDUC (to be fully financed by
counterpart funds); (ii) specific studies and/or impact evaluation such as: the impact of the new
management model (in particular at the school level), factors associated with dropout in upper
secondary, and results related to improvements in school environment. This second activity would be
led by INEVAL.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Based on the Project's allotted budget, four Districts have been selected within Zone 5 to serve as a
comprehensive "pilot" intervention that will receive most of MINEDUC's strategic policy
interventions: (i) District of Mocache and Quevedo (Los Rios Province); (ii) District of Baba,


﻿Babahoyo y Montalvo (Los Rios Province); (iii) District of Guaranda (Bolivar Province), and (iv)
District of Milagro (Guayas Province). All of the targeted districts have a higher poverty rate than the
national average: while in 2010, 60.1 percent of Ecuadorians lived in poverty, according to the
Unsatisfied Basic Needs Index (UBN), the poverty headcount rates in the selected cantons were: 92.9
U       percent in Baba; 90.3 percent in Mocache 77.9 percent in Guaranda; 77.3 percent in Montalvo; 72.6
percent in Babahoyo; 70.9 percent in Quevedo and 70.7 percent in Milagro. Zone 5 was selected
based on the following criteria: it is the most populated zone with the highest enrollment rates of all
zones; it registers third out of the 9 zones in terms of socioeconomic need; it includes a diverse array
of characteristics, including urban and rural schools, indigenous populations, insufficient and/or
decaying facilities, and one of the lowest scores in terms of results in the "Being a Student" (Ser
Estudiante) learning assessment. In addition, Zone 5 was chosen as other zones are currently more
advanced in site selection and construction (e.g. Quito and Guayaquil) and other zones/districts with
high poverty rates were previously selected to receive financing from other sources (GoE, IDB and
CAF).
The Project will finance civil works (school construction and expansion). The works will include
renovations and remodeling of existing schools, construction of additional classrooms in targeted
schools, and the construction of new schools. To manage the environmental impacts of civil works,
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) is triggered. School expansion and new construction may
require the acquisition of land, resulting in involuntary resettlement. OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlement) is currently triggered, and based on the screening and analysis of land acquisition
needs during project preparation, a final determination on whether Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
and/or a Resettlement Policy Framework will be necessary prior to appraisal. If it is determined
during project preparation that not all sites will be known prior to appraisal, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared to outline the agreed upon procedures and entitlements for
involuntary resettlement that take place subsequent to appraisal. If all sites are known prior to
appraisal and there is no need for land acquisition that results in involuntary resettlement, the
appraisal stage ISDS will be revised to not trigger this Policy. Given that not all locations are known,
an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) would be developed for the Project.
0
The Indigenous Peoples Policy OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the three provinces where the Project will
be implemented have Indigenous populations that could benefit if specific measures are adopted to
ensure their inclusion. According to national census data of 2001, Los Rios has an Indigenous
a       population of 5,518, of which approximately 40.6 percent are urban and 59.4 percent are rural.
Bolivar has an Indigenous population of 40,094 of which 5 percent are urban and 95 percent are
rural, and Guayas has an Indigenous population of 42,377 of which 86 percent are urban and 14
percent are rural.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The local authorities of Zone 5, the Undersecretariat for Professional Development, and
abovementioned support units (planning, infrastructure, pedagogic, etc) will have key supervision
responsibilities in all components/subcomponents, according to their respective mandate in the LOEI.
Experience gained during the implementation of the related project pilots carried out by MINEDUC
would be taken into account in the preparation of this operation.
During project preparation, the specific agencies charged with land acquisition will be assessed for
capacity in regards to involuntary resettlement. If necessary, capacity building measures will be
carried out commensurate to the scale of resettlement required by the project. An analysis of gaps


﻿between national and relevant municipal systems and requirements will be assessed against those
outlined in OP/BP 4.12, and the project's RAPs will identify measures to bridge these gaps.
MINEDUC has an existing Directorate for Intercultural Bilingual Education with the mission to
O
)       design and develop quality education projects that are culturally, linguistically and environmentally
pertinent for the educational needs of Indigenous Peoples in Ecuador. At the same time, each District
has staff managing the UEM in their respective cantones. Whereas the Directorate will be charged
with leading the coordination and hiring of the social assessment, consultation process and
preparation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan, the District level counterparts will be closely involved in
the drafting of TORs, identification of consultants, organization of local consultations, and review of
final products. The Directorate has existing protocols for consultation processes with Indigenous
Peoples as well as experience in incorporating their intercultural and bilingual education model into
the Millennium school curriculum. During preparation the Team together with the Client will
determine the most adequate institutional arrangements for safeguards management. The Project
team will assess whether these existing systems meet the objectives and required processes of OP/BP
4.10 and in cases where gaps exist, strengthen the existing systems and Directorate in their objectives
to enhance the access, quality and success of Indigenous youth to basic and secondary education. At
the same time the capacity at a District level will also be assessed and strengthened as necessary.
During project preparation the Bank team will work closely with the Directorate and District level
staff to ensure that it holds adequate capacity and ownership over the actions outlined in the IPP and
to address gender issues identified in the Social Assessment.
The Client country has a well-established national system for environmental impact assessment of
school construction and renovation projects. For a given school, the Ministry of Education outsource
preparation of an environmental form (EF) and an environmental management plan (EMP) -
covering construction and operation stages - to a private consulting firm. Both instruments are
prepared on the basis of engineering and soil studies. The Ministry of Education's National
Directorate for Physical Infrastructure has an Environmental Team of four professionals
(environmental engineers and geographers) that reviews and makes comments to the EFs and EMPs.
This National Directorate then sends these EFs and EMPs to the Ministry of Environment (MAE)
through the MAE's Unified System on Environmental Information portal (SUIA). Environmental
License that approves EFs and EMPs is issued by MAE and then sent to Ministry of Education
through Internet.
Environmental supervision is undertaken by SECOB (Works Contracting Service-Servicio de
Contrataci6n de Obras) that has an Environmental Control and Studies Unit (6 peoples). Supervision
can be undertaken by SECOB staff or consultants. Inspection of works is in charge of SECOB's
Department of Inspection. Contract signed between a given contractor and SECOB includes clauses
that mandate contractor to implement environmental control activities and deploy an environmental
team for environmental control. This request also applies to the inspector of works.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Dianna M. Pizarro (GSURR)
Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


﻿Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project does not foresee significant and
OP/BP 4.01                              irreversible environmental impacts and risks that
could jeopardize the natural environment of its direct
and indirect influential area. Following this
Operational Policy [OP 4.01] the Project would be
"Category B". This category is justified by the fact
that the civil works during construction of new
schools and renovations and remodeling of existing
ones might only generate typical focalized, reversible
and manageable impacts. Subcomponent 1.1 on
reorganization of school supply and expansion of
school infrastructure focus largely on school
renovation (26 schools to be renovated out of 32
schools). Given that exact location of the 32 schools
to be constructed and renovated is not known in all
cases yet an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared before
appraisal. Schools will be located in already
populated urban and rural areas in two Costa region
provinces (Los Rios and Guayas) and one Andean
province (Bolivar).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          This policy should not be triggered because
construction and renovation of schools will occur in
built environments (rural and urban centers and their
peri-urban areas) surrounded by productive
landscapes (agriculture).
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          This policy should not be triggered because the
project does not consider any changes to forest
management or any works in forest areas in the
zones designated for new construction.
O
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          This policy should not be triggered because the
project does not consider purchase, use or storage of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        This policy should be triggered as some of schools to
OP/BP 4.11                              be built may require minor excavations in Andean
areas of the Bolivar Province where chance finds
could occur. The ESMF or EMPs will include the
relevant national procedures in the case of chance-
finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         A social assessment will be carried out during project
4.10                                    preparation to identify challenges and barriers faced
by Indigenous families and youth to accessing and
successfully completing basic and secondary
education in the specific cantons identified for
project financing. An Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
or multiple canton level IPPs will be prepared in


﻿collaboration with the relevant Indigenous
stakeholders in each Canton, and once the IPP or
IPPs hold the relevant cantons' broad community
support, will be disclosed prior to appraisal. The
social assessment will determine the most relevant
and effective organization of the consultation
processes and distribution of activities and
responsibilities for the IPP or IPPs. The consultation
process will be carried out in socio-culturally
appropriate ways, taking into account language,
organization, and cultural specificities. The social
assessment will also evaluate gender issues related to
basic and secondary education to identify whether
specific actions could be supported by the project to
improve the agency of boys or girls who are
experiencing gender-based discrimination. The social
assessment, consultation process and IPP(s) will
build upon and strengthen the Ministry's existing
Directorate for Intercultural Bilingual Education as
well as the District level staff charged with social
inclusion at a canton level.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes           School expansion and new construction may require
BP 4.12                                     the involuntary acquisition of land that results in the
impacts outlined in OP/BP 4.12. A screening process
will be carried out for all sites known during project
preparation. In cases where the involuntary taking of
land is necessary, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
will be prepared. If it is determined during project
preparation that all sites will not be known by project
appraisal, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
will be prepared to outline the agreed upon
procedures and entitlements for involuntary
resettlement that take place subsequent to appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            This policy should not be triggered given that the
project will not support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
investments which rely on the services of existing
dams.
Projects on International     No            This policy should not be triggered because the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        project will not affect international waterways as
defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This policy should not be triggered because the
BP 7.60                                     proposed project will not affect disputed areas as
defined under the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Social Assessment and consultation process to design the Indigenous Peoples Plans will be
carried out between February and April. The upcoming safeguards mission in late January will
determine whether sites for school construction and expansion will be determined prior to
appraisal and thus whether a Resettlement Policy Framework would be necessary. For sites that
o         are identified prior to appraisal, site screening will be carried out and if necessary, Resettlement
Action Plans will be prepared during March and April.
Final Social and Environmental Assessments are planned to be ready and published by June 26,
2015 (Appraisal is planned by July 1st, 2015).
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marcelo Becerra
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                   Date: 28-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/      Name: Janet K. Entwistle (PMGR)               Date: 28-Jan-2015
Manager:


