                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8045
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mali                              Project ID:    P145861
                            Project Name:     Skills Development and Youth Employment Project (P145861)
                            Task Team         Emanuela Di Gropello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         17-Mar-2014                       Estimated   27-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTEW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Adult literacy/non-formal education (25%), Vocational training (25%), SME
                                              Finance (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Education for the
                                              knowledge economy (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      63.00           Total Bank Financing:               63.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             63.00
                              Total                                                                                   63.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support education and training for employability and
                           private-sector led job opportunities for youth in Mali.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed project will support a two pronged strategy to promote jobs creation and develop skills
                         for Malian youth. Jobs creation interventions, supported through Component 2, will target the private
                         sector through support to would-be entrepreneurs and emerging or established SMEs with potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for job creation. Skills development interventions, supported through Component 1, will focus on
                         both the formal and non-formal education and training sector, with emphasis on supporting more
                         relevant and efficient technical tracks in secondary and tertiary education, revamping the
                         apprenticeship program and creating new and more relevant opportunities of short term skills
                         development for out of school youth. The project will be divided into three components.

                         Component 1: Education and Training for Employability

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening Technical and Vocational Education and Training

                         Support to public sector institutions: The project will support at least four (04) public sector formal
                         education and training institutions in the agro-industry, construction and mining sectors (all with
                         potential to become national or regional poles in one of the key priority sectors). More public sector
                         institutions may be considered. In each institution the project will support a reform package which
                         will largely be focused on upgrading curriculum, management and human resources, rather than
                         physical rehabilitation (which will be limited to upgrades of classrooms within the existing schooling
                         sites). The packages will include the elaboration and application of competency based approach
                         curricula, with related standards, in the priority fields and levels, a partnership framework with the
                         productive sector and performance framework with public and private providers related to
                         measurable outcomes, the design of entrepreneurship modules to be integrated within the formal
                         curriculum, the training of trainers (in coordination with the Ecole Normale de Formation des
                         Formateurs de l’Enseignement Technique et Professionnel (ENFFTP)), and selected limited
                         rehabilitation of existing classrooms and equipment. The different elements will be implemented
                         following a continuous gradual process starting from initial TA to assess specific needs, to the
                         elaboration of new curricula and training of trainers, limited rehabilitation and equipment provision,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the curricula and management changes and evaluation of outcomes achieved. A
                         key aim is to develop a partnership model with the productive sector which can eventually lead to
                         dual-training (periods of teaching combined with periods of internship in enterprises) in several
                         institutions, while involving the productive sector in key steps of TVET delivery including
                         participation in curriculum design and identification of standards, in the teaching process as source of
                         practitioner-experts to co-teach courses or providers of industry training to TVET trainers, and in the
                         management of the institution and skills certification process, following the example of successful
                         TVET systems in the world.

                         While public institutions will be pre-selected, due to their large number, private institutions will be
                         selected competitively. The project will provide grants to competitively selected private institutions
                         (on the basis of specific school development proposals) to expand and improve technical and
                         vocational programs at various levels (from CAP to DUT) in the key identified sectors. Depending
                         on the specific proposals, the private institutions will be able to benefit from some of the same
                         interventions in terms of equipment, training, partnership framework, etc., than the public institutions
                         (a menu of eligible expenditures will be prepared, excluding physical rehabilitation). They would
                         also benefit from additional TA to ensure actual quality improvements. Under the assumption of an
                         average amount per grant of US$300,000 and taking out the initial and on-going TA and M&E
                         activities, it is expected that about eight institutions should be able to benefit from a grant. Key
                         features of the competitive grant scheme mechanism will be the support offered to pre-selected


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         schools for the preparation of school development proposals; the competitive selection of the
                         proposals according to pre-identified criteria; and the close monitoring and evaluation of the scheme
                         by FAFPA in coordination with the involved technical departments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening Skills Development for Out of School Youth

                         This sub-component will improve education and training for employability by supporting skills
                         development programs for out of school youth. Out of school youth with secondary and tertiary
                         education will be targeted through the entrepreneurship program for graduates in component 2.

                         More specifically the project will support two programs tailored to the needs of two distinct
                         categories of out of school youth: 15 to 24 age old with some primary up to lower secondary
                         education living in urban areas; and 15 to 29 age old with less than lower secondary education
                         (including no prior education) living in peri-urban and rural areas. It will do so by supporting
                         revamped dual-apprenticeship and short-term decentralized skills training programs. The dual-
                         apprenticeship program is the right mechanism to improve the skills and employability prospects of
                         youth with some education in urban areas, where there is notably higher supply of technical and
                         vocational institutions and higher open unemployment allowing youth to commit for a longer time. A
                         more flexible workplace-based shorter-term program is more adequate for somewhat older youth
                         with no or little education in rural areas where institutions are scarce and youth have more competing
                         options. These two programs will then need to be carefully tailored to the specific needs and
                         characteristics of the two youth target groups. Youth exiting from these programs will have the
                         opportunity to receive additional entrepreneurship training, start-up funds and easier access to credit
                         through the entrepreneurship program for non-graduates in component 2.

                         The project will support under this sub-component the following activities related to the
                         apprenticeship program: (a) TA for the identification of additional fields and locations, development
                         of entrepreneurship modules, certification and legal frameworks; (b) the delivery of the 20% training
                         time in the institutes; (c) pre-apprenticeship training of youth; (d) additional training for master
Public Disclosure Copy




                         apprentices; (e) kits for apprentices and equipment for master apprentices; (f) testing, evaluation and
                         certification of apprentices; (g) capacity building for the artisans’ association; and (g) rehabilitation
                         of classrooms, equipment and training of teachers for vocational training centers. The following
                         activities will be supported to support the decentralized skills training program: (a) TA for the
                         mapping of workplace, complementary training and locality options; (b) training and stipends for
                         local practitioners/producers; (c) equipment for local practitioners/producers; (d) the delivery of
                         complementary training off the workplace; (e) training and salary for facilitators; (f) basic post-
                         training installation kits for youth; (g) awareness campaigns; (h) operating costs of the program; and
                         (i) impact evaluation of the program.

                         Component 2: Private-Sector led Job Creation for Youth

                         Sub-component 2.1: Supporting Entrepreneurship for Youth

                         Entrepreneurship program for youth with limited education (CAP or non-formal training): through
                         this program youth with lower level formal technical education and non-formal education and
                         training exiting education programs now or already on the market will receive support to create a
                         micro-enterprise. The proposed program would offer two levels of training, installation kits and
                         easier access to initial finance and credit for youth.



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         Youth selected by the program with no prior entrepreneurship training will be offered a short
                         awareness training (of a few days) on basic concepts of entrepreneurship, including of simplified
                         business plans, and school to work transition (Level 1 training). This training will be followed for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         most motivated and high potential youth by a short more in-depth training and coaching on
                         preparation of simplified business plans, micro-enterprise management, leadership and decision-
                         making with the combined support of mentors and trainers (Level 2 training). About 60% of these
                         would be entrepreneurs will also be supported more closely in the development of a micro-enterprise
                         through start-up funds (capital endowment of up to US$ 300) to motivate them to implement their
                         simplified business plan over a 12 month period. This more individualized support, adapted to the
                         specific needs of the project, will also include easier access to microfinance through support to the
                         FARE (Auto--Renewable Fund for Employment) which will intervene to the amount of 80% in
                         guarantee of the loans granted the entrepreneurs, and markets and operational assistance and
                         coaching for the whole 12 months (1 day per month) with the objective of leading to viable
                         enterprises. It is expected that this entrepreneurship program would lead to the creation or
                         consolidation of about 3,000 micro or small enterprises in the three key priority sectors of the project
                         and emerging sectors, leading to the creation of about 6,000 new jobs by the end of the project
                         (assuming two people per enterprise, slightly lower than the average statistics on micro and small
                         enterprises in Mali).

                         Entrepreneurship program for youth with at least upper secondary education (technical or non-
                         technical): this program will provide opportunities for successful entrepreneurship for youth with at
                         least upper secondary education who have potential for creating somewhat larger enterprises in the
                         informal and formal sector. The program will support a Business Plan Competition (BPC) for 18 to
                         35 years old coming out of school (including from the institutes supported in Component 1) or
                         already on the labor market.

                         Key activities supported by entrepreneurship programs are: (a) the training of trainers for the
                         entrepreneurship training; (b) entrepreneurship and business plans trainings of various levels; (c)
                         start-up funds for would be entrepreneurs; (d) guarantee funds to support access of youth to credit;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (e) coaching activities; and (d) impact evaluations of the two programs.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Supporting Established Small and Medium Enterprises for Job Creation

                         Matching grants: The objective of these grants is to help high potential local SMEs (e.g. rice
                         importers in Office du Niger, small and medium size mango and papaya producers in Sikasso)
                         improve their productivity, production processes, processing and/or marketing, by facilitating their
                         access to finance, value chain development and just in time specific skills, while supporting sound
                         business plans and developing partnerships with good practice investors. SMEs will be able to apply
                         to two windows: (i) matching grants for TA (non-financial services); and (ii) matching grants to
                         bring in financial contributions to scaling-up plans. This second window will have the potential to
                         support critical activities directly related to the value chain or sector of production, including
                         equipment. The grants will finance up to 80% of non-financial services and up to 20% of the
                         financial services within ceilings determined by the size of the beneficiary SMEs.

                         Support to the FARE: In full alignment with sub-component 1 the FARE will receive additional
                         resources to help it fulfill its role of guarantor of loans for SMEs and therefore support long term
                         financing to SMEs in selected value-chains. The FARE works closely with several banks, including
                         the BMS, and would also have the capacity to select partner banks competitively to get lower interest
                         rates for SMEs. Overall, the FARE will receive about US$5.5 million under Component 2 which

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         should significantly strengthen it and help alleviate credit constraints for MSMEs in Mali. Support to
                         the FARE will be complemented by pre-selection and mobilization of financial partners/banks for the
                         project, and technical assistance to those selected banks to help them provide medium term finance to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         successful MSMEs in close collaboration with IFC.

                         Finally, this project component will further leverage IFC’s strategic directions and operations so as to
                         strengthen impact and delivery effectiveness, with a particular focus on value-chain financing
                         instruments.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Management

                         This component will support four main types of activities: (i) an effective employment information
                         system, including capacity building for the labor market observatory and support to tracer surveys
                         and SME inventories and surveys; (ii) a more coherent skills certification and employment
                         promotion framework, including updating of relevant legal frameworks, policy documents, and
                         promoting multi-sector consultation frameworks; (iii) the institutional strengthening of the technical
                         departments and DCAs in charge of the implementation of Components 1 and 2, including capacity
                         building, additional human resources, selected equipment and operating costs; and (iv) support to the
                         Project Coordination Unit (PCU), including project coordination, fiduciary processes, monitoring
                         and evaluation (M&E), selected equipment and operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Although the project will start in a limited number of regions to test these new innovative
                         experiences for Mali, it may be extended to the whole country. Mali is a fragile state and the project
                         is being processed under paragraph 11 of OP 10:00. Accordingly, compliance with environmental
                         and social policies is being deferred to the project implementation stage and an action plan
                         addressing the application of environmental and social policies is included in the project documents.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Under Component I, the project will finance the
                          BP 4.01                                             rehabilitation of classrooms and new equipment
                                                                              in existing schools (within existing school
                                                                              premises). Most schools will be identified during
                                                                              implementation. In addition, under Component II,
                                                                              the project will support loan guarantees for the
                                                                              creation of micro, small and medium size
                                                                              enterprises and provide matching grants for
                                                                              established small and medium enterprises that
                                                                              may further generate negative social or
                                                                              environmental risk/impacts (indirect impacts of
                                                                              the project). An ESMF is being prepared and will
                                                                              include ESMP checklists to be used for sub-
                                                                              projects and schooling sites, a comprehensive



                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                                                                         chance find procedure, and an exclusion list to
                                                                         prevent indirect adverse risk or impact from the
                                                                         supported enterprises. The ESMF will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         approved and disclosed in country and through
                                                                         the World Bank Infoshop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project will not finance any activities close to
                                                                         protected natural habitats, or that could lead to
                                                                         significant conversion of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not have impacts on the health
                                                                         and quality of forests; or affect the rights and
                                                                         welfare of people who depend upon forests. The
                                                                         project does not aim to bring about changes in the
                                                                         management, protection, or utilization of natural
                                                                         forests or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project may finance fertilizers but will not
                                                                         finance pesticides (negative lists will be
                                                                         prepared).
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project will not support direct investment in
                         BP 4.11                                         known heritage areas, but civil works
                                                                         (rehabilitation/upgrading of classrooms within
                                                                         existing schooling sites) will necessitate digging
                                                                         and material uptake from existing or new borrow
                                                                         pits. Since the country had hosted ancient
                                                                         civilizations, covered cultural resources may be
                                                                         dug up. A Chance find procedure to insert as
                                                                         clause in enterprise contracts will be described in
                                                                         the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                         area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Project activities under component 1 are not
                         4.12                                            expected to induce any type of land take or loss of
                                                                         economic assets. However, in the component 2,
                                                                         there is a provision that the project will provide
                                                                         matching grants for established or news SME to
                                                                         support their critical activities which could
                                                                         require potential small amounts of land space. For
                                                                         the due diligence and to address potential risk
                                                                         under this component, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) will be prepared during
                                                                         implementation stage to ensure that preventive
                                                                         measures are in place, in case any resettlement
                                                                         takes place. This RPF will also be reviewed,
                                                                         consulted upon, disclosed in Mali and at
                                                                         InfoShop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            The project will not operate close to any dam.




                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not affect international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will not intervene in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified category B with respect to activities under Component 1 which will
                              finance the rehabilitation of classrooms in existing schools (within existing school premises), and
                              Component 2 which will support the creation of micro, small and medium enterprises. The
                              expected direct negative impacts of the project will not be large scale, significant or irreversible,
                              instead they would be minor and manageable (temporary nuisances during civil works, safety at
                              work, risk of inadvertent destruction of covered cultural artifacts, potential risk of small land take,
                              etc.); indirect adverse impacts would arise from the new created enterprises supported through the
                              job creation mechanisms (component 2), and be related mainly to wastes and hygiene/sanitation
                              issues. To prevent and manage the said potential impacts, three Bank safeguard policies were
                              triggered: (i) OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; (ii) OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources;
                              and (iii) OP 4.12 on Involuntary resettlement. The WBG environmental, health and safety
                              guidelines (EHS) also apply to activities under component 2. An ESMF isbeing prepared
                              including guidelines and tools (screening checklists and specific ESMP template) and an exclusion
                              list; it will be approved and disclosed in country and at the World Bank Infoshop. The potential
                              negative social impacts of this project are likely to be site-specific and easily mitigated thus no
                              direct or indirect long term impacts are anticipated from the implementation of the project. A
                              resettlement policy framework (RPF) will be prepared during implementation and disclosed in the
                              country and infoshop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential and/or long term impact due to anticipated future activities in the project area is
                              foreseen.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The project is being processed under paragraph 11 of OP 10:00 and compliance with safeguards is
                              being deferred to the implementation stage. Accordingly an action plan is included in the project
                              documents and an ESMF is being prepared and will be disclosed. A Project Coordination Unit
                              (PCU) is not yet in place. However, the operation will build on the many years of experience and
                              the lessons learned from implementation of several bank-funded projects in the country; the
                              project stakeholders including the PCU will therefore benefit from a good framework for an
                              acceptable implementation of safeguard requirements. Further, the PCU will appoint a part-time
                              Safeguards Specialist to ensure proper implementation, documentation, follow up and reporting of
                              the mitigation measures (screening, execution of specific ESMPs, administering the exclusion list,


                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                           etc.) recommended through the instruments (ESMF, RPF, ESMPs). The project Steering
                           Committee made of the stakeholders will also be sensitized/trained on the Bank safeguard policies.
                           A provision of a total amount of about US$200,000 is earmarked in the project budget for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           execution of the above-mentioned measures.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Project stakeholders include the government (ministries of education, ministry for investment and
                           private sector, etc.), the private sector, youth organizations, educational institutions, and teacher
                           associations. They have been consulted during the preparation of the ESMF, and participated in
                           the formal consultation on the ESMF held in April, 2014, and will be also consulted during the
                           RPF preparation. As members of the Project Steering Committee, they will participate in any
                           decision making process during the implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        01-Jul-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Aug-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                               04-Aug-2014
                           Comments: To prevent and manage the said potential impacts, three Bank safeguard policies
                                         were triggered: (i) OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; (ii) OP 4.11 on Physical
                                         Cultural Resources; and (iii) OP 4.12 on Involuntary resettlement. The WBG
                                         environmental, health and safety guidelines (EHS) also apply to activities under
                                         component 2. The project is being processed under paragraph 11 of OP 10:00 and
                                         compliance with safeguards is being deferred to the implementation stage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Accordingly an ESMF is being prepared including guidelines and tools (screening
                                         checklists and specific ESMP template) and an exclusion list; it will be approved and
                                         disclosed in country and at the World Bank Infoshop during project implementation,
                                         as per World Bank policies on fragile states. Therefore, the above disclosure dates
                                         are projected dates.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        01-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     01-May-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                               01-May-2015
                           Comments: The project is being processed under paragraph 11 of OP 10:00 and compliance with
                                         safeguards is being deferred to the implementation stage. Accordingly a resettlement
                                         policy framework (RPF) will be prepared during implementation and disclosed in the
                                         country and infoshop, as per World Bank policies on fragile states. Therefore, the
                                         above disclosure dates are projected dates.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Mali is a fragile state, and the project is being processed under paragraph 11 of OP 10:00. An action
                            plan is included in the project documents and disclosure of safeguard instruments is being deferred
Public Disclosure Copy




                            to the implementation stage
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Emanuela Di Gropello
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                         Date: 12-May-2014
                            Advisor:


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Kaliope Azzi-Huck (SM)   Date: 12-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 10 of 10
