                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8384
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                              Project ID:    P147010
                            Project Name:      Higher Education Reforms Project (P147010)
                            Task Team          Mohan Prasad Aryal
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Sep-2014                        Estimated   22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (80%), Central government administration (10%), Other
                                              social services (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Social safety nets (10%), Other
                                              human development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     795.00           Total Bank Financing:                    80.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          715.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  80.00
                              Total                                                                                       795.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support reforms in selected institutions for improving quality, relevance, and efficiency of higher
                           education; and to assist under-privileged students for equitable access.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         Nepal’s higher education system is expanding rapidly. However, it is unable to meet the aspirations
                         of students or respond to the current and emerging human resource needs of Nepal. University Grants
                         Commission (UGC) has prepared a National Program for Higher Education Reform and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development to implement recommendations of the Higher Education Policy (HEP). The document
                         focuses on development and innovation, access and equity, quality and relevance, financing, and
                         governance in higher education. The Higher Education Reforms Project (HERP) will support the
                         Higher Education Reforms and Regular Program components of Nepal’s National Program for
                         Higher Education Reform and Development (NPHERD).

                         The project will support selected universities and institutions that meet certain eligibility criteria and
                         agree to undertake time-bound reforms. In order to enhance equitable access to higher education, it
                         will also provide for poverty targeted scholarship support to meritorious disadvantaged students
                         (especially female).

                         The following key performance indicators will be used to measure achievement of the development
                         objectives:
                         Indicator 1: Number of accredited institutions
                         Indicator 2: Percentage of students enrolled in identified priority areas
                         Indicator 3: Number of under-privileged students supported
                         Indicator 4: Average time taken for announcement of results of bachelors programs with centralized
                         examination at TU
                         Indicator 5: Number of publications in refereed journals by research grant recipients

                         The Project will comprise of two components, the first supports the implementation of critical
                         reforms in the National Program and the second capacity building and project management. The
                         Bank support will use Investment Project Financing (IPF) through a Disbursements Linked
                         Indicators (DLI) approach for the Implementation of Reforms component and regular IPF for the
                         Capacity Building and Project Management component. In the DLI approach, disbursements will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         linked to achievements of yearly benchmarks for pre-defined measurable and verifiable indicators.

                         Component 1: Implementation of Reforms:

                         To achieve its development objective, HERP will focus on the following four results areas:

                         Results area 1: Systemic/Institutional Reforms
                         These include major reforms for: (a) more effective public funding, (b) institutionalization of
                         national accreditation system; (c) greater institutional autonomy; and (d) strengthening of the
                         examination system. Further details are provided below:

                         a)      More effective public funding: HERP will support continuation of performance-based
                         funding/grants (PBF) to higher education institutions (HEIs) that meet specified eligibility conditions
                         from project resources. In addition, the project will provide incentives for introduction of formula-
                         based funding (FBF) for regular grants to autonomous constituent campuses and inclusion of outputs
                         into formula-based funding to community campuses both financed from Government of Nepal
                         (GON) resources. Similarly, the project will support continuation of formula-based funding of
                         universities predominantly financed through non-government resources.

                         b) Institutionalization of the national accreditation system: While HERP will support the


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         establishment of a National Accreditation Bo ard (NAB), it will also support, as an interim measure,
                         the establishment of a Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agency (QAAA) within UGC with
                         functional autonomy for administering QAA activities. About 150 HEIs are expected to be accredited
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during the project period.

                         c) Greater institutional autonomy: HERP will support TU’s plan to expand autonomy of constituent
                         campuses. It will also support the granting of academic autonomy to affiliated campuses –
                         community and private. Within the project period at least 10 more campuses are expected to become
                         autonomous.

                         d) Strengthening of the Examination System: HERP will support Tribhuvan University’s (TU) plans
                         for decentralizing and modernizing the examination system, streamlining processes, and enhancing
                         Office of the Controller of Examinations' (OCE) capacity and efficiency. It will also support TU's
                         initiative to maintain the academic calendars of major programs.

                         For the above results areas, release of IDA funds will be linked to achievement of the following
                         DLIs: (a) National Accreditation system established and functioning (DLI1); (b) performance-based
                         financing extended higher education institutions (DLI2); (c) Autonomy extended to additional
                         campuses/ schools (DLI3); and (d) examination reforms implemented and academic calendar
                         enforced in TU (DLI4).

                         Results Area 2: Academic Reforms and Relevance
                         HERP will support academic reforms in all participating universities and campuses with a focus on:
                         (a) better learning outcomes in all programs; and (b) introduction/expansion of programs in market
                         relevant and priority areas of development for Nepal. This results area will be supported through the
                         following DLI - Academic reforms introduced: Revision of existing and introduction of new
                         programs (DLI 5).

                         Results Area 3: Equity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         HERP will support meritorious students belonging to two poorest quintiles selected through nation-
                         wide proxy means testing (PMT) (with preferential treatment for female students) for studies in
                         bachelor's degree programs and higher secondary science programs. About 10,000 bachelor's
                         students and 5,000 higher secondary science students are expected to benefit from this program. This
                         results area will be supported through the following DLI - Poverty targeted financial support for
                         under-privileged students (DLI 6).

                         Results Area 4: Academic Excellence and Research
                         HERP will support GON in financing research, development and innovation. Building on the
                         experience of Second Higher Education Project (SHEP), HERP will introduce competitive funding
                         for quality research, development and innovation by students and faculty members with a focus on
                         priority areas including selected clusters of industries. Teaching and learning will be integrated with
                         knowledge generation. This will be facilitated through global and national networking, and university
                         partnerships. This results area will be supported through the following DLI – Institutions supported
                         for academic excellence in priority areas through Research, Development and Innovation (RDI)
                         awards (DLI 7).

                         The Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) for IDA financing for Component 1 are: research,
                         development and innovation grants; scholarships; and salaries and allowances financed through the
                         Regular Program and Higher Education Reforms components of NPHERD.

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Component 2: Capacity Building and Project Management:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will specificallyfocus on effective project implementation and monitoring. The
                         project includes a technical assistance and project management component to finance the necessary
                         inputs required to achieve the above-stated results, as well as to enhance the capacity of
                         implementing agencies and participating institutions. Technical assistance will include inputs such
                         as: (a) services of consultants in the areasof procurement, financial management, education
                         management information system (EMIS), information technology; (b) employer satisfaction survey,
                         student and faculty satisfaction survey; (c) third party verification of results; (d) studies associated
                         with implementation of the higher education policy, (e) impact assessment of various areas of project
                         intervention, curriculum, examinations, accreditation; (f) strategic planning and institutional capacity
                         building; and (g) national and international confere nces and workshops. Inputs for project
                         management will include: (i) salaries for project supported staff; (ii) staff training and international
                         study tours; (iii) monitoring and evaluation including monitoring of compliance with applicable
                         agreements and guidelines; (iv) travel and subsistence allowances; (v) vehicles, office equipment
                         including computers, office rental and other costs associated with office operation. This component
                         will also support activities that will need central level coordination and support for the development
                         of networking among HEIs for tapping into the global knowledge base.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in higher secondary and higher education institutions across the
                         country. It is to be noted that the Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) for IDA financing for
                         Component 1 will be only research development and innovation grants, scholarships; and salaries
                         and allowances. Bank funds will not be used for civil works. However the National program, which
                         IDA is supporting, may support through government funds moderate civil works such as
                         refurbishment /rehabilitation of existing structures, construction of annex buildings, addition of
                         stories on existing facilities, construction of workshops and laboratories, etc., which will take place
Public Disclosure Copy




                         within the existing premises of the participating higher education institutions, thus preempting the
                         need for acquisition of new land. As a result, OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered under the project. Client
                         has prepared EMF for the program based on the prevailing legal and safeguard system of the country
                         as well as considering World Bank environmental safeguard policies. The EMF has been reviewed
                         and cleared by the World Bank. The EMF has been drafted to strengthen the current safeguard
                         system and ensure that all the activities carried out under the reform program comply with the
                         safeguard requirements and system.

                         The project has triggered OP/BP 4.10. Given the varied nature of investments under this project, and
                         lack of information on the specific locations where the project will be implemented (due to the ex-
                         post selection criteria envisaged under the project), a Social Management and Vulnerable
                         Community Development Framework (SM-VCDF) has been prepared to ensure compliance with the
                         Government of Nepal (GON)’s policies as well as World Bank’s safeguard policies. The SM-VCDF
                         outlines measures that will be developed by the project in the event that the implementation of the
                         project in a specific area triggers one of the Bank’s safeguards policies. In addition, a Gender
                         Development Plan has been prepared as part of the SM-VCDF to ensure that project benefits to IPs,
                         women and other vulnerable communities is maximized while any potential adverse effects are
                         mitigated. At sub project level, a VCDP/IPDP will be prepared and disclosed, if required.

                         Potential environmental impacts of the moderate civil works, which are small scale and dispersed far


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         and wide, are considered moderate to low depending on the location and type of activity. Sub-
                         projects with high environmental risk will not be supported. Other likely environmental concerns
                         include safety, water supply & sanitation, cleanliness, limited air, noise and water pollution during
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction, material management during construction, waste management, lights & ventilations,
                         health & safety issues (workers, students/ teachers, neighborhood community), and disposal of
                         wastewater and water quality issues like arsenic etc. The project therefore is not anticipated to cause
                         significant detrimental impact on the ambient environment. The project is classified as an
                         environmental Category B. -. The proposed Project triggers Bank environmental safeguard policies
                         on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).

                         Beneficiary HEIs and the nature of civil works are not-known at this stage. Activity or subproject
                         specific environmental issue varies depending on type of activity/ subproject and its location.
                         Considering this, UGC has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for
                         managing environmental impacts/ concerns during implementation of the project as and when precise
                         locations of the civil work/ physical activity will be known. The EMF provides approach and
                         guidance for mainstreaming environmental safeguard in planning, design and implementation of the
                         HERP. It contains a screening checklist for site selection under the project; legal framework for the
                         implementation of the EMF; the basis for identifying potential environmental impacts and risks of
                         project activities and proposes appropriate mitigation measures, monitoring plan and institutional
                         structure that assigns responsibility for various activities and actors within the framework. EMF
                         requires screening of each civil work/physical activity for environmental risks. During
                         implementation site specific environmental management plans (EMP) will be developed for each
                         sub-projects, and will be monitored.

                         The SMF and EMF also recommend introduction of new academic programs in social and
                         environmental safeguard management including introduction of modules or courses on
                         environmental management, safety and climate change, conflict resolution etc. These are the areas of
                         national priority. HERP will support interested and competent institutions to introduce these
                         disciplines as a separate course/electives under Results Area 2- Academic Reforms and Relevance,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Results Area 4 - Academic Excellence and Research. These interventions will further influence
                         environmental management in policy reforms.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)
                         Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
                         Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Bank financing will not support
                         BP 4.01                                               infrastructure works as civil work is not included
                                                                               in the EEP. However under the national program,
                                                                               through the use of government funds, moderate
                                                                               civil works such as refurbishment and
                                                                               rehabilitation of existing structures, construction
                                                                               of annex buildings, addition of stories on existing
                                                                               facilities, construction of workshops and



                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                                                                            laboratories, etc. will be implemented within the
                                                                            existing premises of the participating institutions.
                                                                            This can have construction related environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            issues such as noise & air pollution, health &
                                                                            safety (workers, students/ teachers, neighborhood
                                                                            community), nuisance related to construction
                                                                            wastes, water and sanitation, etc. Bank’s
                                                                            implementation support will review application of
                                                                            the EMF at macro/ system level.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            No activity will take place in natural habitat.

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            No activity will take place in forest area.

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Project will not fund pesticides or lead to
                                                                            increased use of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Does not involve significant excavation,
                            BP 4.11                                         demolition etc. and moderate civil works will not
                                                                            take place in the vicinity of a listed PCR.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Social Management and Vulnerable Community
                                                                            Development Framework (SM-VCDF) has been
                                                                            prepared to ensure compliance with the
                                                                            Government of Nepal (GoN)’s policies as well as
                                                                            World Bank’s safeguard policies. The SM-VCDF
                                                                            outlines measures that will be developed by the
                                                                            project in the event that the implementation of the
                                                                            project in a specific area triggers one of the
                                                                            Bank’s safeguards policies. In addition, a Gender
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            Development Plan has been prepared as part of
                                                                            the SM-VCDF to ensure that project benefits to
                                                                            IPs, women and other vulnerable communities is
                                                                            maximized while any potential adverse effects are
                                                                            mitigated. At sub project level, a VCDP/IPDP
                                                                            will be prepared and disclosed, if required.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            No new civil works will be carried out as part of
                            4.12                                            the project outside the existing premises of
                                                                            participating institutions. Hence there will not be
                                                                            any adverse impact on land or livelihood.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            Project activity does not involve construction of
                                                                            dam, or the project does not depend on an
                                                                            existing dam.
                            Projects on International        No             No international waterway is involved.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             No disputed area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                    Page 6 of 9
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           It is to be noted that, although the Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) for IDA financing for
                           Component 1 will include only research development and innovation grants; scholarships; and
                           salaries and allowances under the National Program, the project needs to follow the prevailing
                           safeguard system of the country for which EMF has been drafted by UGC and has been reviewed
                           and approved by the World Bank. The EMF has been drafted based on the country’s
                           environmental regulations and World Bank environmental safeguard requirements. The EMF aims
                           to strengthen client’s current safeguard system and ensure that all the activities carried out under
                           the reform program complies with the applicable environmental requirements. Bank funds will not
                           support the procurement of infrastructure works as this is not included in the EEP. However,
                           through the use of government fund, moderate civil works such as refurbishment/rehabilitation of
                           existing structures, construction of annex buildings, addition of stories on existing facilities,
                           construction of workshops and laboratories, etc. may be supported under the Program in which
                           EMF will be applied. Hence, during implementation, role of the environmental safeguard support
                           will be to review application of the EMF to whole national program at system level, not to review
                           each civil works procured. There is no potential large scale, significant impact associated with the
                           project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           UGC, TUPIO and SFAFDB will be responsible for ensuring implementation of EMF and SMF
                           through recipient institutions; UGC will allocate budget for EMF and SMF implementation. Key
                           tasks the EMF and SMF envisages are screening, preparation of EMP, monitoring including
                           regular, trimester, and third party monitoring, grievance handling and others which are well
                           defined the EMF and SMF. UGC allocated budget also includes costs for capacity building of the
                           implementing agencies and beneficiary institutions. The environmental and social specialist will
                           be outsourced by UGC to give technical support/ guidance to the recipient institution whenever
                           required and to ensure EMF and SMF procedures and steps have been followed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the preparation of EMF and SMF, range of formal and informal consultations were held
                           with stakeholders including UGC, technical advisor, member secretary, potential HEIs, TU, etc.
                           The consultations was mainly focused on contents of EMF, environmental and social screening
                           process, likely impacts and mitigation measures, and capacity building measures for institutions
                           involved in HERP. A consultation workshop to discuss EMF and SMF was also organized on
                           August 31, 2014. The draft EMF has been disclosed through UGC website <www.ugcnepal.edu.
                           np> (Download section> on August 24, 2014 and also on the World Bank infoshop on September
                           10, 2014. The comments and suggestions obtained in draft EMF/SMF have been incorporated in
                           the final EMF/SMF, and a response matrix also prepared as an Annex to the EMF/SMF.

                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           The final EMF and SMF will be widely disseminated to the HERP recipient institutions through
                           orientation, and printed documents.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The key stakeholders to be consulted during implementation includes:
                           (a) Project beneficiaries
                           (b) Information dissemination about HERP and EMF, SMF to head of institutions, campus
                           management committee (twice a year)
                           (c) Political party representatives, community leaders, and representatives of community based
                           organizations at central level and regional level
                           (d) Relevant government agencies (Central and district level)

                           A range of formal and informal consultative meetings will be carried out for all including, but not
                           limited to: focus group discussions (FGDs), stakeholder’s meetings, community discussions, and
                           in-depth and key informant interviews.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            24-Aug-2014
                           Comments: UGC has disclosed the Draft Environmental Framework (EMF) through its website.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            24-Aug-2014
                           Comments: UGC has disclosed the Draft Social Management-Vulnerable Community
                                         development framework (VCCDF) through its website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Mohan Prasad Aryal
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 08-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Halil Dundar (PMGR)                               Date: 08-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
