                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC6206

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ecuador                           Project ID:      P147951
                            Project Name:       EC National Water and Sanitation Program - PROSANEAMIENTO Project
                                                (P147951)
                            Task Team           Oscar E. Alvarado
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       24-Mar-2014                           Estimated        22-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSWS                                  Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):           City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Pollution management and
                                                environmental health (20%), Rural services and infrast ructure (10%), Water
                                                resource management (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    220.00                       Total Bank Financing:         170.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        50.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                          170.00
                              Total                                                                          220.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           13.      The PROSANEAMIENTO Program objective, as designed by the Government of Ecuador,
                           is to focus public investment in environmental sanitation in order to improve the quality of life of the
                           population. As an outcome target, PROSANEAMIENTO Program aims to increase the coverage
                           index for water supply, sanitation and solid waste management services to 95% nationwide. In line
                         with this target, the Project Development Objective (PDO) for the proposed PROSANEAMIENTO
                         Project is to increase equitable and sustainable coverage of water supply and sanitation services in
                         participating municipalities. This objective will be achieved by (i) increasing the availability of water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supply and sanitation services; (ii) enhancing the technical capacity of GADs for preparing and
                         implementing investments, operating and maintaining water and sanitation systems and managing the
                         services through technical assistance programs.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project would have the following three components.

                         Component 1: Municipal Water Supply and Sewerage Infrastructure ( US$ 140 million of loan
                         financing) to finance investments in the construction and rehabilitation of primary and secondary
                         water and sewerage networks, water treatment plants, pumping stations and main collectors, and
                         wastewater treatment infrastructure, including treatment plants and discharge infrastructure, amongst
                         others. Investments would be financed with a combination of direct grants from the National
                         Government through BEDE to each participating GAD, credit resources from loans from BEDE to
                         the GAD, and in some cases municipal and water and sanitation (WSS) utilities own-sources. The
                         large subsidy amounts that will be financed under PROSANEAMIENTO Program (around US$ 3
                         billion) reflect the priority of achieving universal access to both services for the Government. The
                         program has designed screening procedures and approval criteria to focus Government grants
                         exclusively on viable and technically sound subprojects .

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance, Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for
                         Autonomous Decentralized Government Municipalities (US$ 20 million of loan financing). This
                         component would comprise two sub-components:

                         •       Technical Assistance for Pre-investment Activities and Works Supervision to finance the
                         preparation of feasibility studies and designs for specific subprojects/investments, including
                         associated environmental and social assessments (also known as “pre-investment” activities), and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the supervision of construction activities at the municipal level through the contracting of
                         independent specialized consultants (“fiscalizadores”). This subcomponent will also include capacity
                         building for the management of environmental and social aspects during the construction of the
                         works.

                         •        Technical Assistance for WSS Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building to finance
                         activities to strengthen the existing administrative, technical, financial, commercial, and operational
                         capabilities at the GAD level and bring service providers to reasonable levels of management,
                         operational efficiency and financial viability. Technical assistance for the strengthening of GADs
                         and /or municipal water utilities would be provided through BEDE's existing Technical Assistance
                         Program, the PATGES (Programa de Gestión de Servicios). This Program comprises five phases: (i)
                         Diagnostic and Assessment of Capabilities; (ii) Preparation of an Action Plan (AP); (iii)
                         Implementation of the AP; (iv) Follow up and Monitoring; and (v) Knowledge Management. It
                         finances technical assistance in three main different modalities: (i) Specialized advisory services
                         from different sources, such as de-concentrated BEDE staff at the regional level, consultants hired by
                         BEDE, or the contracting of specialized services and collaboration arrangements with highly
                         performing public such as ETAPA-EP de Cuenca and EPMAPS- Quito; (ii) institutional
                         strengthening events for municipal authorities and water and sanitation services related management
                         and staff; and (iii) knowledge management activities on different topics (water supply sustainability
                         and use, wastewater disposal, management of environmental and social issues, and others). Activities
                           will include the identification of good practices, preparation of manuals and tools, establishment of
                           communities of practice, and others.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3: Project Management and Administration (US$ 10 million of loan financing). This
                           component will finance activities associated with overall Project management by BEDE, including
                           Impact Evaluation, project-related audits, monitoring, equipment and training to strengthen
                           implementing entities, as well as individual consultants. It will include support to BEDE related to
                           the management of environmental and social issues and safeguards.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will involve various sub-projects (works) to be implemented in various municipalities in
                           Ecuador. The specific sub-projects and municipalities are not known at this time.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Banco de Estado (BEDE), with its established in-house implementation and supervision capacity
                           will be responsible for the overall and day-to-day Project management, including fiduciary and
                           safeguard aspects, disbursements and financial reporting. At the local or sub-project level,
                           participating GADs and municipal utilities/service providers will be responsible for contracting the
                           pre-investment, construction of the works, and the independent supervision. BEDE will be
                           responsible for ensuring implementation of environmental and social management aspects in the
                           project. They have developed some procedures and systems for use in other financial programs
                           implemented by them, and environmental instruments associated with financing in other projects/
                           programs provided by the IDB and also CAF. BEDE has reported that they have an environmental
                           specialist in each of the 6 regional offices. BEDE has established an agreement with the Ministry of
                           Environment, who is responsible for issuing the environmental permits for the projects financed
                           under PROSANAMIENTO, which includes provision of resources for the Ministry to hire staff to
                           provide the review of sub-project applications for environmental permits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The BEDE does not have experience in applying World Bank Operational Policies on Involuntary
                           Resettlement and Indigenous People, and does not have dedicated staff for dealing with these issues.
                           Many municipal governments have community development / citizen participation units who have
                           the potential to support the implementation of these policies, but capacity will vary depending on the
                           size of the municipality. As part of the Bank’s review of the project (project preparation), the
                           institutional capacity related to environmental and social aspects needs will be assessed, including
                           the staff /resource availability to meet the project requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (LCSSO)
                           Robert H. Montgomery (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project team proposes an environmental
                           BP 4.01                                              category of B per OP/BP 4.01, as the sub-
                                                                                projects (approximately 40 to 50) involve
                                                                                relatively standard works with no likely
                                                             significant or long-term environmental or social
                                                             impacts and that can be readily prevented or
                                                             mitigated with standard measures. The potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             negative environmental and social impacts
                                                             associated with the construction works could
                                                             include erosion or sedimentation due to earth
                                                             works, operation of work campsites, noise and
                                                             dust from equipment and earthworks, spills of
                                                             petroleum based products, worker health and
                                                             safety, storm water runoff into water courses,
                                                             and traffic risks and nuisances.

                                                             Since the specific sub-projects are not known,
                                                             an Environmental and Social Framework
                                                             (ESMF) will be developed. The ESMF will be
                                                             based upon the existing Banco de Estado
                                                             procedures related to environmental and social
                                                             issues and instruments and procedures
                                                             developed in conjunction with financing by IDB
                                                             and CAF for similar types of projects/works.
                                                             The ESMF will include a screening mechanism
                                                             to screen out sub-projects that would be
                                                             classified as Category A under OP/BP 4.01 or
                                                             could involve significant conversion or
                                                             degradation of critical natural habitats or forests.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Since the sub-projects are within urban areas
                                                             and given the type of works to be performed,
                                                             there should be no significant conversion or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             degradation of critical natural habitat and it is
                                                             unlikely that there will be any significant
                                                             protected areas in the direct area of influence of
                                                             the sub-projects. -There may be some limited
                                                             trees or vegetation to be removed and either
                                                             replanted or new ones planted. Any needed
                                                             assessment or mitigation measures will be
                                                             considered within OP/BP 4.01 and the specific
                                                             ESMF. -While based on existing information it
                                                             appears that this policy would not be triggered,
                                                             this will be confirmed during project
                                                             preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    Given the sub-projects will be developed in
                                                             urban areas, there should be no forests that will
                                                             be affected. However, any potential impacts on
                                                             forests will be evaluated under the ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project does not involve the purchase or use
                                                             of significant quantities of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The exact locations of the projects are not
                         BP 4.11                                 known but will be in urban environments.
                                                                 Given the type of works to be performed, no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 anticipated significant impacts on physical
                                                                 cultural resources are anticipated. However,
                                                                 there will be the need for sub-projects to assess
                                                                 for potential physical cultural resource impacts
                                                                 and for work contracts to include, as a
                                                                 minimum, chance find procedures. The needed
                                                                 measures will be considered within OP/BP 4.01
                                                                 and the specific EA instruments (e.g., EMP with
                                                                 chance finds procedures).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy will be triggered given the Project’s
                                                                 national scope and potential to benefit
                                                                 Indigenous peoples, which according to the last
                                                                 census make up at least 7% of the population,
                                                                 and more likely a higher percentage of the poor.
                                                                 An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                                                 (IPPF) will be prepared and consulted at a
                                                                 national level (with representative Indigenous
                                                                 organizations) and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                                                 The IPPF will outline the screening criteria to
                                                                 identify subprojects where specific social
                                                                 assessments and Indigenous Peoples Plans
                                                                 (IPPs) should be prepared to ensure that WSS
                                                                 investments are designed to effectively serve
                                                                 these populations needs and practices.
                                                                 Indigenous peoples often have customs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 practices around water collection, use, and
                                                                 sanitation that vary greatly from non-indigenous
                                                                 peoples. Adequately designed WSS
                                                                 infrastructure have important health,
                                                                 subsistence, and economic benefits. Experience
                                                                 demonstrates the risk of wasted resources and
                                                                 conflict (where WSS infrastructure goes unused,
                                                                 poorly maintained or destroyed by
                                                                 communities) when WSS investments are not
                                                                 adequately designed to address specific customs
                                                                 and needs. This Policy has the potential to add
                                                                 value to Client’s system for working with
                                                                 Indigenous peoples by providing procedures and
                                                                 tools to ensure more effective engagement and
                                                                 project design with Indigenous Peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Because the project will involve the
                         4.12                                    construction of new infrastructure, as well as the
                                                                 rehabilitation of existing networks it is possible
                                                                 that expropriation may be necessary and that
                                                                                                                                 informal users occupying municipal land or the
                                                                                                                                 right of way may be displaced. A Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) should be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and disclosed prior to appraisal that focuses
                                                                                                                                 specifically on the types of impacts typical to
                                                                                                                                 this type of project. Given the range of donors
                                                                                                                                 and potential variances in definitions and
                                                                                                                                 understanding around resettlement and
                                                                                                                                 voluntary vs. involuntary, it will be important to
                                                                                                                                 fully assess the impacts and requirements under
                                                                                                                                 OP/BP 4.12. Also, robust screening criteria for
                                                                                                                                 voluntary land donations should included within
                                                                                                                                 the ESMF to ensure that land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 through “donations” meets the Bank’s policy
                                                                                                                                 definition for “voluntary”. If it is the case that
                                                                                                                                 the Project will be supporting the protection of
                                                                                                                                 water sources, which may imply the creation or
                                                                                                                                 enforcement of protected areas, then it may be
                                                                                                                                 necessary to prepare a Process Framework for
                                                                                                                                 potential restrictions in access. The necessity for
                                                                                                                                 such a framework will be assessed during
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams. The potential for sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects or project investments to rely on the
                                                                                                                                 services of existing dams will be assessed
                                                                                                                                 during project preparation.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             Project activities will not affect international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project will not be implemented in areas
                                 7.60                                                                                            known to involve disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 17-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      B.      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
                                      needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                                              The Bank will review the existing procedures and systems that are used by the project
                                      (BEDE) on environmental and social management for the PROSANAMIENTO program. An
                                      Environmental and Social Framework will be developed prior to appraisal of the Project. The
                                      client will also be responsible for preparing a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Indigenous
                                      Peoples Planning Framework. Because the exact locations of the sub-projects will not be known at
                                      the time of appraisal the preparation of frameworks (as opposed to site specific plans) is
                                      appropriate.




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Associated with Component 2, institutional strengthening of the GADs related to environmental
                             and social management will be included. Similarity, support to BEDE related to environmental
                             and social management will be included in Component 3.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Oscar E. Alvarado

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                           Date: 24-Jan-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (SM)                          Date: 29-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
