                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC8456

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                           Project ID:     P150395
                            Project Name:     Tamil Nadu Sustainable Urban Development Program (P150395)
                            Task Team         Raghu Kesavan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Jan-2015                     Estimated       30-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSURR                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (30%), Solid waste management (10%),
                                              Sub-national government administration (30%), Water supply (3 0%)
                            Theme(s):         Municipal governance and institution building (30%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                              and Service Delivery (30%), Municipal finance (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    600.00                   Total Bank Financing:       400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  200.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     400.00
                              Total                                                                     600.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To demonstrate improved urban management practices and improve urban services delivery in
                           participating ULBs in a financially sustainable manner.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed TNSUDP builds on the on-going Bank engagement with Tamil Nadu in the urban
                         sector, in particular on TNUDP-III. It will step-up the level of engagement by enhancing the local
                         urban management and governance as well as further refining the line of credit support to ULBs.
                         Innovations envisaged under the project include: piloting a Model Towns Concept; supporting credit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhancement; and supporting reforms in urban finance and in sector policies. In addition, there will
                         be a greater focus on the sustainability of urban environment under the line of credit sub-loans/
                         grants. The prospects for using the Disbursement Linked Indicator (DLI) mechanism to incentivize
                         the Model Towns will also be explored.

                         The proposed project is expected to comprise two components: Urban Investment and Management;
                         and Urban Sector Technical Assistance.

                         Project Components

                         Component 1: The Urban Investment and Management component will comprise four sub-
                         components:

                         a. Urban Governance and Management Enhancement of Model Towns (Bank loan: US$60 million):
                         The main objective of this sub-component is to demonstrate new models on urban management with
                         a focus on building strong governance and financial sustainability. This sub-component will target at
                         least two medium sized ULBs, which will be empowered and incentivized to improve resource
                         planning and management, transparency and accountability, as well as enhanced municipal service
                         delivery. These Model Towns are envisaged to become role models, and if implemented
                         successfully, can potentially be scaled up to other ULBs across Tamil Nadu in the future.
                         Conceptually, a likely Model Town would have the following outcomes: (i) improved decision
                         making powers supported through the delegation of progressively increased administrative and
                         financial powers; (ii) enhanced technical capacities in management systems; (iii) strategic urban and
                         infrastructure planning linked to ULB resources; (iv) service delivery and operations management;
                         (v) strengthened financial management, transparency and improved accountability mechanisms and
                         processes; and (vi) open and active dialogue with its residents. The vision, objectives and definition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of a Model Town including the selection criteria, would be identified and agreed upon by appraisal.
                         The required regulatory and legal framework (in line with the 74th Constitutional Amendment and
                         the related state level conformity legislation) that will underpin the systems improvement will be
                         agreed with GoTN prior to appraisal.

                         Under this sub-component, the selected Model Towns will be provided an annual grant based on
                         satisfactory performance in selected governance and management areas. The disbursement decision
                         will be based on achievement of pre-specified results: annual targets that will need to be achieved for
                         disbursements against a set of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). The achievement of annual
                         targets for disbursements against the pre-set DLIs will be individually assessed for each city every
                         year by the GoTN, through independent assessment teams. The DLIs and corresponding annual
                         targets will be identified with the GoTN over the course of preparation to reflect specific areas of
                         improvement.

                         b. Credit Enhancement (Bank loan: US$10 million): Tamil Nadu is a pioneer in mobilizing resources
                         from financial markets for urban infrastructure through the issue of municipal bonds. It has so far
                         mobilized US$ 64 million for financing viable urban projects in the state through the issue of bonds.
                         This sub-component will channel increased financial resources for investment in urban sector
                         projects by leveraging Bank funds. Resources may be mobilized through the issue of municipal
                         bonds / other debt instruments under pooled finance framework or on ULB based approach,
                         borrowing from commercial banks, etc. Credit enhancement under this component includes any
                         arrangement intended to decrease the likelihood of default on the debt instruments / borrowings
                         including subordinatio n, reserve fund, cash collateralization and / or other arrangements to improve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the credit rating.

                         c. Line of Credit Urban Investments (US$300 million): The main objective of this sub-component is
                         to help participating ULBs improve urban services with an emphasis on the urban environment.
                         There will be an emphasis on 'sustainability' or improvement of urban environments (not less than
                         40% by value under this sub-component) through interventions in waste-water collection and
                         treatment / water reuse, storm water drains and restoration of water bodies in urban areas. The
                         selection of participating ULBs will be based on existing TNUDF criteria which assess financial
                         sustainability of the interventions in ULBs. This sub-component will also include retroactive
                         financing of some expenditures incurred in TNUDP-III.

                         d. Project Development Advisory Facility (PDAF) (Bank loan: US$10 million) to be managed by
                         TNUDF, would provide technical assistance to ULBs for preparing and/or supervising sub-projects
                         in ULBs, including environmental and social mitigation actions, contract supervision, Public Private
                         Partnerships (PPPs), etc.

                         Component 2: Urban Sector Technical Assistance Component (Bank loan: US$20 million) is aimed
                         at system-wide strengthening of the capacity of ULBs and urban sector officials in the state in
                         specific areas, as well as supporting reforms in the area of urban finance and sector policies. It would
                         comprise: (i) Support for the next generation of municipal e-governance system, covering all ULBs;
                         (ii) Build on the financial management reforms initiatives carried out under TNUDP-III by moving to
                         an integrated/centralized web-based financial management system, enhancement of capacity of
                         newly created municipal accounts cadre; (iii) GIS Mapping for 119 ULBs; (iv) Training and
                         Capacity Building; (v) Project development; and (vi) TA focused on urban public finance issues
                         (enhancing own source revenues of ULBs, etc).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout the state as the all Urban Local Bodies are eligible to
                         participate in the project based on the selection criteria. The state is broadly divided into natural
                         divisions-the coastal plains and the hilly western areas and comprise of 20% of Scheduled castes and
                         1% of Scheduled Tribal population. The state has the third highest slum population with 507out of
                         721 statutory towns reporting the slum population consisting of about 1.46 million households.

                         The state is also rich in environmental resources, with a long coastline of over 1000 km covering 12
                         districts of the state and about 17.5% of the state is under forest cover. The state is endowed with the
                         Gulf of Mannar Marine Biosphere Reserve, Nilgiri Hill Biosphere Reserve, 3 National Parks, 8 Wild
                         Life Sanctuaries and 12 Bird Sanctuaries. The water resources of the state consist of 16 seasonal
                         rivers and over 39,000 water tanks / lakes. Depending on the location of the proposed project
                         interventions, these environmental sensitivities will become relevant to the project.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project is likely to finance some urban investments which will involve complex safeguard issues
                         and will encounter category A sub-projects. The respective implementing agencies will be
                         responsible for implementation of the sub- projects and TNUIFSL will be the coordinating agency
                         for the safeguards application and will also monitor the implementation. As part of the
                           implementation of the previous TNUDP-III, the TNUIFSL and some of the ULBs were exposed to
                           the World Bank’s safeguard policies and are familiar with the safeguards procedures and the
                           requirements. Two Safeguard Specialists (Environment and Social) are part of TNUIFSL and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           associated with the project for more than 5 years, have gained experience in safeguard issues and will
                           assist the implementing agencies in preparation of monitoring of safeguards implementation of sub-
                           projects. There is need to focus in this project to further develop the safeguards capacity of key
                           participating local bodies and other implementing agencies. As part of the overall safeguards
                           implementation in the previous project under TNUDP-III, the borrower has demonstrated willingness
                           to implement sound environmental and social safeguards practices. In the context of the preparation
                           of this project, the need for further strengthening institutional capacity of TNUIFSL and participating
                           Urban Local Bodies will be assessed and accordingly suitable measures will be proposed for its
                           strengthening as needed as part of project appraisal.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           I. U. B. Reddy (GURDR)
                           Srihari Gopalaswamy (GURDR)
                           Bokepalli Kanaka Durga Raja (GURDR)
                           Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project interventions are expected to cause
                           BP 4.01                                              impacts on urban environment. Depending on
                                                                                the nature and location of the urban investment
                                                                                activities, the project is likely to contribute to
                                                                                both positive and negative environmental
                                                                                impacts on the project area. The Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                and Social Framework, developed and
                                                                                implemented in the recently closed TNUDP III,
                                                                                will be suitably updated / strengthened and will
                                                                                be implemented to carry out the necessary
                                                                                environmental assessment of the project
                                                                                interventions.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          TBD             Some of the activities related to restoration and
                                                                                rejuvenation of water bodies in the state are
                                                                                expected to cause impacts on the natural
                                                                                habitats. These investments, if finalized during
                                                                                the preparation phase for inclusion in the
                                                                                project, OP 4.04 will be triggered.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              Based on the current list of activities being
                                                                                considered, the project doesn’t involve
                                                                                substantial conversion of forest areas and
                                                                                impacts on the forest resources.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No              Project activities, are not expected to trigger the
                                                                                requirements of OP 4.09.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   The project investments are not expected to
                         BP 4.11                                 cause any impacts on cultural resources. This
                                                                 will be further ascertained as the project design
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 progresses and will be triggered, if any impacts
                                                                 are anticipated.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The need for triggering this policy will be
                                                                 determined by appraisal based on the
                                                                 assessment of likely impacts to tribal population
                                                                 in the participating Towns.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project will have some adverse impacts
                         4.12                                    related to displacement of people, especially the
                                                                 non-title holders and also involve some private
                                                                 land for the proposed infrastructure
                                                                 improvement interventions. The restoration of
                                                                 water bodies will have substantial impacts as the
                                                                 poor and vulnerable people often found to be
                                                                 occupying the land around water bodies, along
                                                                 the rivers and other vacant public places and are
                                                                 subject to displacement.

                                                                 The main implementing agencies involved in
                                                                 the earlier TNUDP-III would also execute this
                                                                 project and are exposed to and sensitized in
                                                                 addressing the issues related to displacement
                                                                 and private land acquisition. The project will
                                                                 build upon the Environment and Social
                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF) from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 previous project, and strengthen the processes
                                                                 for screening, appraisal, supervision and
                                                                 reporting of the implementation of the sub-
                                                                 projects. TNUIFSL, who has experience in
                                                                 safeguard aspects, will assist the implementing
                                                                 agencies in preparation and implementation of
                                                                 RAPs, the updated ESMF and incorporate the
                                                                 provisions of process of new legislation on
                                                                 “The Right to Fair compensation and
                                                                 Transparency in Land Acquisition,
                                                                 Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013”.
                                                                 The updated ESMF will define the sub-project
                                                                 specific screening, SIA process, consultations,
                                                                 disclosure and preparation of RAPs, if land
                                                                 acquisition and resettlement impacts are
                                                                 involved. The sub-project appraisal process for
                                                                 safeguards will be outlined.

                                                                 Social Impact Assessment (SIA) would be
                                                                 carried out as part of DPRs to determine the
                                                                                                                                 nature of impacts and undertake stakeholder
                                                                                                                                 consultations to seek their views and
                                                                                                                                 suggestions on the project impacts. The SIA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 findings will provide basis for preparation of
                                                                                                                                 sub-project specific RAPs.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Safeguard studies that are being undertaken include: (i) Updation of Environment and Social
                                      Framework; (ii) Sub-project specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and
                                      Resettlement Action Plans (if required) for 30% investments targeted as part of appraisal will be
                                      prepared as part of DPRs for individual sub-projects. All these studies and corresponding
                                      documentation, review and disclosures will be completed by Appraisal. The RSA will retain the
                                      oversight of the project, given the complex nature of urban sector, and some of the proposed
                                      investments will be environment category A sub-projects.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Raghu Kesavan
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 18-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)                                                                                                      Date: 20-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
