                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7500
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                           Project ID:    P144454
                            Project Name:      Global Partnership for Education - Balochistan Education Project (P144454)
                            Task Team          Umbreen Arif
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Jan-2014                        Estimated   02-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASED                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (60%), Secondary education (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (80%), Managing for development results (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         34.10               Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              Education for All Supervising Entity                                                        34.10
                              Total                                                                                       34.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective of the Project is to increase school enrollment and retention in
                           project supported schools, with a special focus on girls’ participation, and to develop mechanisms for
                           information collection and use for improved management of education.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Balochistan Government has drafted a comprehensive Education Sector Plan -BESP - with an

                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         implementation and results framework to improve sector outcomes. Some key initiatives of this plan
                         have been prioritized by the government in consultation with the local education partners to be
                         financed by the GPE allocation of US$34 million. The project activities prioritized from the sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plan are based on Government's existing initiatives, lessons learned from past projects as well as
                         deliverability of activities in a conflict and security constrained province. The main objectives are
                         improving access and addressing quality issues in schools through improved management, planning
                         and provision of basic resources to teachers. The three proposed components to be supported under
                         the Project are: 1) Access and Equity, 2) Quality and Increased Accountability, and 3) Technical
                         assistance for management and monitoring.

                         Component 1: Access and Equity
                         The key objective of this component is to improve access and equity of girls and boys to schooling.
                         Subcomponent 1.1: Expanding Access through Community School Mechanisms: This sub-
                         component will support SED in expanding access to schooling through an improved and transparent
                         process of school site selection with community support by (i) confirming need and demand in
                         communities that lack a school facility; (ii) third party validation to ensure availability of teacher and
                         children; and (iii) community partnership for school management. School learning space will be
                         made available by (i) using underutilized existing government buildings, (ii) community provided
                         space and by (ii) constructing simple transitional learning spaces with community partnership. Under
                         this component, two thousand schools are expected to be constructed.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Support Transition to Higher Levels of Education: Balochistan faces a serious
                         issue of access to middle and high schools, especially for girls. The ratio of middle to primary
                         schools is approximately 1:10; the number is much higher in some districts and especially for girls.
                         The Government plans to use GPE resources to upgrade 50 primary girls’ schools to middle and 10
                         middle girls’ schools to the higher secondary level. The sub-component will institute transparent
                         criteria-based selection of schools to be upgraded, for instance, upgrading where teacher availability
                         is ensured through creation of posts and approvals in the budget, especially for teaching of science
                         and mathematics.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.3: Providing Alternative Learning Pathways: A third activity is to improve school
                         participation and ensure the implementation of article 25 A (right to free education) in the province
                         and to provide alternate learning pathways (ALP) to children who have missed the opportunity to
                         enroll at the right age in formal schooling but may benefit from an accelerated learning program in
                         order to catch up with enrolled children in either primary or middle schools. Approximately 200
                         ALPs will be established after careful site selection and with the support of organizations that have
                         the experience of implementing a fast track learning model.

                         Component 2: Quality and Increased Accountability

                         The objective of this component is to improve quality of teaching through provision of simple
                         teaching and learning management tools for teachers as well as introduction of mechanisms to
                         increase the accountability of teaching and learning in schools.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Teacher Development through Provision of Teaching Learning Materials: This
                         sub-component will support the government's efforts to improve teacher training by developing
                         simple and usable teaching learning and planning materials for classrooms that may also be used
                         simultaneously to (a) improve learning environments in the classroom, and (b) track progress of
                         syllabus implementation. The Provincial Institute of Teacher Education (PITE) will be responsible,

                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         along with the SED, for developing simple management tools like time tables, daily plans, sample
                         teaching activities, assessment tools, teacher responsibilities in the classroom and multi-grade
                         teaching mechanisms.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2.2: Early Childhood Education (ECE): The Government is piloting an ECE program
                         with donor support in 75 schools. Lessons learned from this initiative will be used to expand the
                         activities to 200 additional schools financed by GPE. The sub-component will also support the
                         implementation of ECE through technical assistance for the development of an ECE policy,
                         curriculum and TLM and identify mechanisms to improve teacher selection for early grades.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Student Assessments: This sub-component will undertake a learning assessment
                         of students in project supported schools to establish a baseline of student learning outcomes in basic
                         numeracy and literacy in early grades. In addition to this, the Government also plans to conduct
                         regular assessments of the students enrolled in ALP for monitoring the resul ts of the activity and
                         maintaining quality of learning and teaching. The project will also closely work with a USAID
                         financed project supporting student assessments and teacher professional development.

                         Subcomponent 2.4: Strengthening Balochistan Education Management Information System
                         (BEMIS): BEMIS performs an important function of conducting an annual school census; however
                         the exercise is marked with data inconsistencies and weak analysis reducing its usefulness for
                         planning and decision making. Using the existing system as a foundation, additional diagnostic
                         activities are planned to improve the validity of the data, collect timely and reliable information
                         through ICT and improve data presentation to support decision making.

                         Component 3: Technical assistance for improved capacity for management and monitoring.

                         The objective of this component is to support the establishment of systems and procedures for
                         effective planning and implementation of Project activities and developing robust monitoring
                         systems. The Technical Assistance (TA) facility would expand the capacity of the existing PMU
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operating for the PGEB project to set up the project activities, support district education offices to
                         implement and monitor project activities. Communication mechanisms would be developed by SED/
                         PMU to ensure information sharing upstream (Provincial departments and district education
                         departments) as well as downstream (schools, communities). Some key communication aspects
                         include wide sharing of grievance redressal systems, sharing of criteria for school site selection
                         through district offices, print media. In addition to the above, the TA facility may also support the
                         relevant education departments such as the Directorate of Education, BoC and PITE in capacity
                         building activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the entire province of Balochistan, which is an arid, mostly
                         mountainous province of Pakistan. The area exhibits a great variety of physical features, consisting
                         of vast rocky deserts with extremes of climate and very low rainfall. The northern most areas of
                         Balochistan are dominated by high relief and a rugged landscape. From here, towering mountain
                         ranges arc southward. The Toba Kakar Range forms the boundary with Afghanistan, while the
                         Sulaiman Range forms the boundary with the Indus valley. From the central region of the Province,
                         the mountains sweep south and west, reaching almost to the sea. Elevations exceed 2,000 m in many
                         areas, with peaks reaching to 3,500 m around Quetta. Primarily due to vastness of the province and
                         predominantly rural setup, Balochistan has a low population density, compared to the rest of the


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         country. Most parts of Balochistan face water scarcity, a problem which has been further
                         exacerbated due to the frequent droughts.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
                         Mohammad Omar Khalid (SASDI)
                         Muqaddisa Mehreen (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Construction activities under Component 1 may
                         BP 4.01                                             potentially have environmental impacts of low to
                                                                             moderate significance. To address these potential
                                                                             issues, the Education Department will use the
                                                                             guidance provided in the ESMF, in compliance
                                                                             with the OP 4.01.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The schools under the proposed project will be
                                                                             established within the built-up areas where the
                                                                             original habitat has already been significantly
                                                                             modified, and therefore the project is not likely to
                                                                             affect any natural habitat. The officially notified
                                                                             protected areas of the province will be included in
                                                                             the ESMF as the negative list for any new
                                                                             construction to be undertaken for the proposed
                                                                             project. Hence this OP is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              As stated above, the project activities will be
                                                                             carried out in built-up areas outside any forests.
                                                                             The small construction activities included in the
                                                                             project are unlikely to have any adverse impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             on the forests in the province. Hence this OP is
                                                                             not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project does not include any activity related
                                                                             to cultivation or use of pesticides. Hence this OP
                                                                             is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The project activities will be carried out in built-
                         BP 4.11                                             up areas as stated above and hence are unlikely to
                                                                             affect any known PCRs. The ‘Chance Find’
                                                                             procedures will be included in the ESMF to
                                                                             address any unknown PCRs discovered during the
                                                                             construction activities under the project.
                                                                             Furthermore, the officially notified sites of
                                                                             archaeological, cultural or historical significance
                                                                             will be included in the ESMF as the negative list
                                                                             for the construction activities to be carried out
                                                                             under the project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              No indigenous people exist in the Province hence
                                                                             this OP is not triggered.



                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The project will not cause any involuntary
                            4.12                                                resettlement hence this OP is not triggered. Up
                                                                                gradation is planned to be prioritized in schools
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                where existing space is available. The ESMF will
                                                                                include procedures for any land donation, if
                                                                                required, for establishingnew schools.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project does not include any activity related
                                                                                to construction or operation of any dam. Hence
                                                                                this OP is not triggered.
                            Projects on International           No              The project does not include any activity related
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                to international waterways. Hence this OP is not
                                                                                triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 No disputed areas exist in Balochistan province
                            7.60                                                where this project will be implemented. Hence
                                                                                this OP is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed construction of new schools and upgradations as well as operation of these schools
                              may potentially cause negative environmental and social impacts, such as soil erosion, competing
                              demand for water for various uses like drinking vs. construction, water and soil contamination, air
                              quality deterioration, damage to natural vegetation, and safety and health hazards for students,
                              teachers, workers and surrounding population. However, most of these impacts are not likely to
                              be irreversible, wide-spread, or unprecedented, and can be addressed with the help of appropriately
Public Disclosure Copy




                              designed and effectively implemented mitigation plan. Therefore the proposed project has been
                              classified as Environment Category B, in accordance with the WB Operational Policy 4.01. No
                              other environment and social safeguard policies will trigger.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are expected to take place.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              GoB has conducted a project-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and
                              developed an ESMF for an existing education project, because of the similarities in the project
                              activities and scope of work the team been given permission to use the existing ESMF. The ESIA
                              identifies the negative environmental and social impacts that are likely to be caused by the project
                              during its various phases, and proposes mitigation measures to address these impacts. The ESIA
                              also proposes the institutional arrangements to manage the environmental aspects of the project,
                              and has identified environmental monitoring requirements to ensure the effective implementation
                              of the mitigation measures, describing the environmental training needs, and specifying the


                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           reporting and documentation requirements.

                           The Project Management Unit already established for an existing project, has designated a senior
Public Disclosure Copy




                           officer as Environmental and Social Focal Point (ESFP) and will also hire a Safeguard Officer, to
                           ensure the effective implementation of ESSAF during the Project implementation, and to
                           coordinate with the Bank and other stakeholders, such as EPAs, on matters relevant to
                           environmental management. Capacity building of ESFP, Safeguard Officer and other related
                           project personnel (such as the field officers), as well as awareness raising of the Project staff will
                           however be needed for better management of environmental and social aspects of the Project,
                           particularly the effective implementation of the ESIA.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders include the beneficiary communities, PTSMCs, Education Department of
                           GoB, EPA, local NGOs, construction contractors and supervision consultants. Stakeholder
                           consultations will be carried out while conducting the ESIA, which will also propose consultation
                           mechanism for the project implementation period.
                           The ESMF has been uploaded on the project website and its executive summary has been
                           translated into Urdu.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       19-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    19-Feb-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                          31-Mar-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The ESIA was conducted for the existing eductaion project with similar activities.
                                         The team has recieved permission from the regional safeguard advisor to use the
                                         same ESIA for the GPE-BEP project.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Umbreen Arif
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Amit Dar (SM)                               Date: 14-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
