                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC2779

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Gambia, The                      Project ID:      P143650
                            Project Name:      Maternal and Child Nutrition and Health Results Project (P143650)
                            Task Team          Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-Jan-2014                      Estimated        21-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHW                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Health (60%), Other social services (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Health system performance (25%), Nutrition and food security (35%), Child
                                               health (20%), Population and reproductive health (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      8.68                     Total Bank Financing:           3.68
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                     3.68
                              Health Results-based Financing                                                5.00
                              Total                                                                         8.68
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           A. Proposed Development Objective

                           The development objective of the project is to increase the utilization of community nutrition and
                           primary maternal and child health care services. The proposed project is expected to contribute to
                           the improvement of maternal and child nutrition and health outcomes
                         C. Project Description
                         Introducing a Results-Based Financing (RBF) mechanism with a focus on preventive and primary
                         care for health and nutrition has been noted as a strategic step that could contribute to improved
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maternal and child health and nutrition outcomes in The Gambia. RBF measures will be identified
                         following a results-based management approach that starts with the identification of the result to be
                         achieved, an analysis of the bottlenecks to achieve the result, and the identification of the (RBF)
                         measures to overcome the bottlenecks in the most efficient manner. Table 3 shows how this will
                         work for four different results related to maternal and child nutrition and health.

                         The project will have three main components:
                         1.     Community mobilization for social and behavior change;
                         2.     Enhancing delivery of selected community nutrition and primary health care services; and
                         3.     Capacity building for results-based management in health and nutrition service delivery.

                         Overall, the project design will look as follows:

                         Component 1: Community mobilization for social and behavior change •         Conditional mother
                         - baby friendly community awards •     Performance/Results-based payments for community action
                         Component 2: Enhancing delivery of selected community nutrition and PHC services     •
                         Performance-based payments to service providers •      Start up support
                         Component 3: Capacity building for service delivery and results-based •      RBF governance
                         and program management at national and decentralized levels • Community mobilization and
                         organization

                         Component 1: Community Mobilization for Social and Behavior Change (IDA $1 million; HRITF
                         $1.5 million): Component 1 will focus on community-based promotion of key family practices (i.e.,
                         the 12 family and community practices that promote child survival, growth and development) and
                         health care seeking behaviors for improved maternal and child health and nutrition outcomes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Communities will be mobilized to implement and adhere to a set of mother and baby friendly
                         conditions in a similar way as Baby Friendly Hospitals have to comply with 10 criteria under the
                         Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI). This component will use community awards conditioned
                         on: (i) the establishment of mother and baby friendly criteria; and (ii) the promotion of selected
                         behaviors for the improvement of nutrition and health outcomes in young children and mothers.
                         Community ownership is a key factor in the conditional community awards.

                         Component 2: Enhancing Delivery of Selected Community Nutrition and Primary Health Care
                         Services (IDA $1.3 million; HRITF $2.3 million): Component 2 aims to support the delivery of
                         selected community nutrition and primary health care services at community, primary, and, where
                         needed, referral health care levels, and will use performance-based incentives. These incentives
                         involve a provider payment scheme based on the delivery of prior agreed maternal and child health
                         and nutrition services. The RHTs will engage various nutrition and health-related service providers
                         under performance-based service delivery contracts stipulating the services they will deliver and the
                         level of payments for each service provided. The service providers include: (i) Village Support
                         Groups – led by the Village Health Worker – to deliver a basic package of services with a focus on
                         maternal and child nutrition and health; (ii) Community Health Nurse (CHN) to train, supervise and
                         support the VSGs (alone and as member of the MDFT and/or the local Health Team) and deliver
                         priority outreach health services; (iii) local Health Teams at Health Centers to supervise CHNs and
                         deliver a package of basic facility-based and outreach services; (iv) MDFT to train, supervise and
                           support communities and VSGs; and (v) RHTs to supervise outputs including quality of care at the
                           primary and community levels and to provide support and mentoring to providers within the targeted
                           communities. Health centers can be Government-run or private (not-for-profit). An Independent
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Verification Agency (IVA) will be used to counter-verify whether targets have been reached by
                           service providers; this will be done in addition to internal verification done by CHNs, local Health
                           Teams, MDFTs and RHTs. The payments can be used, in addition to staff bonuses, to fund, inter
                           alia, training courses for staff, and equipment (such as vehicles, electricity, medical supplies and
                           sanitation).

                           Component 3: Capacity Building for Service Delivery and Results-based Management (IDA $0.7
                           million; HRITF 1.2 million): This component will support the implementing entities to set up and
                           implement RBF (including contracting and management) as well as monitor, evaluate and document
                           the project through: (i) long-term technical assistance; and (ii) in-service as well as on-the-job
                           training and consulting services. It will cover the costs of the IVA, the com munity surveys by the
                           IVA and CBOs, the aggregation of results, the analysis of the data to monitor trends in coverage of
                           services in project districts, and the communication and dissemination of information to all the
                           stakeholders. This component will support essential improvement to the community nutrition and
                           health data management systems to enable the roll-out of the RBF mechanism.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The eastern half of the country including the Upper River Region, the Central River Region, the
                           North Bank Region and the Lower River Region (to be confirmed during preparation).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Melissa C. Landesz (AFTSG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        TBD             The components 1 and 2 will lead to more
                           BP 4.01                                             medical procedures and therefore may generate
                                                                               more medical waste.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Sep-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      To be confirmed.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Menno Mulder-Sibanda

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 23-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 23-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
