                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA3258
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                         Project ID:    P133195
                            Project Name:      Argentina Second Rural Education Improvement Project - PROMER-II
                                               (P133195)
                            Task Team          Peter Anthony Holland
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSHE                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (40%), Pre-primary education (10%), General education
                                              sector (30%), Public administration- Education (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (20%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (35%), Education for all (20%), Administrative and civi l service reform (10%),
                                              Indigenous peoples (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     275.00           Total Bank Financing:                250.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 24.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   250.50
                              Total                                                                                   275.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to support national Government policy to i) reduce



                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         repetition in primary education; and ii) increase enrollment and completion in secondary education,
                         in Argentina's rural areas.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project would be comprised of three components. The first, covering pre-primary, primary and
                         secondary education, would aim to reduce repetition rates in rural classrooms, through improvements
                         in teaching and school directors’ management practices and strengthening the school-family
                         linkages. The second component would focus on increasing enrollment and completion of secondary
                         education, through expanding coverage of services. The third component consists of activities
                         related to Project management, monitoring, and evaluation. Given Argentina’s federalist nature, the
                         precise implementation arrangements for components would need to be adapted to the specific
                         conditions of each province, given that similar programs may already be underway in certain areas,
                         in which case PROMER II could support those interventions granted they fulfill certain criteria
                         defined by the National Ministry of Education.

                         Component 1: Reduce Repetition Rates in Rural Classrooms (US$59 million)

                         This Component would consist of two parts: 1.1 Improving teaching and school management; and
                         1.2 strengthening the link between schools and families. Under PROMER I, much progress was
                         made in reaching out of school preschool-aged children, helping to reduce the number of six year
                         olds in grade one that had never attended preschool by more than half. Still, the school readiness of
                         children entering grade one can be improved upon, as evidenced by the persistently high repetition
                         rate in rural areas throughout primary. Although the teacher training financed under PROMER I
                         helped this effort in part, the chosen training model was to provide intense, long-term training to a
                         select few teachers (postítulo), with insufficient focus on pedagogy. The in-service training provided
                         under PROMER I did not include school directors and supervisors hence excluding, among other
                         things, school-level tools for identifying students at risk of repetition and interventions to remediate
                         the problem. Under component 1.1 of the Project, a new training strategy for in-service teachers,
                         principals and supervisors would be designed and implemented, in accordance with the recently
Public Disclosure Copy




                         approved National Plan for Teacher Training (Plan Nacional de Formacion Docente). PROMER I
                         also fostered greater links between schools and communities, and established the mechanisms for
                         transferring small resources for schools to manage independently with the condition of developing an
                         improvement plan. Component 1.2 of the Project seeks to support the further development of this
                         approach, with a view toward fostering greater participation from parents and communities, so as to
                         better engage them in the learning of their children, thereby enhancing their children’s schooling
                         performance (including reducing repetition and dropouts).

                         Component 1.1: Improving teaching and school management

                         This Component would support Argentina’s recently approved National Plan for Teacher Training,
                         through efforts to improve teaching and school management, including designing and implementing
                         an in-service training strategy for all pre-primary, primary and secondary rural schools for teachers,
                         school directors and supervisors. Among the activities to be financed would be the definition of
                         minimum standards for rural teachers, directors and supervisors, design of the training courses to
                         ensure that all rural teachers, directors and supervisors reach minimum standards, design of the
                         training’s rollout strategy to prioritize among those most in need, stipends for trainers, transportation
                         costs, training costs, the development of new teaching and training materials, and the printing and
                         distribution of existing materials. Special consideration would also be given to designing training/
                         teacher support systems that work with indigenous schools, working to address challenges identified


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         in the diagnostics and corresponding school improvement plans (see Component 1.2).

                         Training courses for teachers would be organized per level of education, focusing on both the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         particular needs of that level, as well as the linkages with previous and subsequent levels of
                         education. For school directors and supervisors, training activities would be developed in order to
                         better ensure institutional support for the improved teaching practices, implementation of the learned
                         pedagogic approaches/tools for rural schools and the development and implementation of tools for
                         identifying students at risk of repetition. As such, selection for participation in training would be at
                         the school level, allowing for school teams to develop school-specific projects to address identified
                         challenges. The training would also include instructions for directors in carrying out diagnostics of
                         school problems, developing corresponding school improvement plans, and strengthening the
                         outreach activities with families and communities(Component 1.2). Including teachers, school
                         directors and supervisors in the National Training Plan and defining the school as the level of
                         intervention, has the advantage of triggering synergies and potential interaction effects among the
                         three interventions.

                         Component 1.2 Strengthening the link between schools and families

                         This Component would build on the activities fostering local and social participation under
                         PROMER I. With the view of fostering greater participation of parents and other community
                         members in the learning of children, the Component would strengthen the links between schools and
                         local community. In general, small funds would be co-managed by school management committees
                         consisting of school administrators/representatives, parents association, and community
                         representatives, in order to carry out the activities such as: i) sharing of experiences at the level of the
                         agrupamiento (including financing transportation costs where needed); ii) simple preventive
                         maintenance of schools, such as fixing broken windows; or iii) purchasing needed equipment (e.g. a
                         refrigerator for the kitchen). Access to the small funds would be subject to a school improvement
                         plan developed by the school management committee and the fulfillment of the teacher, principal and
                         supervisor training plan for selected schools as described in Component 1.1. The school
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvement plan must include a diagnostic of the school with basic performance indicators like
                         repetition, dropout and efficiency rates. The school improvement plan should make explicit how the
                         additional funds will be used in any of the three activities listed above (or a combination of them).
                         School improvement plans will be followed by an end-of-year report, developed by the school
                         management committee, describing how the funds were used.

                         Component 2: Increasing Enrollment and Completion of Rural Secondary School (US$180 million)

                         This Component would consist of expanding the supply of secondary education services in rural
                         areas including infrastructure for new schools, increasing capacity for existing schools, school
                         maintenance, learning material and the supply of qualified teachers. The focus under PROMER I has
                         thus far been at the primary and lower secondary level, since that is where demand has been highest.
                         As discussed in the sectoral background, the remaining coverage gap is mainly in upper secondary,
                         hence this Component would focus on expanding supply at that level while still contributing to the
                         expansion of lower secondary, as well as investments in other levels of education where needed,
                         which serve as important pull factors for increasing coverage at higher levels.

                         This Component would strive to increase enrollment in secondary education in rural areas through
                         the expansion of education supply at upper and lower secondary levels, as well as other levels where
                         needed. Among the activities to be financed would be infrastructure and equipment, technical

                                                                        Page 3 of 12
                         assistance to identify the areas or regions with an infrastructure shortage, didactic materials and the
                         provision or qualified teachers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To address the infrastructure shortage, a map of underserved areas would be developed to locate
                         demand and help determine the best service delivery models for each selected area. Wherever
                         possible, the unit of analysis for the maps, and the subsequent areas for prioritization, would be the
                         agrupamientos.

                         The pedagogic and institutional approaches to be supported under this Component would strive to
                         address the two main bottlenecks to expanding secondary education supply: the dearth of qualified
                         teachers, and insufficient infrastructure. To address the shortage of qualified teachers, the expansion
                         of the Horizontes program would be the main activity for increasing supply in lower secondary, since
                         it offers a sustainable alternative that relies less on subject area teachers. Launched in 2006, the
                         program organizes teaching around six areas: Spanish, math, social sciences, natural sciences, art,
                         and English. The backbone of the program is especially designed resource manuals featuring
                         concepts for each area, containing individual and group work activities, organized by self-standing
                         units that have parameters for evaluation, and allow students to advance through the material
                         progressively, once the previous unit has been passed. This allows students to move at their own
                         pace, all the while protecting a certain group dynamic.

                         Component 3: Strengthening Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$11.5 million)

                         This Component would consist of two parts: 3.1 Project management and 3.2 Monitoring and
                         evaluation.

                         Component 3.1: Project anagement

                         As per the first phase of PROMER, Project management entails: (i) the technical coordination within
                         the MEN across technical departments; (ii) the planning, monitoring, and evaluation of province-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level activities; and (iii) the fiduciary oversight for all Project activities, including financial
                         management, procurement, and all legal aspects of the Project, including safeguards. The Project
                         Management structure is based on existing structures within the national and provincial education
                         ministries. To assure quality implementation of Project activities, the Project would support
                         technical departments through financing just-in-time consultancies and other technical support as
                         required.

                         Two specific technical assistance projects will be developed under this Component: (1) best
                         international practices and other inputs needed for the design of the training strategy for teachers,
                         principals and supervisors, including the definition of standards; and (2) a map of underserved areas
                         to locate demand for secondary education and help determine the best service delivery models for
                         each selected area.

                         Component 3.2: Monitoring and evaluation

                         Working closely with the National Directorate of Information and Evaluation of Educational Quality
                         (Dirección Nacional de Información y Evaluación de la Calidad Educativa – DiNIECE), the Project
                         management team would be responsible for the monitoring and evaluation of Project activities. The
                         Project would finance the Project´s monitoring of indicators and the development of a system to
                         track the implementation of activities and trends in basic education indicators, for Provinces and the

                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         general public to track progress of PROMER II.

                         Sound impact evaluations in selected Provinces would estimate and quantify the effect of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interventions support by the Project. The final design, scope and identification strategy of the
                         proposed evaluations will depend on the agreements reached with the Ministries of Education of the
                         selected Provinces.

                         a.       The effects of the teacher training in a selected province. The evaluation would include
                         classroom observations and the development and application of a standardized test as part of the
                         instruments to measure the impact.
                         b.       Measuring management practices in a selected province. To measure the impact of training
                         to principals and supervisors, an instrument measuring management practices would be developed
                         and implemented in the Province.
                         c.       The effects of strengthening the link between schools and families on dropout and repetition
                         rates in Salta. In an ongoing evaluation, a small fund or grant like the one described in Component
                         1.2 has been assigned randomly to schools in Salta. The baseline information has been collected and
                         by the end of 2014 the results from the first follow up will be ready. These results will inform on the
                         impact of Component 1.2 of the Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Target areas for the envisioned Project’s physical interventions are rural zones. Specific sub-project
                         locations have not been identified; they will be selected during Project implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)
                         Elba Lydia Gaggero (LCSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Potential physical interventions are foreseen
                          BP 4.01                                             under Component 2 of the Project. They refer to
                                                                              to i) construction of new schools; and ii) the
                                                                              rehabilitation and refurbishment of schools. The
                                                                              rest of the Project's components would essentially
                                                                              involve institutional development, training, and
                                                                              capacity-building activities. Based on the nature
                                                                              of the works, this Project is classified as Category
                                                                              B, requiring a partial environmental assessment in
                                                                              accordance with the Bank's Safeguards Policies.
                                                                              No major adverse environmental impacts are
                                                                              anticipated for the Project. Expected potential
                                                                              negative impacts would be primarily during the
                                                                              construction phase of small to medium-scale civil
                                                                              works and will be mitigated through specific
                                                                              measures included in the Environmental and
                                                                              Social Management Framework (ESMF) of the
                                                                              Project.




                                                                      Page 5 of 12
                                                                     Considering that sub-projects would be entirely
                                                                     defined during Project implementation, the
                                                                     Ministry of Education (MEN) has developed an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     ESMF according to OP/BP 4.01(Environmental
                                                                     Assessment), that: (i) ensures compliance with
                                                                     pertinent legislation and Bank policies for works
                                                                     of the type considered under the Project; (ii)
                                                                     identifies potential environmental and social
                                                                     impacts based on the scope of physical
                                                                     interventions and site characteristics; (iii)
                                                                     establishes appropriate procedures for sub-project
                                                                     screening as well as mitigation, management, and
                                                                     monitoring measures; and (iv) defines procedures
                                                                     and responsibilities for the environmental and
                                                                     social management of the Project. This also
                                                                     considers specific safety and building standards
                                                                     needed for schools, including structural measures
                                                                     for disaster risk reduction, access for people with
                                                                     disabilities, indoor comfort, etc.

                                                                     As the envisioned works are similar to those that
                                                                     have been executed during the ongoing operation,
                                                                     the proven procedures and measures that are
                                                                     currently being applied, as well as specific
                                                                     improvements, have been incorporated into the
                                                                     ESMF of this new Project.

                                                                     MEN conducted a focus group consultation on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     this instrument. The views of consultation
                                                                     participants were incorporated into the ESMF
                                                                     final document.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             Sub-project specific locations would be selected
                                                                     during Project implementation. However, since
                                                                     rural areas are targeted, and moreover, the Project
                                                                     would prioritize locations in dispersed or remote
                                                                     rural areas, it is possible for works to be located
                                                                     in natural habitat zones. Therefore, the
                                                                     environmental Bank’s policy OP/BP 4.04
                                                                     (Natural Habitats) is triggered for the Project. The
                                                                     corresponding considerations have been included
                                                                     in the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No              The Project will not support management of
                                                                     forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No              This safeguard does not apply as the Project
                                                                     does not require the purchase, application or
                                                                     storage of pesticides and will not lead to an
                                                                     increased use of pesticides. While the Policy is


                                                             Page 6 of 12
                                                                         not triggered, schools may use pesticides during
                                                                         their operational phase to control pests. This
                                                                         aspect would be considered within any efforts to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         improve or strengthen MEN’s protocols for
                                                                         school infrastructure management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Sub-project specific locations would be selected
                         BP 4.11                                         during Project implementation. However, since
                                                                         rural areas are targeted, and moreover, the Project
                                                                         would prioritize locations in dispersed or remote
                                                                         rural areas, it is possible for works to be located
                                                                         areas with cultural values (outstanding
                                                                         landscapes, indigenous territories, historic or
                                                                         archaeological heritage sites, etc.). Some school
                                                                         buildings to be rehabilitated may also have
                                                                         cultural values. Then, OP/BP 4.11 is triggered for
                                                                         the Project. The corresponding considerations
                                                                         have been included in the ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The targeted Project areas are primarily rural,
                                                                         many of which have indigenous communities.
                                                                         Considering that these communities are among
                                                                         the most marginalized in Argentina, OP 4.10
                                                                         (Indigenous Peoples) is triggered. Based on the
                                                                         results and performance of the first PROMER
                                                                         Project's Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and its
                                                                         responsible institutional parties, a comprehensive
                                                                         social assessment has been carried out and an
                                                                         Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                         has been prepared by the MEN, and consulted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         with organizations representative of indigenous
                                                                         peoples in order to receive and incorporate their
                                                                         advice and gauge their level of support, to ensure
                                                                         that indigenous peoples are benefiting optimally
                                                                         from the Government education interventions
                                                                         supported by the Project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              Activities under the Project will avoid any
                         4.12                                            potential involuntary resettlement impacts and
                                                                         will ensure that if land acquisition is necessary, it
                                                                         will be carried out in a fully voluntary nature.
                                                                         Given that the risk of involuntary resettlement is
                                                                         low, the ESMF willinclude land acquisition
                                                                         screening criteria in order to ensure that any
                                                                         potential involuntary resettlement impacts will be
                                                                         avoided.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              he Project will not support the construction or
                                                                         rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other




                                                                 Page 7 of 12
                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of existing
                                                                                 dams. Therefore, the Policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International            No               The Project will not affect international
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 waterways as defined in the Policy. Therefore,
                                                                                 this Policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The Policy is not triggered because the Project
                            7.60                                                 will not be implemented in areas known to
                                                                                 involve disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project’s physical interventions are foreseen under Component 2, whereby the construction,
                              rehabilitation and refurbishment of schools would be financed. These interventions are of small to
                              medium-sized scale. Thus, no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are
                              expected. Anticipated potential adverse environmental impacts would be primarily during the
                              construction phase of civil works (e.g. construction staging, construction activities while school is
                              underway, debris generation, dust emission, noise, safety, and other standard impacts of
                              construction). During the operational stage, potential negative impacts would be related to
                              potential misuse or maintenance problems of the school infrastructure. The prevention, reduction
                              and mitigation of these impacts are mainly based on the adoption of school building design,
                              construction and management good practices, such as the specific measures included in the
                              Environmental and Social Management Framework of the Project.

                              In addition, the Project will support activities linked to providing consistent and sustainable energy
                              (such as stoves in kitchens that do not rely on wood, hereby stalling desertification, especially in
Public Disclosure Copy




                              arid climates), harvesting and conserving drinking water, and other rural schools’ infrastructure
                              needs. Off-grid renewable energy for isolated rural areas systems/devices will also be considered,
                              articulating activities with other programs like the PERMER (Secretariat of Energy of Argentina –
                              IBRD).

                              The Project will bring a number of positive social development outcomes and impacts. It will
                              improve basic social services, reduce inequality of opportunity, and enhance human capital
                              accumulation in Argentina’s marginalized rural areas. Specially, the Project will allow increased
                              access to education opportunities for indigenous peoples (teachers and students); greater visibility
                              of indigenous peoples in Project schools; increased access to development opportunities through
                              the local development works; increased access to learning materials for indigenous peoples in their
                              main language; and strengthened social integration through training for indigenous as well as non-
                              indigenous teachers working in rural schools that have indigenous students.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No adverse potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
                              Project area have been identified. The Project will contribute to improving quality of education in
                              Argentina, and facilitating the transition to the labor market for rural Argentine youth.



                                                                         Page 8 of 12
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project’s institutional and implementation arrangements will build on the arrangements
                           currently in place for the implementation of the Rural Education Improvement Project (PROMER
                           I). The implementing agency is the National Ministry of Education (Ministerio Nacional de
                           Educación, MEN), through its Directorate General for the Unit of International Finance (Dirección
                           General para la Unidad de Financiamiento Internacional, DGUFI). At the national level, the
                           DGUFI would be responsible for coordinating the various activities of the Project, including
                           overseeing execution of activities within each of the participating provinces. Among the key
                           participating entities at the national level are the Infrastructure Directorate (Dirección General de
                           Infraestructura, DI) and, regarding Indigenous People, the Bilingual Intercultural Education
                           Modality (Modalidad de Educación Intercultural Bilingüe, MEIB). At the provincial level, each
                           province has a coordinator responsible for overseeing the implementation of activities.

                           Given that the specific sub-projects will be entirely defined during Project implementation, the
                           MEN has developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), according to
                           OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), that: (i) ensures compliance with pertinent legislation
                           and Bank policies for works of the type considered under the Project; (ii) identifies potential
                           environmental and social impacts based on the scope of physical interventions and site
                           characteristics; (iii) establishes appropriate procedures for sub-project screening as well as
                           mitigation, management, and monitoring measures; and (iv) defines procedures and
                           responsibilities for the environmental and social management of the Project. As the envisioned
                           works are similar to those that have been executed during the ongoing operation, the proven
                           procedures and measures that are currently being applied, as well as specific improvements, have
                           been incorporated into the ESMF of this new Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Following the ESMF provisions, environmental criteria will be applied along the sub-project
                           cycle. All the works will be screened, designed and implemented in observance of the specific
                           building and safety standards needed for schools, including structural measures for disaster risk
                           reduction, access for people with disabilities, indoor comfort, etc. The ESMF also includes land
                           acquisition screening criteria in order to ensure that any potential involuntary resettlement impacts
                           will be avoided. During works execution, contractors will be required to implement Environmental
                           Technical Specifications established in accordance with the applicable regulatory framework and
                           Bank guidelines, which also cover safety aspects for the school community and construction
                           workers. Upon the completion of works, a Use and Maintenance Manual will be provided to
                           school authorities. Monitoring and reporting procedures are part of the ESMF.

                           The ESMF will be used and implemented by the MEN and the provincial coordination agencies.
                           Activities will be articulated among the different responsible bodies: at the national level DGUFI
                           through the DI; and at the provincial level, the provincial directorates, coordination areas, etc. of
                           the provincial Ministries or its equivalents, designated by the main provincial educational
                           authority. Supervision of works execution would be mainly a responsibility of the provincial level.
                           Specialists of the DI will provide support to provincial teams and perform field audits in the
                           construction work sites and the operational schools.



                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           The application of the IPPF will be the responsibility of DGUFI through the Bilingual Intercultural
                           Education Modality (Modalidad de Educación Intercultural Bilingüe – MEIB).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An assessment of the institutional capacity of the implementation agency was carried out during
                           Project preparation. In general, it was found that the teams of specialists within the DI and MEIB
                           are competent to manage safeguards issues. However, some activities are carried out at the
                           provincial level and the improvement of certain mechanisms was identified. In response, the MEN
                           have developed an ESMF that would allow: i) the consolidation of socio-environmental
                           management processes, including articulation among the different levels; and ii) the
                           systematization of monitoring activities and result documentation. In addition, the Project will
                           fund socio-environmental management strengthening activities under its component 3.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders are education community representatives, public and private entities that may
                           have interests on rural targeted activities and the Autonomous Educational Indigenous Peoples
                           Council (Consejo Educativo Autónomo de Pueblos Indígenas, CEAPI).

                           The final draft ESMF was disclosed on the MEN website on November 4, 2013. MEN conducted
                           a focus consultation on this instrument with education community representatives (infrastructure
                           areas of all the Provincial Ministries of Education), national environmental authorities/agencies
                           (Directorate of Forest of the Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development and the
                           Environmental Unit of the Roads National Directorate), and the NGO Rural Community Network,
                           Red de Comunidades Rurales. The views of consultation participants were incorporated into the
                           final ESMF document, which was disclosed on the MEN website on November 8, 2013 and on the
                           Bank’s Infoshop on November 12, 2013.

                           Based on the principle of free, prior, and informed consultation, Project preparation documents
                           (including Project objectives, approach, activities, mechanisms, and a draft of the Indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                           People Planning Framework – IPPF were presented to organizations representative of indigenous
                           peoples: the Autonomous Educational Indigenous Peoples Council (Consejo Educativo Autónomo
                           de Pueblos Indígenas, CEAPI). A process of consultations with the organization in order to receive
                           and incorporate their advice and gauge their level of support has been underway, and will continue
                           under implementation. The first consultation took place in September 2013, and the second is
                           scheduled for November 28, 2013. A version of the IPPF incorporating feedback from CEAPI and
                           the Bank was published on the MEN website on November 8, 2013 and on the Bank’s Infoshop on
                           November 12, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   08-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                11-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Argentina                                                     08-Nov-2013
                           Comments: http://portales.educacion.gov.ar/dgufi/promer/normativa/
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework

                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Argentina                                                        08-Nov-2013
                           Comments: http://portales.educacion.gov.ar/dgufi/promer/normativa/
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Peter Anthony Holland
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Janet K. Entwistle (SM)                     Date: 18-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
