                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7653
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Serbia                            Project ID:    P147050
                            Project Name:      Real Estate Management Project (P147050)
                            Task Team          Gavin P. Adlington
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          22-Aug-2014                       Estimated   20-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (40%), Law and justice (30%), Information
                                              technology (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Land administration and management (25%), Personal and property rights
                                              (25%), e-Government (25%), Municipal finance (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                 50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     50.00
                              Total                                                                                     50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the efficiency, transparency and reliability of Serbia’s real property management
                           systems.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         The project will be structured around the four following components:

                         Component A – Valuation and Property Taxation (US$11.4m) would provide all the information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         required about lands and buildings so that a complete record is available for local government to use
                         and to improve the methodology for valuing and using that property.

                         Component B – E-governance for Enabling Access to Real Estate Information (US$20.3m) would
                         support RGA to develop and implement: an Integrated REC and Registration IT system, including a
                         fiscal building register, sales index and price index; e-services and interoperability with key
                         government registers; a central analogue and a digital archive; and modernization of the address
                         register and utility cadastre. It would also support the implementation of the National Spatial Data
                         Infrastructure (NSDI) and data quality improvement. The component aims at increasing RGA’s
                         capacities to manage the IT systems over the long-term and establishment of a new sustainable
                         business model for further development and maintenance of the IT systems in place.

                         Component C – Institutional Development of the Republic Geodetic Authority (US$15.2m) would
                         pursue and expand the work initiated under the Real Estate Cadastre Project. The component would
                         also support RGA’s efforts to improve its services and meet EU standards in this regard. It comprises
                         five subcomponents: Governance, Strategy and planning; Maintenance of the reference
                         infrastructure; Conversion of existing analogue maps into digital form; C.4) Improving procedures,
                         registration of buildings, removal of backlogs, and enhancement of service infrastructure; and Real
                         Estate Cadastre improvement.

                         Component D – Project Management and supporting activities (US$3.1m) would support
                         incremental costs of consultant services, communications, training, equipment and operations to
                         facilitate project implementation including procurement and financial management, monitoring,
                         evaluation and reporting. A project-funded PIU within RGA would be established in order to manage
                         the project and provide fiduciary oversight. Under the PIU director and a land administration
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specialist who would act as assistant director, the PIU would contain expertise to coordinate and
                         oversee the components dealing with property valuation and property taxation, information
                         technology, institutional development and improvement of RGA services, public awareness,
                         monitoring and evaluation, and training. An M&E specialist within the PIU would be responsible for
                         monitoring of project progress, overseeing the conduct of the various surveys to be undertaken,
                         monitoring the utilization of information available on portals, and checking the impact of the project
                         on real estate market activity, gender equity, support for vulnerable groups, etc.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide, it is expected that a new archive building will be constructed in Zemun, major
                         rehabilitation of the RGA office will be conducted in Sopot, and minor works will be done at the
                         RGA office in Ruma.

                         Serbia Real Estate Management Project, as a part of its activities, envisages support to RGA in
                         preparation of the Main Design for construction of the Archive Depot Building in Zemun, and its
                         subsequent execution. Currently, there are no existing designs for this facility and only the basic
                         information is available. Consequently, the Environmental Mitigation Plan is prepared on the basis of
                         available information and may be further refined and finalized during the design process. The
                         location of the new the RGA Archive Depot building is envisaged to be at the cadastral parcel no.
                         1179/9, Cadastral Municipality Zemun Polje, Municipality Zemun, address Autoput no. 20. The


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         parcel surface is 67 838 sq m, the building is planned to have total surface of 4000 sq m and will
                         consist of 3 underground floors with 1000 sq m per floor and one floor above ground with surface
                         area of 1000 sq m. The location of the new building is within the already existing “Grmec” industrial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         area.

                         The existing RGA building in Sopot is a temporary single-story construction, covering area of 182 sq
                         m, which was built using hazardous material - asbestos panels. The building is over 40 years old and
                         is unsuitable for further operation and maintenance. The construction of the new building is
                         envisaged at the same location with the same footprint as the existing structure. The site is located in
                         fully urbanized area, with streets, public lighting, power, phone, waters and wastewater services
                         provided. Currently, there is no design for the new facility.

                         The RGA premises in Ruma are located in the Building of public authorities and organizations
                         (Municipality) on the ground floor of the building. Due to the ground subsidence there are many
                         cracks on the walls and the premises are unsuitable for work due to the presence of moisture. The
                         civil work related rehabilitation activities in these offices envisage remediation of subsidence,
                         investigating and filling the cracks in the walls and protecting facilities from the moisture. There will
                         be no changes to the building footprint, neither to facades nor constructive elements. The building is
                         located in the center of the settlement, with all facilities and services connected to it.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jorge E. Villegas (GURDR)
                         Nikola Ille (GENDR)
                         Tomoko Unaki (GURDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             A new building is expected to be constructed in
                         BP 4.01                                               Zemun as an archive for paper documents and as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               a disaster recovery center for the computer
                                                                               networks. Rehabilitation of the existing RGA
                                                                               offices in Ruma and Sopot are planned, at the
                                                                               locations already used by the Client. All locations
                                                                               are in the urban areas.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09               No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP        No
                         4.12




                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified as environmental category B because of building works that are required.
                              While the majority of the project activities are environmentally-neutral, some civil works would
                              be funded. These include: (i) a new building for the cadaster depot in Zemun; (ii) a major
                              rehabilitation of existing RGA office in Sopot; and (iii) minor rehabilitation of the existing RGA
                              building in Ruma. For these works, the locations are defined, and include buildings and building
                              plots that are already owned by either RGA or are state property. Additional rehabilitation of RGA
                              offices may be also undertaken using project funds, but details are not known at present.
                              Nevertheless, it is envisaged that these works, if any, would be undertaken on buildings already
                              owned by RGA or for which RGA has the right to use, build or renovate.

                              The expected environmental impacts are related to handling of construction material, construction
                              waste, and the health and safety of workers and general population that need to be close to the
                              construction area. Mitigation of negative impacts related to these activities will be undertaken
                              using well known methods contained in the code of the good construction practice, which will be
                              applied on all construction sites. With respect to hazardous waste – it is expected on location
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Sopot (asbestos-cement slabs, fibers and mineral dust) – the designer will have to specify in detail
                              both the “building decommissioning method” as well as the general and personal H&S equipment
                              to be used. The hazardous material will be properly sorted on site and immediately packed and
                              delivered to disposal/storage site that can store it under legally prescribed conditions. Both the
                              works contractor and waste management company in Sopot will need to have a valid license to
                              work with the asbestos. No other large, significant or potentially irreversible environmental
                              impacts have been identified, nor are they expected during the execution of the civil works.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              As the project activities are limited to building works, no negative indirect or long-term impact is
                              expected.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Mitigation measures and safeguard reviews have been put into place to minimize any adverse
                              impacts from building works.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The implementing agency has experience with both new construction and refurbishment under a
                              previous Bank-funded project and are aware of the environmental safeguards requirements. The


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           borrower already prepared and disclosed three site-specific Environmental Management Plans,
                           based on existing level of information – and will update them as necessary, during the design
                           phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           These activities will not affect anyone as the project will finance building works on RGA- and/or
                           government-owned land which has no occupants. Therefore, no resettlement action plans will be
                           required.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       28-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    14-Jul-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Gavin P. Adlington
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager:      Name: Agnes I. Kiss (PMGR)                      Date: 04-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
