                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA12680
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Bangladesh                        Project ID:    P150938
                            Project Name:     Financial Sector Support Project (P150938)
                            Task Team         Niraj Verma
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         30-Mar-2015                       Estimated   05-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFMDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (50%), Banking (25%), Payments, settlements, and remittance
                                              systems (15%), General finance sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Financial Sector Development (75%), Infrastructure services for private
                                              sector development (15%), International financial stan dards and systems (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     350.00           Total Bank Financing:               300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       50.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             300.00
                              Total                                                                                   350.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           TThe project development objective is to improve financial market infrastructure, regulatory and
                           oversight capacity of Bangladesh Bank and access to long term financing for firms in Bangladesh.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         The project will have 4 major components. The project components are described below:

                          Component 1: Strengthening Financial Market Infrastructure (US$50 million, of which IDA is US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $40 million).

                         The proposed component will build on previous efforts and improve financial market infrastructure
                         further, specifically focusing on activities in the following four broad areas: (1) payment and
                         settlement system development; (2) expanding and modernizing the Credit Information Bureau
                         (CIB); (3) strengthening the systems of the Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (BFIU) and
                         integration with systems of other stakeholders; and (4) strengthening the information technology (IT)
                         governance and IT management of the BB, optimizing the IT assets of the BB, and raising awareness
                         of IT security aspects for the financial industry.

                          The project will also support the capacity building of the BB staff to effectively implement reforms
                         in the area of financial infrastructure and oversee the financial infrastructure in Bangladesh. The
                         areas of capacity building will among others include: IT management, IT Governance, best practices
                         in the area of monitoring and supervising compliance to AML/CFT standards; payment and
                         settlement systems; credit reporting systems; and, other related topics. Supporting the BB staff to
                         acquire internationally recognized certifications in this space would also be supported and a detailed
                         technical study on assessing automation and modernization needs of state owned banks will also be
                         undertaken.

                         Component 2: Strengthening the Financial Sector Regulator (US$5 million; of which IDA is US$4
                         million)
                         This component aims to strengthen BB’s capacity to regulate and supervise the scheduled financial
                         institutions (banks and nonbank financial institutions), run the FIU more efficiently, and further
                         develop and deepen the financial sector with new and innovative products. The component would
                         support regulatory and supervisory strengthening. Recognizing that a rigid, rules-based approach to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supervision can result in a reactive response to events, BB wants to migrate to a risk-based approach
                         to regulation and supervision that makes the supervisory process more anticipatory. To pursue its
                         mandate more effectively and efficiently, BB would like to review its current system of banking
                         supervision, consolidate and streamline its eight supervisory departments, and migrate to a risk-based
                         integrated supervisory system (RISS). The project will provide technical assistance to BB to develop
                         a corrective and remedial action policy, including a prompt corrective action policy. Support will
                         also be provided to build capacity to review and strengthen prudential regulations. In addition,
                         support will be provided to strengthening the Financial Intelligence Unit. Further, activities will
                         include support for human resource development which will be an integral part of the regulatory and
                         supervisory capacity building. Banking legislation, regulation, and supervision constitute specialist
                         areas that require specialist knowledge, skills, and experience. The project will provide technical
                         assistance to conduct a review of the human resource policy on banking regulation and supervision to
                         ensure that these functions are being effectively carried out in fulfillment of its mandate. This
                         component of the project will also support BB in developing a comprehensive program that covers
                         induction training, on-going training and development, and career path planning.

                         Lastly, support for enhancing development capacity will be provided. The project will provide
                         technical support for the creation of new and innovative products. BB expressed an interest in
                         expanding its capacity to facilitate provision of agricultural finance and in developing a national
                         financial inclusion strategy. With regard to agriculture finance, for reasons of project design and fit


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         and implementation feasibility—and given that the Bank and Financial Institutions Division (BFID)
                         expressed an interest in complementary technical assistance on agriculture insurance—it was agreed
                         that the project would focus on a study of warehouse receipts financing. Such a study would support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BB’s broader role as a catalyst for financial sector innovations. Moreover, while the availability of
                         long-term financing from BB (through the credit line described below in component 3), will enable
                         PFIs’ to channel these funds to especially to export-oriented companies (mainly manufacturing),
                         technical support will be provided to address other constraints on the sustainable development of the
                         long-term financing market. I n that light, the component will also support analytical and policy
                         research on long-term capital markets (particularly secondary bond markets) and the pensions
                         market, both crucial to the development of the long-term financing market. In addition, in response to
                         the current absence of long-term deposit instruments in the PFIs, sector focused technical support
                         will be extended to develop the use of those products.


                         Component 3: Supporting Long Term Finance (US$292.5 million; of which IDA is US$254 million)
                         This component will support long-term financing (an expected average of five years of financing)
                         through PFIs to firms, particularly exporters, in Bangladesh. Funding will be focused on
                         manufacturing sector firms. BB will channel the long-term finance line to PFIs and, through a
                         demonstration effect and the associated technical assistance described below, this will serve to build
                         markets for long-term finance. In addition, through the implementation arrangements the project will
                         contribute to the improvement of health and safety standards in industry, thereby reducing credit risk.

                         The funding will indeed be accompanied by technical assistance to support capacity building of
                         Financial Institutions (FIs) and industry associations Sector wide TA will be provided to financial
                         sector on two areas: credit risk management and safeguards for long-term financing projects. This
                         will help FIs to develop improved processes for risk assessment/due diligence, monitoring and
                         management, thereby lowering their credit and environmental and social risks. Partnerships with
                         industry associations will be forged to raise awareness of safeguards practices and to improve those
                         practices across the private sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4. Project Implementation and Monitoring (US$2.5 million; of which IDA is US$2
                         million)
                         Adequate resources will be available to ensure the quality of the project's implementation and the
                         proper monitoring and effective assessment of its results and impacts. Funding assistance will cover
                         the operating costs of the implementing unit for project management and for monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E), and capacity building will improve BB’s own ability to implement projects and
                         contribute to the achievement of the PDO. This component will provide support to the project
                         implementation unit, named the Financial Sector Support Project (FSSP) cell, to build up its capacity
                         in project implementation, monitoring, and evaluation
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented by Bangladesh Bank as the FI apex channeling funds through the
                         PFIs. The sub-project (beneficiary/firm/SMEs) locations are not defined at this stage and are
                         expected to be all over Bangladesh. The project will support long-term financing mainly to the
                         manufacturing sectors for purposes of capital equipment purchase, up-gradation (including
                         improving health and safety compliance) and expansion of the existing firms. In addition, the project
                         support includes technical assistance to support capacity building of PFIs and industry associations,
                         strengthening financial market infrastructure and strengthening the financial sector regulator. The


                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         project is not aimed to support large-scale infrastructure . The project investment intends to help
                         especially the manufacturing sector typically for capital investments for machinery or improving the
                         factory condition to meet the requirement of buyers and also national regulatory agencies. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will also provide sector wide capacity building TA to PFIs on safeguard management.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
                         Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes           The project has been classified as Category ‘FI’ since the
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     financing to the manufacturing sectors will be channeled
                                                                   through PFIs. The World Bank environmental safeguard
                                                                   policy OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment has been
                                                                   triggered to ensure that the project design and
                                                                   implementation focus on reducing adverse impacts and
                                                                   enhancing positive environmental impacts.

                                                                   Since subprojects will be identified during the project
                                                                   implementation phase, as discussed above, a framework
                                                                   approach has been adopted for the project. The ESMF
                                                                   prepared for the project meets the requirements of
                                                                   Department of Environment (DoE), Bangladesh and the
                                                                   World Bank Environment Safeguard Policy. The relevant
                                                                   Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines of the
                                                                   World Bank Group will also be applicable to the project.

                                                                   The ESMF also provides guidelines on subproject
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   environment and social risk categories. These are: (i) high
                                                                   risk transaction; (ii) substantial risk transaction; (iii)
                                                                   moderate risk transaction; and (iv) low risk transaction.
                                                                   All high risk transaction will require prior review and
                                                                   clearance of the World Bank. A detailed capacity
                                                                   assessment will be carried out during the Mid-term review
                                                                   or a suitable time to assess the capacity development of
                                                                   PFIs and Bangladesh Bank. Depending on the capacity
                                                                   development, the clearance role can be delegated to
                                                                   Bangladesh Bank. The World Bank will prior review first
                                                                   three substantial risk transactions to help the template/
                                                                   expectations are understood and thereafter applied.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            The subprojects are mostly expected to be limited to the
                         4.04                                      existing project location within the industrial areas.
                                                                   Accordingly, the project will not result conversion or
                                                                   degradation of critical natural habitats. For this reason, the
                                                                   policy has not been triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            The project is expected have no impacts on the health and
                                                                   quality of forests, no affect the rights and welfare of



                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                                                       people and their level of dependence upon or interaction
                                                       with forests and bring no changes in the management,
                                                       protection, or utilization of natural forests or plantations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       As such, the policy has not been triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No    The project is not expected to finance any synthetic
                                                       chemical pesticides activities and the policy has not been
                                                       triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        No   Since the subprojects are expected to be limited to the
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          industrial areas, there will be no impact on landscape with
                                                       archaeological, paleontological, historical, architectural,
                                                       religious, aesthetic, or other cultural significance.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   The project will be supporting service and manufacturing
                         BP 4.10                       enterprises that typically would operate from designated
                                                       industrial estates/zones across the country or be located in
                                                       areas where commercial enterprises operate from. The
                                                       project will not be working with individual(s) or
                                                       communities but formal sector firms which are the
                                                       primary beneficiary and stakeholder of this project. The
                                                       nature, size and specific locations of individual sub-
                                                       projects exclude the possibility of locating them randomly
                                                       or in areas with IPs. Hence, the project is not anticipated
                                                       to have impacts on indigenous people, their lands, culture,
                                                       livelihood or way of life.

                                                       The ESMF provides guidelines on assessing labor
                                                       standards, gender and inclusion issues pertaining to the
                                                       labor force at the relevant firms in a representative
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       manner.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No   The project will finance capacity building of factories by
                         OP/BP 4.12                    upgrading equipment and health and safety standards, as
                                                       well as expansion of existing factories. However, all
                                                       expansion activities will be limited to the owner’s own
                                                       existing property and the project will not finance any land
                                                       purchase, even that made on a willing buyer willing seller
                                                       basis. No land acquisition or displacement of people
                                                       (physical or economic) will be permitted under the
                                                       project. OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered
                                                       for the project.

                                                       While majority of the firms supported under the project
                                                       are expected to be located in designated industrial zones
                                                       or areas where commercial enterprises operate from, some
                                                       project proposals in the manufacturing and service sector
                                                       could also involve private land purchase in industrial/
                                                       commercial areas. The cost of any such land purchase and
                                                       related costs will be borne by the firm itself and not by the



                                                        Page 5 of 9
                                                                      project.

                                                                      The ESMF prepared for the project will focus on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      guidelines for firms to apply a checklist to ensure that no
                                                                      acquisition or displacement takes place due to any project
                                                                      activities and provide an outline on required
                                                                      documentation, brief assessment and consultations where
                                                                      required, when land is purchased by private firms on a
                                                                      direct purchase/willing buyer-willing seller basis.

                                                                      The clearance process for social management plans
                                                                      (comprising the assessments, documentation and
                                                                      consultation mentioned above, and prepared in
                                                                      accordance with the ESMF) will be the same as
                                                                      mentioned above in the environmental safeguards section.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The subprojects under the project will be identified during project implementation phase.
                              Environmental and social issues of Firms (sub-borrowers) and their sub-projects will be addressed
                              through the sub-loan environmental eligibility assessments and social safeguards checklists and
                              assessments as required and incorporated in the ESMF. Environmental assessments will be carried
                              out in accordance with both Government of Bangladesh Environment Conservation Act/
                              Environment Conservation Rules and also the World Bank EA (OP 4.01) requirements. The
                              subprojects may generate minimal to significant negative social and environmental impacts
                              associated with loans to SMEs/firms. The type and extent of impacts will vary depending on the
                              type of activities/sectors to be financed and on the amount of loans to be provided. There may be
                              specific environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) and labor impacts and risks related to
                              SME/firm investment in certain sectors. Textile is one of the possible sectors for investment and
                              wastewater is one of the key concerns. The wastewater is generated due by the wet operations,
                              which are conducted during different parts of the textile manufacturing process and contain
                              substantial pollution load in terms of organic matter, suspended matter, mineral oils, non-
                              biodegradable or low biodegradable surfactants and at times heavy metals. Odor and color are two
                              other characteristics of the wastewater generated. The impacts of the wastewater, when discharged
                              untreated, can be significant. Some chemicals discharged can have toxic effects on the receiving
                              environment. Discharge of such effluents into aquatic bodies can cause lowering of dissolved
                              oxygen and threats to aquatic life and downstream water users, due to toxicity and deterioration in
                              the aesthetic value of the water quality.


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           Since the project will not permit land acquisition or displacement of people for the sake of project
                           activities, no significantly negative or irreversible social impact is expected. The project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fund land purchase of a direct/willing buyer-willing seller nature either; this will be done at the
                           firm’s own cost where it is required. However, even in such cases, the prospective beneficiary
                           firms will have to provide the required documentation and conduct, where necessary, brief
                           assessments and consultations as per the provisions of the ESMF. The focus of the ESMF on
                           issues of labor standards, gender and inclusion issues is expected to improve labor standards and
                           working conditions in beneficiary factories. Guidelines for conducting these, including
                           consultations involved, are described in the ESMF. A system for documenting, addressing and
                           resolving grievances is also described in the ESMF through an established GRM at Bangladesh
                           Bank which will be linked to those operated by the PFIs.

                           As the project is expected to operate in designated industrial zones or areas where industrial and
                           commercial enterprises are operated from, there will be no impact on tribal areas or the lifestyles,
                           culture and norms of indigenous people. OP 4.10 is not triggered for the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           This will be screened and evaluated in individual subprojects ESIAs.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           This will be evaluated in individual sub-loans ESIAs as needed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Although PFIs have not yet been identified, the prospective PFIs will be required to use the
                           procedures outlined in the ESMF in reviewing and appraising sub-borrowers/sub-projects, and to
                           inform SMEs/Firms of the environmental and social safeguards requirements for subprojects
Public Disclosure Copy




                           appraisal, so that sub-projects can be implemented in an environmentally sound and socially
                           sustainable manner. The SMEs/Firms will be responsible for carrying out any environmental
                           analysis and for confirming that the proposed sub-projects comply with national environmental
                           legislation and for obtaining the necessary environmental clearance from the Department of
                           Environment (DoE). They will likewise be responsible for carrying out the social assessments and
                           consultations as necessitated by the ESMF. The environmental and social safeguards documents
                           will also confirm with the World Bank safeguards policy requirements.

                           The Bangladesh Bank is familiar with the World Bank safeguard policies through implementing
                           the Investment Promotion and Financing Facility (IPFF) Project. It has established Green Banking
                           and CSR Department on April 04, 2013 with a view to develop sustainable banking (i.e. green
                           banking, CSR and financial inclusion) framework and to integrate it into core business operation
                           of banks and FIs through efficient and effective implementation of green banking, CSR and
                           financial inclusion. Green Banking and CSR Department will be the focal unit for environmental
                           management work of FSSP. The project will provide opportunity to build its own institutional
                           capacity on environmental and social management.

                           To build capacity of PFIs further, it has been agreed that the PFIs selected for the project will have
                           a dedicated desk and regular qualified staff/consultant on environmental and social management
                           before participating in FSSP. In addition, the project has TA provision to PFIs to build their


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           capacity on safeguards management. The TA consultant for environmental and social management
                           will be on board from the inception of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The primary project beneficiaries include (a) private firms in Bangladesh, mainly manufacturing
                           exporters and including some small and medium enterprises/firms in sectors that are crucial for
                           growth; (b) financial sector stakeholders including its consumers/clients, regulators, participating
                           financial institutions (PFIs); and (c) Bangladesh Bank. The ESMF was prepared in consultation
                           with the key stakeholders including the Bangladesh Bank, PFIs, IFC, industry sectors and
                           communities. A consultation workshop on draft final ESMF was undertaken by Bangladesh Bank
                           on March 23, 2015 to share the draft ESMF with all the stakeholders and take their opinion in
                           finalizing the ESMF. Consultation with labor and nearby communities has been made mandatory
                           for environmental screening/assessment of each subproject as relevant. The draft ESMF document
                           has been disclosed both in the Bangladesh Bank website (www.bangladesh-bank.org) on March
                           18, 2015 and the Bank’s Infoshop on March 23, 2015 for public comments. Hard copies of the
                           document with Bangla version have also been made available in Bangladesh Bank and potential
                           PFIs. The English and Bangla version of the final ESMF will be disclosed in-country and in
                           Infoshop on April 1, 2015.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       23-Feb-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Mar-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bangladesh                                                        18-Mar-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The draft ESMF document has been disclosed both in the Bangladesh Bank website
                                         (www.bangladesh-bank.org) on March 18, 2015 and the Bank’s Infoshop on March
                                         23, 2015 for public comments. Hard copies of the document with Bangla version
                                         have also been made available in Bangladesh Bank and potential PFIs. The English
                                         and Bangla version of the final ESMF will be disclosed in-country and in Infoshop
                                         on April 1, 2015.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Niraj Verma
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                              Date: 01-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Thyra A. Riley (PMGR)                          Date: 01-Apr-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
