                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6825

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                           Project ID:       P148659
                            Project Name:      Sahel Disaster Resilience Project (P148659)
                            Task Team          Doekle Geert Wielinga
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Mar-2014                      Estimated         01-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTN2                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Flood protection (40%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
                                               protection (20%), General information and communications sector (15%),
                                               Irrigation and drainage (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (75%), Water resource management (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   100.00
                              Total                                                                         100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           Proposed PDO is to increase the resilience to extreme weather events and climate variability and
                           change in the Sahel region through national and regional institutions responsible for water resources
                           management, disaster risk management and meteorology.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project supports the Sahelian countries to achieve resilience by better understanding
                         and managing climate, weather and water related shocks, and facilitating resilient growth in the key
                         water related sectors. The project combines, regionally anchored capacity building and knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management activities with specific in-country investments in the national hydro-meteorological
                         services to build and manage knowledge systems and services.

                         Project Components: The proposed project aims to build upon existing structures at the national and
                         regional levels such as the food security early warning systems and, where necessary, support
                         formulation of complementary structures and services. The project will have two inter-related
                         components: (1) Assessment of surface and ground water resources and for hydrological,
                         meteorological and climate services and regional capacity building; and (2) Modernizing national
                         disaster risk management, water resources, and weather and climate services.

                         Component 1- Assessment of Surface and Ground Water Resources and Hydrological,
                         Meteorological and Climate Services and regional capacity building (US$25 million): This
                         component would support regional agencies’ to assess water resources and develop of capacities for
                         observing, monitoring and forecasting meteorological, hydrological and climate-related hazards, with
                         a cascading process from the global to the regional, sub-regional, national and local scales. The
                         activities will be coordinated by CILSS (AGRHYMET), with contributions from other technical
                         partners including ECOWAS, SSO, NBA and ACMAD. In addition, the US National Aeronautics
                         and Space Administration (NASA) would provide technical expertise in the form of training in
                         remote sensing techniques, development of hydrologic models, and other core elements of
                         hydrology.

                         Sub-Component 1.1- Assessment of Surface Water Resources (US$5 million): The project would
                         support both in-situ monitoring with traditional hydrological approaches and earth observation
                         remote sensing techniques, with technology transfer to Sahelian countries. Specialized experts will
                         lead a series of capacity building events aimed at helping staff from relevant line ministries, national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         survey authorities and other relevant organizations to improve their knowledge and ability to plan
                         and act effectively. The technical partners will further provide backup support and mentoring as
                         necessary. The component may include study grants for a number of technical specialists from the
                         involved countries as well as purchasing essential equipment such as servers and state of the art
                         analytical software.

                         Sub-Component 1.2- Assessment of Ground Water Resources (US$13 million): This will include
                         developing options to manage region’s groundwater resources and identify sustainable use of ground
                         water resources to respond to the growing demand. The assessment would cover the Sahel region and
                         be exploratory in nature. For a number of priority aquifers in depth studies will be facilitated to
                         provide specific investment related knowledge and ground water management capacity. The sub-
                         component would also build technical capacity in the regional and national water resources
                         institutions.

                         Sub-Component 1.3- Strengthening Meteorological, Hydrological and Climate Services (US$7
                         million): This sub-component would strengthen ability of the regional organizations to assist
                         Sahelian countries in providing specialized hydro-meteorological services. The regional
                         organizations would be supported to: (a) better fulfill their technical mandate towards Member States
                         and enhance delivery of services; (b) extend their services and build capacities for severe weather
                         forecasting and flash-flood guidance; (c) enhance technical centers’ databases for better data sharing
                         and management of hydro-meteorological data; and (d) support member countries with feasibility
                         studies and detailed assessments of technical needs of national DRM and hydro-meteorological
                         services. The component would also build capacity and provide support to ACMAD to make it a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fully operational regional climate center.

                         Component 2- Modernizing National DRM, Water Resources, Weather and Climate Services ( US75
                         million): Investments and capacity building will be country specific for Burkina Faso and Mali,
                         while being coordinated with the regional level activities. The investments will help strengthen
                         hydrological services, meteorological services and DRM. These activities will be complemented with
                         a national level contingent emergency response component and a national project management
                         component, which would cover implementation costs. This component has two sub-components: (i)
                         Support to Burkina Faso and (ii) Support to Mali.

                         Sub-Component 2.1- Support to Burkina Faso (US$37.5 million): This sub-component would
                         address capacity building and investment needs of the Directorate General for Water Resources
                         (DGRE). The proposed investments would include (a) institutional strengthening and capacity
                         building of DGRE, (b) upgrading the hydrological monitoring network and data management, and (c)
                         improving service delivery for flood forecasting, surface and groundwater resources management.
                         Support will be provided for capacity building of staff in water monitoring techniques, investments
                         and upgrading of monitoring equipment to ensure more reliable, automated data transmission;
                         installation and operation of a ground water monitoring and laboratory equipment (water quality
                         monitoring focusing on arsenic and pesticides) and improvement of hydrological data management.
                         Selected refurbishment of main facilities, provision of equipment and instruments for calibration and
                         field work including specialized vehicles is also planned in this subcomponent.

                         This sub-component will provide support in strengthening National Hydrological Information
                         Systems and Services including the Directorate General for Meteorology (DGM) to conduct critical
                         investments in their equipment and monitoring network, improve information technology and
                         communication services and strengthen service delivery. Infrastructure investments will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upgrading of the land-based and remote observations network including automatic weather stations.
                         It will also include modernization of communication and information system and introduction of new
                         software and technologies. The extension of the observation network will go hand in hand with
                         improving the quality of weather forecasts and other products staff capacity. Selected refurbishment
                         of main facilities, provision of equipment and instruments for calibration and field work including
                         specialized vehicles is also planned under this sub-component.

                         In addition, sub-component will support CONASUR as a project coordination mechanism and DGPC
                         as primary civil protection agency, in establishing operational flood forecasting systems,
                         communication and contingency planning. DGPC’s training facilities, including a regional higher
                         education institute for emergency practitioners, would be modernized. Priority investments in early
                         warning systems will include the establishment of flood forecasting for priority areas of the Volta
                         basin and flash flood forecasting for selected urban areas.

                         National Level Contingent Risk Financing for Burkina Faso: This sub-component will allow
                         expenditures to be made in accordance with the rapid response procedures of OP/BP 8.00 subject to
                         the list of positive goods and services defined at project outset. Disbursements would be made
                         against procurement of goods, works, and consultant services required in supporting the immediate
                         response and recovery needs of the country. Resources would be reallocated from committed
                         amounts that are not yet disbursed. The World Bank, together with the responsible national ministry,
                         would agree on applicable criteria, such as the declaration of the state of emergency.
                         Project Management in Burkina Faso: This activity supports all project coordination activities related
                         to Burkina Faso and including Project Management Unit (PMU) staff costs, vehicles and office space
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to ensure successful project implementation. It is envisioned that the PMU would be located in an
                         existing ministry/agency with regional coordination responsibilities such as CONASUR.

                         Sub-Component 2.2- Support to Republic of Mali (US$37.5 million): For Mali the following specific
                         activities will be implemented in the same sub-set of activities.
                         This sub-component will provide support in strengthening National Hydrological Information
                         Systems and Services including capacity building and investment needs of the National Directorate
                         for Hydrology (DNH). The proposed investments would include (a) upgrading the hydrological
                         monitoring network and data management to reach the original level of operational surface and
                         ground water stations, (b) institutional strengthening and capacity building of DNH, facilitating
                         updated data management and monitoring techniques such as the use of Acoustic Doppler Current
                         Profilers (ADCP) for discharge measurements, and (c) improving service delivery for flood
                         forecasting and water resources management. For the last activity DNH will collaborate with Meteo-
                         Mali and DGPC at the national level as well as with the Niger Basin Authority at regional level for
                         an operational flood forecasting system. Selected refurbishment of main facilities, provision of
                         equipment and instruments for calibration and field work including specialized vehicles are also
                         planned in this sub-component.

                         This sub-component will also provide support in modernizing Weather and Climate Information
                         Systems and Services including support to the Direction Nationale de la Météorologie (Météo-Mali)
                         to become a fully operational national meteorological agency, following its transition into an
                         autonomous agency one year ago. The modernization plan is built around capacity building,
                         modernization of monitoring infrastructure and service delivery. Training of forecasters and
                         investments in equipment and infrastructure will ensure that an operational forecasting unit will be
                         established, which would work full-time with clearly defined standard operating procedures for
                         communication and warnings. Capacity building for improved service delivery will target climate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sensitive sectors such as agriculture, and will strengthen existing forecasting programs, particularly
                         those related to agro-meteorology. Equipment and infrastructure investments will include the
                         installation of several new synoptic stations, and improving the decentralized structures in regions
                         and districts to improve service delivery and data management. Selected refurbishment of main
                         facilities, provision of equipment and instruments for calibration and field work including specialized
                         vehicles is also planned in this sub-component.

                         This sub-component also strengthens Disaster Risk Management and would support the Directorate
                         General for Civil Protection (DGPC) in three areas: (a) strengthening the political dialogue and
                         advocacy for an effective policy and operational disaster risk management strategy; (b) supporting
                         operations as well as capacity of staff to effectively implement emergency response capability
                         including investments in DGPCs decentralized structure; and (c) establishing operational early
                         warning systems for river floods in collaboration with DNH and NBA, flash flood forecasting for
                         urban centers such as Bamako and risk and vulnerability mapping in urban areas and priority
                         watersheds.

                         National Level Contingent Risk Financing for Mali. This sub-component will allow expenditures to
                         be made in accordance with the rapid response procedures of OP/BP 8.00 subject to the list of
                         positive goods and services defined at project outset. Disbursements would be made against the
                         procurement of goods, works, and consultant services required supporting the immediate response
                         and recovery needs of the states. Financial resources would be re-allocated from existing projects
                         that are not yet disbursed. The World Bank, together with the responsible national ministries, would
                         agree on applicable criteria, such as the standards governing declarations of national emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                         following floods or droughts.

                         Project Management in Mali: This activity supports all project management activities related to Mali
                         including the PMU staff costs, vehicles and office space to ensure successful implementation. It is
                         envisioned that the PMU would be located at the DGPC.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project consists of national and regional level components. The regional level components will
                         be implemented at the headquarters of ACMAD and CILSS / AGRHYMET both located in Niamey,
                         Niger. The national level components will be implemented in Mali and Burkina Faso, which are at
                         PCN stage identified for investments in the national disaster risk management and hydro-
                         meteorological services in the first phase of the project. Other countries may follow in the second
                         and third phase of the project.

                         The regional level components would mainly entail technical assistance and capacity building
                         targeted to the regional technical centers and government officials from member states. It would, for
                         example, include developing regional coherent guidance and early warning systems for floods and
                         flash floods. The regional technical centers may be further supported with investments in adequate
                         IT, communication, power supply infrastructure, the rehabilitation of existing buildings and
                         laboratory facilities as well as project management infrastructure.

                         Regarding the national level components in Mali and Burkina Faso; the number and exact location of
                         automatic weather stations, agro-meteorological stations, upper air stations, weather radars and other
                         will be determined during project preparation. Automatic and manual water level recorders will be
                         installed at several locations along the main rivers (Volta, Senegal, Niger) and possibly a number of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         piezometric stations for ground water monitoring. The impact related to the installation of these
                         stations will be kept as limited as possible; in most cases they will be installed on government land
                         and require only limited space (surface area). Where needed, access roads (unpaved) or paths may
                         need to be prepared to ensure that maintenance of the stations can be conducted. The project will
                         furthermore invest in upgrading buildings, laboratory equipment, providing facilities for
                         downloading and processing of satellite information, as well as IT and communication infrastructure.
                         This may include the provision of power-back-up to ensure a 24/7 operation as well as the
                         installation of offices at decentralized level.

                         In line with the Category B classification, safeguards instruments such as a Simplified Environmental
                         Management Framework and Environmental Management Plan (EMF-EMP), and a Resettlement
                         Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared for Mali and Burkina Faso since the exact locations for the
                         installation are not known yet. They will outline the basic procedures for identifying and mitigating
                         any potential negative impacts (such as managing installation materials, and any acquisition of new
                         land and potential subsequent losses).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project implementing entities (CILSS and ACMAD at regional level, CONASUR and DGPC at
                         national level) have rather low technical expertise on environmental and social issues and therefore
                           capacity building and guidance will be provided to ensure that the relevant safeguard instruments can
                           be prepared and implemented according to standards acceptable to the World Bank.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ronald N. Hoffer (AFTN1)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will finance the rehabilitation and
                           BP 4.01                                             installation of hydro-meteorological equipment
                                                                               at a number of sites in Burkina Faso and Mali,
                                                                               and some refurbishment of offices and
                                                                               laboratories. Those sites will be determined to
                                                                               the best extent possible during project
                                                                               preparation, but many will not be confirmed
                                                                               until implementation. In general the impacts are
                                                                               small in scale, affecting e.g. a few m2 for the
                                                                               installation of an automatic weather station. To
                                                                               support these stations, access roads may need to
                                                                               be installed or upgraded, and very localized
                                                                               stabilization of stream beds or non-consumptive
                                                                               off-takes for stream flow may be required which
                                                                               do not affect long term ecological viability or
                                                                               riparian uses. Surface and ground water
                                                                               resources assessments in Component 1 do not
                                                                               pose any significant, direct additional risk.
                                                                               Given these relatively low environmental risks,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               a Simplified Environmental Framework and
                                                                               Environmental Management Plan will be
                                                                               prepared and disclosed in draft before appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         TBD             The project will finance the rehabilitation and
                                                                               installation of hydro-meteorological equipment
                                                                               at a number of sites in Burkina Faso and Mali;
                                                                               some of which may be in riverine environments
                                                                               of some ecological importance. This potential
                                                                               will be further evaluated during project
                                                                               preparation, and as needed, provisions in the
                                                                               EMF-EMP will be included to ensure that works
                                                                               within these areas can be carried with minimal
                                                                               if any impact. Significant loss or degradation of
                                                                               critical natural habitats is not expected to be
                                                                               needed for such minor works.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              It is not expected that the project would affect or
                                                                               intervene in forested areas or have impact on the
                                                                               forest management practices in Mali and
                                                                               Burkina Faso.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Although the project aims to support the
                                                                 agricultural sector with the provision of quality
                                                                 agro-meteorological services and information, it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 does not finance direct investments in the
                                                                 agricultural sector that relate to the application
                                                                 of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project will finance the rehabilitation and
                         BP 4.11                                 installation of hydro-meteorological equipment
                                                                 at a number of sites in Burkina Faso and Mali.
                                                                 Those sites will be determined during project
                                                                 preparation, but it is very unlikely that those
                                                                 sites would be located in or related to areas of
                                                                 particular physical cultural value. Nevertheless,
                                                                 provisions will be included in the EMF-EMP for
                                                                 handling “chance finds” of physical cultural
                                                                 resources encountered unexpectedly during site
                                                                 works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    It is unlikely that the project would impact
                                                                 specific groups of the population in general or
                                                                 indigenous people specifically, beyond those
                                                                 potential impacts covered under OP/BP 4.12.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The policy is triggered because the project will
                         4.12                                    finance the rehabilitation and installation of
                                                                 hydro-meteorological equipment at a number of
                                                                 sites in Burkina Faso and Mali, which may
                                                                 require some minor land acquisition and/or
                                                                 cause losses of assets or restrictions of access to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 resources. The exact sites for the infrastructure
                                                                 installations are not known at this stage and
                                                                 therefore a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                 (RPF) will be prepared based upon the recently
                                                                 approved RPFs in DRM projects in Burkina and
                                                                 Mali, consulted upon and publicly disclosed in-
                                                                 country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal
                                                                 for both Mali and Burkina Faso. In general, the
                                                                 adverse impacts are expected to be small scale.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project does not foresee the planning,
                                                                 rehabilitation or construction of dam
                                                                 infrastructure. Stream bed stabilization, if
                                                                 required, is minor and very localized.
                         Projects on International         Yes   While the surface and ground water resources
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    assessment work included in Component 1 are
                                                                 studies and not directly linked to future
                                                                 investments that involve the use or pollution of
                                                                 international waterways, indirect links cannot be
                                                                 avoided and hence, OP/BP 7.50is triggered.
                                                                                                                                 Project activities are comparable to the water
                                                                                                                                 resources and feasibility studies envisaged in
                                                                                                                                 the Exceptions to Notification Requirements of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 OP 7.50(1) and such an exception will be
                                                                                                                                 sought. Further investments in Component 2
                                                                                                                                 are limited; small scale site preparation and
                                                                                                                                 installation, and equipment operation would not
                                                                                                                                 affect water use (abstraction or flow) affecting
                                                                                                                                 riparians.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Not / applicable
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      February 18, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Doekle Geert Wielinga

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 11-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 12-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
