                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7164
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                             Project ID:    P147348
                            Project Name:      Transmission Grid Strengthening Project (P147348)
                            Task Team          Joseph Melitauri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Mar-2014                         Estimated   13-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Export development and competitiveness (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         62.00              Total Bank Financing: 60.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     2.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       60.00
                              Total                                                                                       62.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to provide reliable power transmission services to new power
                           generation development in southwestern part of the grid, upgrade electricity exchange systems, and
                           provide economically efficient, environmentally and socially sustainable electricity sector planning.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Transmission Grid Strengthening (TGS) Project will: (i) provide transmission services to the

                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         newly constructed hydropower station, (ii) improve stability of the south-western part of the
                         transmission grid, (ii) establish power exchange platform, and (iii) assess the environmental impact
                         of the sector strategy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Transmission System Strengthening (US $52.15 million). This component will finance
                         a high voltage transmission line from Akhaltsikhe to Batumi.
                         This component will have three sub-components;
                         i)       Subcomponent 1a (US $45.65 million). This sub-components will finance the supply and
                         installation of a double-circuit, 220 kV transmission line (TL) from Akhaltsikhe back-to-back (BTB)
                         and 500/400/220 kV substation (Akhaltsikhe station) to Batumi 220 kV substation. It will connect
                         with the two hydropower plants (HPPs): 175 MW Shuakhevi HPP and 150 MW Koromkheti HPP.
                         The estimated length of the TL is 142 km. It is composed of two sections: Section 1 is a 91 km TL
                         from Suakhevi HPP to Akhaltsikhe station and Section 2 is a 52 km TL from Batumi substation to
                         Suakhevi HPP via Koromkheti HPP.
                         ii)      Subcomponent 1b (US $4 million). This subcomponent will finance supervision consultant
                         for the supply and installation of Akhaltsikhe Batumi transmission line.
                         iii)     Subcomponent 1c (US $2.5 million). This subcomponent will finance consultants to evaluate
                         of bids for Akhaltsikhe Batumi transmission line, consultants for the preparation of the following;
                         new transmission-system expansion plan, prospective transmission line feasibility studies, and the
                         preparation of basic designs for the prospective transmission.

                         Component 2. Wholesale Power Exchange Platform (US $6 million). This component will finance
                         hardware and software for the power exchange systems. This component will have two
                         subcomponents;
                         i)      Subcomponent 2a (US $5.5 million). This subcomponent will finance supply and installation
                         of power exchange platform which includes hardware and software for metering, balancing, and
                         trading systems. The GSE will be the beneficiary of the power exchange platform.
                         ii)     Subcomponent 2b (US $0.5 million). This subcomponent will finance preparation of the
                         design and supervision for the above platform.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (US $1.2 million). This component
                         will finance preparation of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment report. This
                         component will have two subcomponents;

                         i)      Subcomponent 3a (US $1.0 million). This subcomponent will finance preparation of the
                         Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment.
                         ii)     Subcomponent 3b (US $0.2 million). This subcomponent will finance capacity building of
                         the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection in strategic environmental and social
                         assessment.

                         Component 4. Project Management (US $0.5 million). This component will finance (PIU) GSE for
                         effective project management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Most part of the Akhaltsikhe-Batumi transmission line corridor passes through the Autonomous
                         Republic of Adjara, and the rest of it is located in Adigeni and Akhaltsikhe provinces of Samtskhe-
                         Javakheti region of Georgia. Part of the corridor gets pretty close to the Georgia's State border with
                         Turkey. The transmission line will connect the town of Akhaltsikhe - located on the plateau of semi-


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         arid hills with continental climate, to Batumi - a sea port and beach resort on the Back Sea coast. The
                         line will get over the Goderdzi mountain pass located 2025 meters over the sea level. The corridor
                         will pass through highly diverse types of terrain, ranging from alpine meadows to subtropical forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the coastal zone. These areas include populated and cultivated parcels of land, pastures, as well
                         as parts remote and minimally transformed forests.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Jorge E. Villegas (ECSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The TGS Project will support construction of a
                         BP 4.01                                              new power transmission line in a difficult terrain,
                                                                              including forested areas and river crossings, rural
                                                                              settlements, and cultivated land plots. Certain
                                                                              sections of the transmission line alignment may
                                                                              overlap with bird migratory routes. The Project
                                                                              triggers OP/BP 4.01 and according to this Policy,
                                                                              is classified as an Environmental Category A,
                                                                              requiring a full scale environmental assessment.
                                                                              The Borrower financed Environmental and Social
                                                                              Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the construction of
                                                                              Batumi-Akhaltsikhe transmission line (TL) and
                                                                              developed an ESIA report. ToR of this task was
                                                                              agreed with the Bank and publicly disclosed. The
                                                                              TOR and the scope of ESIA were discussed with
                                                                              stakeholders. Draft ESIA report was also
                                                                              disclosed and consultation meetings held in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              capital city of Tbilisi and in Batumi – the main
                                                                              city of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara. ESIA
                                                                              report was finalized afterwards with incorporation
                                                                              of the public feedback.

                                                                              The construction of Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL is
                                                                              subject to the EIA, State ecological expertize, and
                                                                              environmental permitting as per the national
                                                                              legislation. The Borrower is expected to fully
                                                                              meet all requirements of the Georgian law.

                                                                              Adjaristskali Cascade Project is an ongoing
                                                                              activity for the construction of four HPPs in the
                                                                              Autonomous Republic of Adjara, implemented
                                                                              with financial participation of IFC and EBRD,
                                                                              which is associated with the construction of TL.
                                                                              Namely, TL will evacuate power generated in the
                                                                              four HPPs under construction. In accordance with
                                                                              IFC Access to Information Policy, early drafts of
                                                                              the ESIA of Adjaristskali Cascade Project were


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                                                     disclosed at IFC's website on May 24, 2013.
                                                                     Updated ESIA documents were re-disclosed on
                                                                     October 3, 2013 along with an Environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Social Summary prepared by IFC.

                                                                     Bank’s Task Team preparing the TGS Project
                                                                     reviewed ESIA report, Environmental and Social
                                                                     Summary, as well as the Resettlement Action
                                                                     Plan developed for Adjaristskali Cascade Project,
                                                                     and was satisfied to see that all important
                                                                     environmental, social, and cultural heritage
                                                                     aspects related to the Cascade Project are covered
                                                                     in these documents. At the same time, the Bank
                                                                     team had questions and concerns in regard to
                                                                     several environmental aspects of Cascade Project
                                                                     and shared them with IFC. An overarching issue
                                                                     is that the ESIA report, Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Plan, Construction Environmental
                                                                     Management Plan, as well as a number of other
                                                                     thematic plans in place suggest a menu of
                                                                     mitigation measures which should be specified
                                                                     into an applicable form for individual work sites
                                                                     on the rolling basis, over the project
                                                                     implementation. This will generate a great inflow
                                                                     of information to be processed, reviewed,
                                                                     approved and enforced by the project proponent
                                                                     with little oversight on behalf of the national
                                                                     environmental authorities. The Bank is aware of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     the risks associated with running such back-
                                                                     loaded environmental and social management
                                                                     system for an activity associated with the TGS
                                                                     Project and will remain engaged with the IFC’s
                                                                     project team throughout the implementation
                                                                     period with the purpose of reviewing
                                                                     environmental and social performance under the
                                                                     Adjaristskali Cascade Project and collaborating
                                                                     with IFC for mitigating corporate risks.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats is triggered because
                                                                     about 10 km long lower section of the TL
                                                                     alignment falls within the important international
                                                                     migratory corridor of birds, out of which the
                                                                     potential impacts of the TL construction and
                                                                     operation may be significant within 5-6 km
                                                                     segment, where birds are known to fly closer to
                                                                     the earth surface. The TGS Project is expected to
                                                                     have modest impact on the forest habitats as well.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           Significant part of the transmission line corridor


                                                             Page 4 of 12
                                                                         passes through forested areas. Placement of
                                                                         towers and arrangement of service roads will
                                                                         require tree cutting. Natural forests,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         predominantly located on mountain slopes, will
                                                                         therefore be affected. A land strip under the
                                                                         power cables shall be maintained free of high-
                                                                         growing vegetation throughout operation of the
                                                                         TL. OP/BP 4.36 Forests is triggered to address
                                                                         risks associated with the expected impacts of the
                                                                         TGS Project on the forest stands.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            OP 4.09 Pest Management is not triggered,
                                                                         because ESIA confirmed that no herbicides will
                                                                         be used during construction and operation of the
                                                                         TL with the purpose of clearing and/or controlling
                                                                         vegetation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL will pass the area
                         BP 4.11                                         with a number of registered historic monuments.
                                                                         Although the TL is designed the way to avoid
                                                                         direct impacts on the these cultural assets, a need
                                                                         for the construction and operation of service
                                                                         roads, construction camps and other supporting
                                                                         infrastructure carries certain risk of negative
                                                                         impacts. Also, there is a likelihood of
                                                                         encountering chance finds during earth works
                                                                         required for the construction of towers. OP/BP
                                                                         4.11 Physical Cultural Resources is triggered to
                                                                         manage any possible impacts of the Project on the
                                                                         cultural property.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The transmission line corridor from Batumi to
                         4.12                                            Akhaltsikhe will go through few populated
                                                                         villages, pasture lands and other plots of land
                                                                         used by the local population for their livelihood
                                                                         generation purposes. While the GSE will try to
                                                                         avoid the resettlement to the extent possible, the
                                                                         project triggers the Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                         Policy OP/BP 4.12. The policy triggering is
                                                                         mandating the GSE to prepare the Resettlement
                                                                         Policy Framework where the resettlement case
                                                                         identification (census), compensation, livelihood
                                                                         restoration and other social impact mitigation
                                                                         measures and general principles shall be defined.
                                                                         The RPF will become public at the public
                                                                         disclosure meeting where the project affected
                                                                         persons will be informed about the project’s



                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                                responsibilities vis-à-vis their resettlement and/or
                                                                                livelihoods loss mitigation principles. The RPF
                                                                                preparation, its disclosure and public consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                mandate rests with GSE.

                                                                                The sectional draft RAP (for the selected section
                                                                                of the transmission line to be constructed for the
                                                                                first year of implementation) has to be submitted
                                                                                for approval to WB before appraisal together with
                                                                                the RPF.

                                                                                The WB will coordinate with IFC as required to
                                                                                ensure the adequate implementation of the Land
                                                                                Acquisition and Resettlement Plan developed for
                                                                                the associated hydropower project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           Yes             The Bank-financed construction of TL does not
                                                                                include any physical activities on dams and is not
                                                                                directly dependent on the safe operation of dams,
                                                                                however, construction of HPPs associated with
                                                                                TL entails placement of two large dams with the
                                                                                height of 22m and 39m and the OP 4.37 is
                                                                                triggered. The Bank team reviewed arrangements
                                                                                in place for ensuring dam safety under the IFC-
                                                                                supported Adjaristskali Cascade Project and will
                                                                                track how the quality control will actually work at
                                                                                the dams’ design, construction and operation
                                                                                phases as activities for the arrangement of HPP
                                                                                reservoirs progress.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International           No              The Bank-financed construction of TL does not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                trigger OP 7.50. Three HPPs to be constructed
                                                                                under the associated Adjaristskali Cascade Project
                                                                                will abstract water from the rivers of Chorokhi
                                                                                basin that drains into the Black Sea in the territory
                                                                                of Georgia. Construction of these HPPs will not
                                                                                have any trans-boundary impacts.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The TGS Project will support construction of a new Akhaltsikhe-Batumi TL, most part of which
                              will pass through the Autonomous Republic of Adjara, and the rest of it will be located in Adigeni
                              and Akhaltsikhe provinces of Samtskhe-Javakheti region of Georgia. Part of the TL corridor gets
                              pretty close to the Georgia's State border with Turkey. The transmission line will connect the town


                                                                        Page 6 of 12
                         of Akhaltsikhe - located on the plateau of semiarid hills with continental climate, to Batumi - a sea
                         port and beach resort on the Back Sea coast. The line will get over the Goderdzi mountain pass
                         located 2025 meters over the sea level. The corridor passes through the highly diverse types of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         terrain, ranging from alpine meadows to subtropical forests and the coastal zone. These areas
                         include populated and cultivated parcels of land, pastures, as well as parts remote and minimally
                         transformed forests.

                         Despite proximity to several designated protected areas, historic monuments, an evolving skiing
                         resort, and numerous human settlements, works in the TL corridor will not affect these protected
                         areas, will not destroy or fragment significant natural habitats, will have the least negative impact
                         on the aesthetic appearance of the landscapes, and will carry minimal needs of resettlement. The
                         selected most optimal alignment of the TL still has a few kilometers overlap with a sensitive
                         section of an international migratory corridor of birds, where the only option is to design the TL
                         towers and conductors applying best practice features to reduce the likelihood of bird collisions
                         and electrocutions. This will include placing of conductors within the distance established to avoid
                         electrocutions while perching, and equipping the cables with bird reflectors to increase their
                         visibility and rescue collisions. Bird monitoring will be ensured at the TL operation phase to check
                         birds’ mortality rate, verify effectiveness of mitigation, and determine the need for additional
                         measures. Mitigation of the construction-phase negative impacts will be possible by applying
                         conventional good environmental practice and strong supervision of works. In addition to that, the
                         humid subtropical climate of the Autonomous Republic of Adjara provides favorable conditions
                         for a rapid natural regeneration of a number of construction impacts in most parts of the Project
                         area.

                         Adjaristsqali Cascade Project is an ongoing activity for the construction of four HPPs in the
                         Autonomous Republic of Ajara, implemented with financial participation of IFC, MIGA and
                         EBRD, which is associated with the construction of TL. Namely, TL will evacuate power
                         generated in the four HPPs under construction. In accordance with IFC Access to Information
                         Policy, early drafts of the ESIA of Adjaristsqali Cascade Project were disclosed at IFC's website
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on May 24, 2013. Updated ESIA documents were re-disclosed on October 3, 2013 along with an
                         Environmental and Social Summary prepared by IFC. Bank’s Task Team preparing the TGS
                         Project reviewed the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report, Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan, Construction Environmental Management Plan, and several other
                         thematic management plans developed for Adjaristsqali Cascade Project, and was satisfied to see
                         that all important environmental, social, and cultural heritage aspects related to the Cascade
                         Project are covered in these reports. However the Bank noted certain aspects of these documents
                         that lacked clarity or otherwise raised concerns. The Bank and IFC teams corresponded and held a
                         virtual meeting to discuss the Bank’s questions pertaining some statements and conclusions made
                         in the ESIA report of Adjaristsqali Cascade Project as well as to clarify how the system of
                         environmental and social management will function under this project. Clarifications were
                         received on the incorporation of ESIA findings into the project design, establishment of ecological
                         water flow for the affected river, biodiversity offsets, cumulative impacts within the river basin,
                         and long term positive environmental impacts of the Adjaristsqali Cascade Project.

                         Overall outcome of the Bank’s due diligence in examining environmental and social management
                         system under the Adjaristsqali Cascade Project is that the studies undertaken so far are of a high
                         quality and cover all significant aspects of the project’s activities however guidance provided on
                         the environmental mitigation measures to be applied during construction and operation of the
                         HPPs is of a generic nature. This system implies collection of site-specific information through

                                                                   Page 7 of 12
                           additional studies and monitoring work to be undertaken on the rolling basis and to inform the
                           development of concrete and adjusted mitigation measures as the project activities unfold.
                           Knowing that the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Protection of Georgia has
Public Disclosure Copy




                           already issued an environmental permit for the construction of HPPs, and being aware of
                           institutional weaknesses of public entities in environmental controls and enforcement, the Bank
                           team notes that quality control over the site-specific safeguard documents to be developed at later
                           stages of the project cycle is expected to be weak on behalf of the State environmental bodies and
                           the GSE. Therefore, the main responsibility for ensuring quality of future environmental work and
                           adequacy of mitigation measures to be prescribed based on the outputs of this work will
                           predominantly rest with the IFC and AGL. IFC requires that AGL maintains in-house
                           environmental staff and also hires a technical supervisor (Owner’s Engineer) or tacking
                           compliance of construction contractor’s performance with IFC's Performance Standards.
                           Environmental Manager of Owner’s Engineer will undertake internal auditing of work at least
                           quarterly. IFC, ADB, and EBRD, in the capacity of lenders, may require independent external
                           monitoring of works by an industrial environmental management specialist every six months.
                           MIGA, as a provider of financial guarantee to the project owner, will also track environmetnal and
                           social performance of the Adjaristsqali Cascade Project. The Bank will maintain dialogue with
                           IFC to remain up-to-date on the status of project’s adherence with the Performance Standards and
                           will receive environmental audit reports on regular basis. Joint supervision of the associated
                           projects of TGS and Adjaristskali Cascade may also be considered, as suggested by IFC.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The operation and maintenance of the Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL will cause a number of specific
                           environmental and social impacts. There will be certain limitations to the land use within the right
                           of way due to the need for protecting health and safety of people from the potential threats of
                           living and/or working under a high voltage overhead TL. Despite the initially provided bird safety
                           installations, collisions and electrocutions may not be entirely ruled out. Monitoring data for the
                           first several years of TL operation would allow to judge sufficiency of the provided means and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           design additional mitigation measures as required. Maintenance works will imply common risks
                           for health and safety of workers which are usually effectively managed by strict adherence to the
                           rules of conduct of maintenance works and regular use of personal protective gear.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           “No project” alternative without the electric transmission infrastructure would have zero adverse
                           impacts on the environment however this would disallow provision of electricity produced at the
                           Adjaristsqali Cascade Hydropower Scheme to surrounding communities, Georgian grid and for the
                           export to Turkey, having significant negative economic and social implications. Furthermore,
                           because the Adjaristskali Cascade Project is already underway, power evacuation from its HPPs is
                           not optional and the Government will provide transmission infrastructure using any available
                           source of funding.

                          Several design and routing alternatives were considered during development of the preliminary
                          design of the TL. An underground cable system was one design alternative. Though visually
                          appealing in the long run, it would cause more disruption during construction and
                          decommissioning as would involve a larger area for excavation and hence greater negative
                          environmental and socio‐economic impacts, especially in residential areas. Also, the TL’s right-of-
                          way runs through the areas prone to erosion and landslides, making any extensive excavation
                          activities highly disruptive. So the reasons why underground options are not considered as

                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           alternatives to the Project are, first - technical difficulties, complexity, as well as safety and
                           reliability of an underground line, and secondly – a significantly higher cost.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A number of alternative solutions were considered for aligning the TL and selecting locations of
                           its towers. Final choices were made after examining geotechnical, environmental, heritage, and
                           social aspects. Boundaries of the existing protected areas and more valuable forest stands were
                           avoided. Much effort was applied to choosing the TL alignment in the sections were its corridor
                           overlaps with the migration routes of birds and technical means for decreasing chances of
                           collusion and for safe perching were provided. Alignment was designed the way to follow the
                           natural topographic lines, so that geology and vegetation pattern would allow to minimize scope of
                           intervention and decrease visual impact. Throughout the design work, the goal of keeping the need
                           for involuntary resettlement as low as possible had been pursued.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The World Bank safeguard policies as well as the environmental legislation of Georgia required
                           carrying out of a full scale environmental assessment of the Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL construction.
                           The Borrower financed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) from its own
                           proceeds and carried it out through a qualified consultant company. ESIA covered environmental,
                           social, and cultural aspects of the TL construction and operation. An environmental and social
                           management matrix was developed as part of the ESIA report, which lays out measures for
                           mitigating expected negative impacts of the Project and provides a plan for monitoring
                           implementation of the mitigation plan. Because the detailed designs will not be finalized and the
                           construction works will not commence along the entire corridor or the TL at the same time, a
                           number of technical details of construction will become known at later stages of the Project cycle.
                           Works contractor(s) will be obligated to develop site-specific management plans for handling
                           waste and excess material, regulating traffic, protecting biodiversity, reinstating area, and ensuring
                           workers’ health and safety. The Project implementing entity will carry responsibility for ensuring
                           that all of these site-specific plans are developed prior to commencement of works in a particular
Public Disclosure Copy




                           site, are of adequate quality, and the contractor(s) follow the plans throughout their activity within
                           the site.

                           GSE is the Project implementing entity. It has undergone an institutional re-arrangement recently,
                           which resulted in the creation of an Environment and Social Safeguards Unit under the
                           International Projects and Reporting Department. The unit has one staff unit for an environmental
                           specialist and two for social specialists. Although the safeguards unit would have been better
                           positioned outside of the International Projects Department due to general nature of its services,
                           and although more than one environmental specialist is required to adequately cover entire scope
                           of GSE’s activities, this new set-up is an improvement as compared to just one safeguards
                           specialist located within the main body of the Department a few months ago. GSE will use
                           services of an international supervision engineer to ensure quality of works under TGS Project,
                           and monitoring of safeguards application will be an integral part of the consultant’s assignment.
                           Additional consultancy may be sought to supplement GSE’s in-house capacity as required.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The primary beneficiaries of the Project are the retail consumers of electricity to be generated by
                           new HPPs in the Autonomous Republic of Adjara and evacuated by Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL.
                           Small and medium businesses located in Ajara will also benefit from a more reliable, high-quality
                           power supply. TGS and the associated Adjaristskali Cascade projects will indirectly benefit entire

                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                           country through improved transmission grid stability are additional clean energy generation.
                           Therefore, the Ministry of Energy and GSE are significant stakeholders of the Project. People
                           residing in the settlements along the TL corridor will be directly affected by the construction and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           operation of the TL.

                           Prior to commencement of the ESIA of the construction of Batumi-Akhaltsikhe TL, the Borrower
                           shared ToR of this task with the Bank for comments to ensure that the ESIA report is in line with
                           the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policy and meets quality expectations. This ToR was
                           disclosed to the Project stakeholders and a discussion was held on the scope of the upcoming
                           ESIA on September 17-19, 2013. Draft ESIA report was also disclosed and discussed with the
                           Project stakeholders in GSE's office in Tbilisi and Batumi, where centrally located stakeholders as
                           well as local communities affected by the Project had an opportunity to voice their questions,
                           concerns, and comments. ESIA report was finalized afterwards with the documented information
                           on the public consultation process attached to it.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     17-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        17-Dec-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                            25-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Draft ESIA report was disclosed in-country on November 25, 2013 and through the
                                         InfoShop on December 17, 2013. Public consultation meetings on the draft ESIA
                                         report were held in Tbilisi on March 20, 2014 and in Batumi on March 24, 2014.
                                         Final ESIA report was re-disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop on April 4,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        11-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     13-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                            13-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Draft RPF was disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop on March 13, 2014.
                                         Public consultation meetings on the draft RPF were held in Tbilisi on March 20,
                                         2014 and in Batumi on March 24, 2014. Final ESIA report was re-disclosed in-
                                         country and through the InfoShop on April 4, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Joseph Melitauri
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 04-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                          Date: 04-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
