                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA7472

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Yemen, Republic of                Project ID:    P148366
                                                       Parent         P122594
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     RY: AF-Labor Intensive Public Works (P148366)
   Parent Project    Labor Intensive Public Works Project (P122594)
   Name:
   Task Team         Ali Khamis
   Leader:
   Estimated         17-Mar-2014                       Estimated   03-Jul-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    MNSSU                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General education sector (46%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                     sector (35%), Sub-national government administration (10%), Health (5%),
                     General transportation sector (4%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Social safety nets (40%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        50.00           Total Bank Financing:  50.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                50.00
     Total                                                                                    50.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?



                                             Page 1 of 7
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The proposed Project’s development objectives are to assist the Recipient to: (i) provide needed
   infrastructure to improve access to basic public services; and (ii) create short term employment.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) is a scale up of the Labor Intensive Public Works Project
(LIPWP), the fourth phase of the Public Works Projects to enhance the impact of the well-
performing LIPWP. The scale up, requested by the Government of Yemen in its letter dated October
6, 2013 (Attachment 1), would involve increasing the number of sub-projects to be delivered by 301
and thereby increasing the geographical coverage and the number of beneficiaries, since the need for
basic infrastructure services remains very high. Two new design features of the proposed AF will
further enhance gender inclusion and citizen engagement. By Project end, it is expected that: (i) an
additional 1,254,960 people will benefit from improved access to economic and social services and;
(ii) 120,000 person-month of employment will be generated. Continuing the project's flexible
approach, the proposed AF will continue to finance the established three components:

i.      Component 1: Community Infrastructure (US$45.86 equivalent): This component will
finance works and goods for small sub-projects in the following sectors: health, education, water
supply, sewage, water harvesting schemes, stone paving of roads and streets and vocational training,
where gender inclusion and citizen engagement activities are incorporated.
ii.     Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$2.25 million equivalent): This component will
finance consultancy services for: (i) preliminary and detailed designs of Sub-projects including
construction supervision; (ii) auditing services; (iii) environmental assessments, monitoring, and
technical advisory services; and (iv) training and workshops.
iii.    Component 3: Project Management (US$1.98 million equivalent): This component will
finance incremental operational costs of the PMU and staff training, including monitoring and
evaluation of project progress (including gender inclusion and citizen engagement).
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The sub-projects will collectively have national coverage with emphasis on areas with high rates of
poverty, population, as well as remoteness and deprivation of basic infrastructure services. Sub-
projects will be selected from proposals submitted by communities and local governments, following
the established nine selection criteria, which include for each subproject (i) a minimum of 5%
community contribution; (ii) minimum labor content of 30%; (iii) no involuntary resettlement/land
acquisition (land acquisition not involving involuntary resettlement, if any, will be handled in
accordance with the procedures detailed in the Manual of Procedures); and (iv) no sub-projects
proposals will be accepted that involve trans-boundary aquifers or other international waterways in
accordance with OP/BP 7.50. Baseline surveys for all sub-projects, regardless of size and type, are
conducted before a Sub-project is selected to ensure that it is technically and economically feasible,
in compliance with the Bank's safeguards policies, and is sustainable.



                                             Page 2 of 7
As the proposed AF is a scale-up of activities of the parent project, LIPWP, there is no change to the
safeguard category, nor the triggered safeguards policies. Hence the only triggered Safeguards policy
is OP 4.10 on Environmental Assessment, and the proposed AF remains category B as the list of
eligible sub-projects are expected to generally have positive health and environmental impacts.
Additionally, due to the small-scale nature of the investments (costing on average about US
$130,000), no significant or irreversible impacts are anticipated. The safeguards instruments of the
parent project can be applied to the proposed AF, with an update to include the social aspects. Hence
the LIPWP PMU will use an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address
negative impacts, if any, which would be minor based on the Borrower's experience with the past
PWPs and the ongoing LIPWP, and which could be mitigated effectively by implementing the
mitigation, monitoring and screening measures of the ESMF. Hence, the PMU will continue its 15
year long experience with managing project impacts successfully. The Manual of Procedures
includes provisions for screening sub-project proposals, and stipulates rejection of any sub-project
proposal that would result in involuntary resettlement of people, involuntary land acquisition, and/or
may involve trans-boundary aquifers or other international waterways.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Tracy Hart (MNSEE)
Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
Amer Abdulwahab Ali Al-Ghorbany (MNSEE)
Ibrahim Ismail Mohammed Basalamah (MNSSU)

6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The list of eligible sub-projects are expected to
BP 4.01                                              have generally positive environmental and social
                                                     impacts. Additionally, due to the small-scale
                                                     nature of the investments (costing on average
                                                     about US$130,000), no significant or irreversible
                                                     impacts are anticipated. Based on the Borrower's
                                                     experience in the three Public Works Projects and
                                                     the ongoing LIPWP, negative impacts, if any,
                                                     would be minor and could be mitigated
                                                     effectively by implementing the mitigation
                                                     measures as recommended in the ESMF. The
                                                     Bank understands that if lands are required for
                                                     sub project level activities, these requirements are
                                                     of very small magnitude and are typically
                                                     undertaken on public/governmental owned lands.
                                                     Lands can also be voluntarily donated (by
                                                     communities or individuals) for sub projects that
                                                     are to the benefit of communities. These
                                                     processes are documented well. Given the
                                                     prevailing security situation which precludes
                                                     Bank supervision of sub projects, the use of Third
                                                     Party Monitoring for safeguards is being used.
                                                     The MOP includes provisions for screening sub-
                                                     projects and stipulates rejection of any sub-



                                             Page 3 of 7
                                                       project proposal that would result in involuntary
                                                       resettlement of people, and/or may involve trans-
                                                       boundary aquifers or other international
                                                       waterways.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

   Pest Management OP 4.09             No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The land needed for the project will be obtained
   4.12                                                through voluntary land donation. Any sub-
                                                       projects involve in involuntary resettlement, land
                                                       acquisition, and physical displacement will not be
                                                       eligible for financing by the project.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The Project is classified Environmental Category "B" in accordance with World Bank Operational
     Policy 4.01, "Environmental Assessment," as the list of eligible sub-projects are expected to have
     generally positive health and environmental impacts. Additionally, due to the small-scale nature of
     the investments (costing on average about US$140,000), no significant or irreversible impacts are
     anticipated. As noted above, Component 1 will finance works and goods for the following types of
     small community-based sub-projects : health centers and community centers more generally,
     schools, water supply, sewerage, water harvesting schemes, stone paving of roads and streets, and
     vocational training. Minor negative impacts to be mitigated include medical waste (for health
     sub-projects); as well as spillage at public collection points, vector breeding in pooled water, and
     generation of increased quantities of wastewater (water catchment and water supply sub-projects).
     Common to all sub-projects are minor, temporary impacts associated with small-scale civil works
     constructions, including increased levels of dust, noise, and vibration, and possible site worker
     accidents.
     The project will not involve any involuntary resettlement impacts, as any sub-projects, that may
     involve involuntary resettlement, land acquisition, and/or physical displacement will not be


                                               Page 4 of 7
  eligible for financing by the project. The land needed for the project will be obtained through
  voluntary land donation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  N/A.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The LIPWP PMU will use an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to
  address negative impacts, if any, which would be minor based on the Borrower's experience with
  the past PWPs and the ongoing LIPWP, and which could be mitigated effectively by implementing
  the mitigation, monitoring and screening measures of the ESMF. Additionally, baseline surveys
  for all sub-projects, regardless of size and type, are conducted before a sub-project is selected to
  ensure that it is technically and economically feasible, in compliance with the Bank's safeguards
  policies, and is sustainable. Appropriate site selection, technology choice, and engineering design
  are all means of helping to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. For example, water catchment
  interventions are located away from densely-populated areas; schools are located away from flood-
  prone areas, pavement is designed to slope water to harvest storm water and prevent pooling, etc.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The borrower took the opportunity of the AF to update the safeguards instruments of the parent
  project to include the social aspects. Hence the LIPWP PMU will use an Environmental and Social
  Management Framework (ESMF) to address negative impacts, if any, which would be minor
  based on the Borrower's experience with the past PWPs and the ongoing LIPWP, and which could
  be mitigated effectively by implementing the mitigation, monitoring and screening measures of the
  ESMF. Secondly, baseline surveys for all sub-projects, regardless of size and type, are conducted
  before a Sub-project is selected to ensure that it is technically and economically feasible, in
  compliance with the Bank's safeguards policies, and is sustainable. Thirdly, the Manual of
  Procedures includes provisions for screening sub-project proposals, and stipulates rejection of any
  sub-project proposal that would result in involuntary resettlement of people, involuntary land
  acquisition, and/or may involve trans-boundary aquifers or other international waterways. Finally,
  the PMU will continue its 15 year long experience with managing project impacts successfully.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  There are two categories of key stakeholders: (1) donor communities and sector ministries, as well
  as (2) beneficiaries who include communities and their local representative groups such as
  sheikhs, local governments etc. Donors and sector ministries are largely interested in subprojects
  that (i) enhance the capacity of the recipients to absorb and manage resources for the
  implementation of small scale infrastructure that delivers services, (ii) have a positive impact on
  the lives of the poor, and (iii) generate employment through the use of labor intensive works
  contracts. Donors have steadily increased contributions each public works project phase (the
  LIPWP is the fourth phase). The second category of stakeholders is the beneficiaries, and they
  include members of parliament, NGOs, district councils, local government officials, Sheikhs, etc.
  This group of stakeholders has become acutely aware of the PWPs over the last 15 years. They are
  well informed through the local media, as well as through word of mouth e.g. in professional
  associations of engineering firms, the contracting industry and through other communication tools
  such as brochures. The project will be implemented through a demand driven approach, where
  beneficiaries will be actively involved in the subproject preparation and implementation. In


                                            Page 5 of 7
  addition, a grievance redress mechanism will be established to allow stakeholders to express their
  concerns, suggestions, and complaints.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-Mar-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Yemen, Republic of                                               27-Dec-2010
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
 the project legal documents?


                                            Page 6 of 7
III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:   Name: Ali Khamis
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:     Name: Franck Bousquet (SM)       Date: 04-Mar-2014




                                          Page 7 of 7
