                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC7968

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Albania                           Project ID:       P144688
                            Project Name:       Albania Health System Improvement (P144688)
                            Task Team           Lorena Kostallari
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           21-Jul-2014                       Estimated         17-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSH1                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        50.00               Total Bank Financing:               45.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              Borrower                                                                         5.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                           45.00
                              Total                                                                           50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is to improve the efficiency and quality of health care services in Albania through
                           strengthening: (a) management, governance, and quality assurance systems for public hospitals; and
                           (b) health financing, purchasing, maintenance, and information technology systems.
                           C. Project Description
                           To improve the efficiency and quality of health care services in Albania, the proposed activities
                           under the Project will: (a) reform the hospital sector by supporting rationalization of the hospital
                         network, creating a sound legal and management framework for efficient service provision,
                         strengthening performance management and planning, overcoming operational constraints in service
                         delivery, and strengthening the referral system; (b) improve monitoring and management of service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         quality and efficiency by establishing a comprehensive Health Management Information System
                         (HMIS), a Logistics Management Information Systems (LMIS) focusing on hospital drugs, and a
                         system for medical equipment management and maintenance; and (c) provide support to the
                         Government to reform the health financing and provider systems, strengthen systems for efficient
                         purchasing and distribution of pharmaceuticals and medical supplies, improve maintenance of
                         medical equipment, and assessing options to expand insurance coverage, and transition into a general
                         tax based system within available fiscal space. Swiss Cooperation is currently developing a project to
                         support strengthening of primary health care, which will complement the focus of this proposed
                         Project on hospitals and cross-cutting systems. The proposed Project would include the following
                         components:

                         Component 1: Hospital governance, management, and service quality

                         This component aims to improve efficiency and quality of hospital services delivery in Albania. The
                         component would finance technical assistance, training, civil works, goods and equipment to support
                         the design and implementation of a sustainable hospital network with the appropriate infrastructure
                         and human capital to deliver needs-based hospital services. Implementation will build on the results
                         and concepts developed in previous project. A working group would be established in MOH to
                         oversee the process. Implementation will be phased to ensure the establishment of an appropriate
                         legal and regulatory framework, management capacity and institution building, and minimize
                         disruptions in service delivery and access to services. Key areas would include:

                         (i) Improving needs-based planning of hospital infrastructure and human resources, and results-based
                         management for essential hospital services. Proposed activities would include support for: (a) the
                         review and implementation of the existing Hospital Master Plan; (b) the elaboration of an appropriate
                         legal and regulatory framework for hospital services, to provide increased autonomy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accountability; and (c) training and capacity building for hospital management teams, MoH, HII, and
                         other supervising agencies on service planning, resource allocation, performance management, and
                         implementation monitoring and contracting.

                         (ii) Improving hospital organization and physical infrastructure. Proposed project activities would
                         include technical assistance for the design and implementation of a more flexible budget system and
                         organizational structure for hospitals; and financing for the rehabilitation and upgrading of hospital
                         infrastructure and medical equipment based on the agreed hospital Master Plan. The Plan does not
                         currently envisage closing any facilities, although hospital beds may be reduced or reallocated in
                         accordance with service requirements, and appropriate mechanisms established to reallocate staff if
                         necessary.

                         (iii) Medical equipment management. The MoH has identified medical equipment management and
                         maintenance as a strategic priority for the development of public health care in Albania. Two main
                         activities would be supported under this area: (a) The establishment of a National Center with the
                         mandate to manage all medical equipment in the public sector in Albania. This will comprise
                         central inventory management, maintenance, usage monitoring, consumables cost monitoring, and
                         investment planning. (b) Development of a medical equipment maintenance strategy. Options under
                         consideration are i) multiple contracts with manufacturers; ii) in-house maintenance; iii) single
                         contract with a global service provider.
                         (iv) Improving patient management, clinical services outcomes, and accountability. Activities under
                         this area will address the poor quality and treatment outcome of hospital services in the current
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system. Indicative project activities to improve clinical services comprise technical assistance for the
                         further development and application of clinical protocols and treatment guidelines, the roll-out of
                         patient-centered IT systems (interfacing with the HMIS component), the development of standard
                         definitions for hospital service statistics (MIS / quality monitoring system), strengthening hospital
                         quality assurance systems, developing standards and protocols for referrals, strengthening the
                         existing accreditation system, supporting investments for training and equipment; and piloting social
                         accountability mechanisms to enhance patient feedback and reduce informal payments.

                         Component 2. Development of the HMIS/eHealth

                         To further improve the efficiency of health care services in Albania, the HMIS/eHealth component
                         proposes to introduce a standard, interoperable, interconnected Hospital Information System in
                         Albania’s regional hospitals. In the HMIS/eHealth area, it is suggested that information technology
                         be used as a catalyst to improve the referral mechanisms between hospitals, between primary care
                         and secondary hospital level, and between secondary hospitals and the national tertiary hospital
                         (QSUT). In addition, the component will improve management of pharmaceutical drugs in hospitals
                         as well as establishing the institutional foundations for an interconnected HMIS. Main areas under
                         this component would include:

                         (i) HMIS/eHealth – foundational activities for establishing the Health Management Information
                         System at national level. Proposed foundational activities would include: (a) establishing the Master
                         Plan for HMIS/eHealth for Albania (2014-2018). The work under the proposed Project must be set
                         in a larger context with a longer timeframe, and taking into consideration those components outside
                         the purview of this Project; (b) establishing an Albanian Health Data Dictionary, which is required to
                         enable connectivity between systems. The data dictionary would specify which registries and coding
                         system will be used as well as define standard definitions; and (c) creating essential Registries for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Health Facilities, Health Workers, and Biomedical Equipment. These present the basic steps on
                         which the proposed Project will build up the hospital information system.

                         (ii) Improved “Track and trace” of pharmaceuticals within hospitals. In order to minimize drug
                         stockout in hospitals and potentially reduce out of pocket costs, this component will support the
                         improvement of “track and trace” system of pharmaceuticals within hospitals. In this context, the
                         proposed Project activities would include identification of ways to better “track and trace” drugs
                         within hospitals and specifically a system be installed/piloted at the tertiary hospital (QSUT), since it
                         is by far the largest purveyor of drugs in the country and has the most complicated supply chain
                         within the hospital.

                         (iii) Establishment of regional hospitals information system. Key proposed activities in this area
                         would include: (a) starting with “management” functions installed in selected hospitals, including
                         ADT (Admissions Discharges and Transfers), Outpatient Registration, Medical Records locator and
                         an interface to HIF for claims/encounters reporting; (b) installing clinical functions (clinical
                         laboratory order, radiology order, and pharmacy prescribing functions); (c) creating a modest design
                         for a clinical summary which is accessible (with security and confidentiality) by all those involved in
                         the treatment of the patient (which is called the “National Registry of Health Events”); and (d)
                         creating and maintaining the chronic disease registries for key diseases (cardiovascular disease,
                         tumor registry and Diabetes Mellitus), aiming at improving continuity-of-care and communication
                         between the different providers, facilities and specialties involved in identifying and managing
                         chronic diseases.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iv) Establishment of a National Health Information Center (NHIC). Rather than MOH, HIF, QSUT
                         and other related institutions have small, separate data centers and support staff, some of these
                         functions could be combined in a more efficient arrangement. It could also house a Biomedical
                         Engineering facility whose responsibility includes the tracking and maintenance of the equipment.
                         Activities under the proposed Project would include: (a) building up one Health Data Center, which
                         would serve as a “utility” to all MOH-related organizations and entities, including the regional
                         hospitals and perhaps also QSUT; (b) establishing the NHIC training facilities; (c) establishing NHIC
                         biomedical engineering department; and (d) supporting a Helpdesk for user inquiries be established
                         with easy “hotline” access from users across the country who might have questions regarding the use
                         of applications or to report problems. These activities are essential for an efficient use of health
                         information and proper management of the medical equipment, at national level.

                         Component 3: Improve Health Financing System

                         Major priorities for the health financing agenda include: (i) sustainable revenue mobilization that is
                         harmonized with macroeconomic growth; (ii) improved allocative efficiency and shifting toward
                         output-based and performance-based financing for hospital and primary care services, and (iii)
                         expanding the breadth and depth of health insurance coverage and the pooling of health care
                         resources, subject to the resources availability in a difficult fiscal environment. To address these
                         priorities, the component include the following proposed areas:

                         (i) Support to the Health Insurance Institute (HII) for strategic purchasing and improved coverage.
                         Proposed activities will support HII to strengthen its collaboration with the MOH, to strengthen
                         governance arr angements, and to develop capacity to be a strategic purchaser of hospital services.
                         Strategic planning may need to be accompanied by management and organization planning,
                         including reviewing the number and functions of departments, lines of responsibilities among
Public Disclosure Copy




                         departments and staff, and management and technical capacity. The HII would benefit from
                         technical assistance to increase capacity in areas of management, organization, financial and risk
                         management, information technology and provider payment systems.

                         (ii) Support to Pharmaceutical reforms: Significant cost savings could be attained through revised
                         pharmaceutical policies. Off-patent drugs are currently purchased through price negotiation rather
                         than competition. Retail and wholesale margins in the country are larger than in other countries in
                         Europe, which could be addressed through enhanced regulatory measures, and copayment policies
                         revised to encouraged use of lower cost drugs. In general, stronger accountability and transparency in
                         the contracting and prescription of medications would help improve value for money in the sector.
                         To support the Government in designing and piloting of innovative pharmaceutical policies, the
                         proposed Project would include the following activities: (a) development of well-defined drug lists,
                         (b) improved treatment protocols and enhanced monitoring of prescription practices, including
                         through e-prescription, (c) generic promotion and prescription, (d) price regulation such as central
                         procurement, e-procurement, and reference pricing; and (e) piloting expanded coverage of outpatient
                         drug benefit package, starting with a few priority chronic diseases, to reduce OOP expenditures and
                         improve treatment compliance.

                         (iii) Payment Reforms. Improving payment methods will require improved flow of information
                         about provider performance at the individual level, which in turn can be used to help promote
                           continuous improvement in service delivery. The proposed Project would support the following
                           activities: (a) provider payment baseline assessment, including linking new payment models with
                           policy priorities, a baseline assessment of MIS infrastructure and quality systems as measures of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           “readiness” for payment reforms, (b) development of costing tools and costing studies of relative
                           costs of services across facilities, (c) design and piloting of payment models, most likely starting
                           with a simple case-based payment system for hospitals, and further refining capitation and
                           performance-based financing for primary care; and (d) monitoring, evaluation, refinement, and scale
                           up of payment reforms.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will deal with the overall health sector in Albania, and as such will be conducted
                           throughout the country. The reconstruction works will be focused on tertiary hospitals in Tirana, the
                           capital.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A Project Coordination Unit will be based in the Ministry of Health that will be overall responsible
                           for the implementation of the project.
                           Given the small portion of the project scope that may include construction works and related
                           mitigation plans, the PCU willmost likely hire a consultant to prepare all needed documents, while
                           the supervision contracts will also include portions on supervision of works.
                           The World Bank environmental requirements have been clearly communicated with the client and
                           will be included in the Project Operational Manual.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                           Esma Kreso (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The small-scale construction and reconstruction
                           BP 4.01                                              works envisaged under Component 1 of the
                                                                                project may lead to negative environmental
                                                                                impacts such as generation of construction
                                                                                waste, noise and dust, that will be mitigated
                                                                                through the use of Checklist Environmental
                                                                                Management Plans for Small Scale
                                                                                Construction. These forms will be prepared
                                                                                prior to Project Appraisal, and will be part of
                                                                                the documentation for the works contracts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The Operational Policy for Involuntary
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            Resettlement is not triggered with the project
                                                                                                                                 because the Project will finance works to
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitate current operating hospital. No new
                                                                                                                                 construction is planned and thus there will be no
                                                                                                                                 impacts such as displacement or land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Checklist EMP for the known project locations will be prepared prior to Appraisal set for the
                                      first half of June 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Lorena Kostallari

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 18-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Johanne Angers (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 01-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
