INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1202
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Georgia                     Project ID:  P150696
Project Name: Third Regional Development Project (P150696)
Task Team       Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Zaruhi Tokhmakhian
Leader(s):
Estimated        17-Feb-2015                Estimated    24-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (35%), Sub-national
government administration (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roa ds and Highways
(35%), SME Finance (10%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (35%), Cultural Heritage (20%),
Urban Economic Development (25%), Infrastructure servi ces for private sector
development (10%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      75.00             Total Bank Financing:    60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                     15.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        60.00
Total                                                                        75.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity to
support increased contribution of tourism in the local economy of the Samtskhe-Javakheti and
Page 1 of 11


﻿Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions.
3. Project Description
Component 1. Infrastructure Investment
U
Component 1.1: Urban Regeneration and Circuit Development. This component will finance: urban
regeneration of old towns and villages, including restoration of building facades and roofs, public
spaces, museums, roads and water, and enhancement of cultural and natural heritage sites, including
o        access and presentation.
Component 1.2: Provision of Public Infrastructure to Attract Private Investments. To encourage
private sector investments in the region, this component will support a selected number of private
sector entities in Project areas that demonstrate interest and capacity to invest in tourism or
agribusiness through investing in complementary public infrastructure that is necessary to ensure the
viability of their investments.
Component 2. Institutional Development
Support institutional capacity and performance of the Georgia National Tourism Administration
(GNTA), National Agency for Culture Heritage Preservation of Georgia (NACHP), National
Museum, Project Implementing Entity (Municipal Development Fund of Georgia, MDF), and other
local and regional entities in order for them to carry out the following activities: setting up of
destination management office in each of the two regions; marketing and promotion; preparation of
sustainable site management plans for cultural heritage sites; training for skilled workforce
development; cultural heritage advisory service to the NACHP; business start-up/expansion advisory
service to tourism SMEs; performance monitoring & evaluation; and preparation of studies and
construction supervision.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
0
Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions of Georgia.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon (GSURR)
Nino Metreveli (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The Project carries investment components in
OP/BP 4.01                               support to infrastructure development and therefore
triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.
None of the Project-supported activities are expected
to have significant, long term, or irreversible impacts
on the natural environment, therefore the Project is
classified as environmental Category B. No Category
A activities will be eligible for funding from the
Project proceeds.
Page 2 of 11


﻿Based on the Environmental Management
Frameworks used for the implementation of RDP
and RDP II, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) has been
developed for the purposes of RDP III. The ESMF
guides the preparation of subproject-specific
Environmental and Social Reviews (ESRs) and/or
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs),
depending on the risk assessment of these
subprojects. The ESMF also describes the process for
determining the application of the Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) for specific subprojects.
A Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage, and
Social Assessment (SECHSA) was carried out in
conjunction with the regional development and
tourism development strategies developed for the
beneficiary regions by the client. While consistent
with the objectives of OP 4.01, completing SECHSA
is not a requirement for the Project Appraisal. It is a
supplementary instrument for managing longer term
issues, and has also provided important information
that has been reflected in the Project design and in
the ESMF.
The SECHSA identifies risks and opportunities
associated with the overall development program
proposed for Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-
Mtianeti regions. The SECHSA a) pools baseline
information on the target regions, b) analyzes the
expected long term, cumulative, and induced/indirect
impacts of the proposed policy approaches, and c)
assesses institutional capacity of the government
agencies to manage environmental, cultural, and
social implications of the regional development in
Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti,
including gap analysis and recommendation for
capacity building. Following a further process of
public consultation, the final version will also
provide recommendations for mitigation of
environmental and social issues and for promoting
environmental and social sustainability at a strategic
and program level.
The participatory process used to develop SECHSA
mobilized stakeholders whose involvement is critical
for ensuring that RDP III activities contribute to the
Page 3 of 11


﻿broader regional development context and secured
strong ownership of RDP III by the client. The
SECHSA identified areas for better citizen
engagement in the Project as well as specific
activities for targeting women. It indicated the
opportunities of maintaining the rehabilitated sites by
neighboring communities and increasing the benefits
from the Project to those groups. The SECHSA
assessed possible social vulnerability of the Project-
affected communities and proposed activities to
address them.
The ESMF satisfactory to the Bank was disclosed
prior to Appraisal, and discussed with all relevant
stakeholders, along with the Executive Summary of
the SECHSA report. The process of consultation on
the SECHSA with the local, regional and national
level stakeholders will continue, as described above,
after which the final version of SECHSA report will
be furnished to the Bank and will be disclosed in-
country and through the InfoShop.
In accordance with the ESMF, site-specific EMPs
will undergo the same procedures of disclosure and
consultation on the rolling basis, prior to tendering of
the respective works.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          RDP III is designed to invest into capacity building
and infrastructure development for Javakheti and
Tbilisi national parks, which will have implications
for the valuable natural habitats conserved in these
protected areas. OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to ensure
that any interventions into the protected areas and the
areas in their immediate vicinity are fully
harmonized and supportive of the habitat
conservation goals. Site-specific ESRs and/or EMPs
to be developed for individual sub-projects related to
protected areas will explain how the above principles
are integrated into the design and implementation
arrangements of each sub subproject.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           While some of the natural areas that could be
affected directly or indirectly by RDP III are
forested, OP/BP 4.36 is not being triggered as the
natural forest areas will be covered within the scope
of OP/BP 4.04.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Page 4 of 11


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          The Project aims at attracting increased flow of
OP/BP 4.11                                tourists to the natural and cultural heritage sites of
Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions.
This would imply improvement of access to these
sites and development of tourist infrastructure around
them. Implementation of civil works in and around
the historical monuments and other elements of the
cultural heritage carries a risk of affecting their
aesthetic value, accidental damage, or gradual
deterioration. These risks will be specified and their
mitigation measures laid out in subproject-specific
ESRs and EMPs.
Also, development of tourist infrastructure and
improving access to the cultural sites will imply earth
works carrying high likelihood of chance finds. OP/
BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no element of
cultural heritage is affected negatively neither during
construction nor operation of the infrastructure
provided under the project. Site-specific ESRs and/or
EMPs will cover the aspect of cultural heritage
preservation and carry relevant mitigation measures,
as well as arrangements for monitoring their
implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         OP/BP 4.12 is triggered in light of temporary
BP 4.12                                   impacts of anticipated civil works and in case land
acquisition is required for targeted investments. The
experience of RDP and RDP II show that triggering
OP/BP 4.12 is important given that urban upgrading
leads to permanent and temporary impacts on
housing and livelihoods for people living in areas
being restored. Because the location and footprint of
these investments will not be known until
implementation, the RPFs prepared for RDP and
RDP II have been updated for the purposes of RDP
III, incorporating all lessons learned from those two
projects.
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for individual
subprojects will be prepared as needed in line with
the RPF and resettlement measures implemented
prior to commencement of civil works at any given
subproject site.
Page 5 of 11


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International    Yes         The Project's subcomponent 1.1 will finance urban
Waterways OP/B P 7.50                   regeneration of old towns and villages through
restoration of building facades, public spaces,
museums, roads, and water supply and sanitation
systems, and enhancement of cultural and natural
heritage sites. Subcomponent 1.2 will provide
complementary public infrastructure to stimulate
tourism and agribusiness related private investment.
Therefore, activities that may be suggested for the
Project's interventions include upgrade or extension
of the infrastructure in the two target regions,
including water supply, wastewater collection and
water drainage schemes. Because water-related
infrastructure is eligible for the Project funding and
because vast majority of Georgia's rivers fall under
the category of international waterways as defined by
OP/BP 7.50, this policy is triggered. However new
construction of water and wastewater infrastructure
will be excluded from the Project funding.
Investments for rehabilitation of the existing schemes
that are aimed at cutting water loss due to seepage,
leaks overflows, and malfunctioning of hydraulic
structures will be supported on the condition that no
alteration of water intake and/or discharge results
from the Project implementation. Due to these rules
of subproject selection included in the OM,
communication to the riparians was deemed
unnecessary and exemption from the requirement of
communication to the riparins was obtained from the
Bank's Vice President.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Third Regional Development Project (RDP III) will finance infrastructure rehabilitation and
development subprojects that are classified as environmental Category B according to the OP/BP
4.01. No large scale significant adverse environmental impacts are expected from the Project
implementation. The majority of the civil works to be supported under the Project has
environmental implications which are common for small to medium scale infrastructure projects.
The Municipal Development Fund (MDF), which is the Project implementing entity, is well
experienced in preparing and applying environmental mitigation measures to such type of civil
Page 6 of 11


﻿works and is significantly boosting its capacity to manage social risks of the Project. Some small
scale tourism infrastructure interventions may take place in proximity of cultural heritage sites.
Such interventions carry additional risks of damaging monuments in case the design and
methodological approaches are unfit for conservation of the historical and aesthetic value of these
O
Q)          sites. Another risk may be associated with increased tourist visitation of these sites as a result of
the Project interventions without proper management of sites in a sustainable manner. Building on
the experience from the ongoing RDP and RDP II, the design of RDP III carries reliable
mechanism for screening, raising, and addressing the above risks in both the review and the
implementation phases of subprojects. The institutional development component included
activities to prepare site management plans for key cultural heritage sites under the Project.
RDP III will invest in Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti, both covered by the regional
development strategies and tourism development strategies produced by the Government of
Georgia. For the purpose of maximizing positive impacts of RDP III interventions, its preparation
included a Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage, and Social Assessment (SECHSA) of these
strategies in order to explore what long-term and cumulative impacts are expected from their
implementation and how RDP III can assist in achieving the goals of these strategies as well as
help to fill their gaps and help to address weaknesses. Activities which carry highest risk due to
legal and/or institutional weaknesses identified through SECSHA are excluded from RDP III
financing, because they either do not serve its development objectives or are not eligible based on
the exclusion rules applied under the Project. For managing lower risks flagged through SECHSA,
procedures supplemental to the national legislation are built into the Project design. These
procedures provide stronger protection of biodiversity, landscapes and historic value of physical
cultural heritage as well as guarantee more comprehensive approach to compensation for possible
involuntary resettlement as compared to what is guaranteed by the national legislation. The
SECHSA also explored the ways for citizens' engagement in the implementation of regional and
tourism development strategies and RDP III, mechanisms to help communities benefit from
benefit from Project activities, and processes to address the needs of women, minorities, and
disadvantaged.
o
For mitigating all possible risks associated with the implementation of the Project on human,
natural, social and cultural assets, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and will be observed during
Project implementation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Project implementation will have long term positive impact on the economic growth in Samtskhe-
Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions through increased tourist visitation, improved
infrastructure and utilities in the selected municipalities, and enhanced business activity. This is
expected to improve the livelihood of the residents of municipalities selected for direct
interventions as well as to potentially raise incomes of communities residing in the proximity to
the cultural monuments and natural assets. Indirect long term risks of the stimulated visitation and
investment nearby and around the heritage sites is the possibility of exceeding their carrying
capacity as well as potential loss of the aesthetic value of the landscapes surrounding tourist sites
due to over-development in their buffer zones. This potential threat could be effectively mitigated
by following policy advice of the SECHSA report and practicing integrated approach to the
regional development.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Page 7 of 11


﻿impacts.
No alternatives to the general design of the Project have been considered, as it builds on the
experience of well advancing RDP and RDP II. Analysis of alternatives and prioritization
occurred in the process of selecting individual investment proposals for the Project support.
Technical alternatives are being looked at and analyzed as part of the subproject review process
which looks at the consistency of design documents, economic studies, environmental risks, and
social impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project implementing entity produced the ESMF by re-working Environmental Management
Frameworks currently in use for RDP and RDP II. ESMF carries detailed guidance on handling
environmental, cultural, and social aspects of the project implementation. It is included into the
Operations Manual (OM) of the Project. To handle the anticipated temporary impacts of
subprojects and to address other possible resettlement issues, the RPF was produced for RDP III
based on the similar documents prepared for the purposes of RDP and RDP II. ESMF and RPF
will be used for the development of investment-specific Environmental and Social Reviews
(ESRs), EMPs and RAPs, as required. The local municipalities will be responsible for the
implementation of RAPs with the assistance of the MDF prior to commencement of construction
at the individual project sites, while implementation of EMPs at the construction phase will be
enforced on works contractors directly by the MDF. Authorized national and regional agencies
shall enforce mitigation measures further on at the operation phase.
The MDF is the implementing agency for RDP III. The MDF is also the implementing entity for
the ongoing RDP and RDP II, and has a long history of implementing World Bank-supported
projects with a good track record of safeguard compliance. However its in-house capacity to
monitor application of measures to mitigate negative impacts of civil works is limited because of
MDF's large portfolio of projects with a wide geographic span and due to lack of experienced
environmental and social professionals resulting from continuous turnover of staff. Considering
this limitation and acknowledging that implementation of Project activities in the proximity to
cultural heritage monuments and aesthetically valuable landscapes carries additional challenges for
safeguarding these sensitive receptors, MDF will hire an international construction supervision
firm to support technical oversight of works and monitor compliance to safeguards policies. The
MDF has also boosted its social safeguards staff and will now have two resettlement specialists
and one social / gender specialist. The MDF has started to plan training for their safeguards staff
and has identified consultants capable of providing some of this training.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The population of Samtskhe-Javakheti and Mtskheta-Mtianeti regions in general is the main
beneficiary of the Project. Municipalities, elected local councils, NGOs, tourism businesses,
potential future investors to the region, the Georgia National Tourism Administration, the Agency
for Cultural Heritage Preservation, the Cultural Heritage Fund, the Ministry of Regional
Development and Infrastructure, the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development, and the
Ministry of Finance are also stakeholders of the project. The MDF is the designated implementing
entity.
At a higher level, the national Government of Georgia is directly involved in the overseeing of the
Project's implementation through MDF's Supervisory Board as the project is an integral part of the
Page 8 of 11


﻿national strategy for regional development. From the very initial stage of the project preparation,
the top management and technical staff of the above listed national line agencies as well as those
of the regional and municipal governments have been directly involved in the consideration of all
aspects of RDP III. Public consultations on the ESMF, the RPF and the Executive Summary of
O
SECHSA report were held in Akhaltsikhe and Mtskheta - regional centers for Samtskhe-Javakheti
and Mtskheta-Mtianeti - to generate inputs from a wide array of the national, regional, and local
stakeholders. The documents were disclosed in-country and through the InfoShop. The final
versions of these documents, with the minutes of public consultations attached, will be re-
disclosed. Consultations with the local, regional and national stakeholders are ongoing as part of
the SECHSA process. Full report on SECHSA will be published, opened for feedback, finalized,
and re-disclosed. The site-specific ESRs (as required), EMPs and RAPs (as required) for all
individual subproject will be reviewed and appraised by the Bank, disclosed in-country, and
discussed with the affected communities in the areas of individual project sites.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Georgia                                                  12-Feb-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
Georgia                                                  12-Feb-2015
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 9 of 11


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes[  ] No[X]       NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[   ]   NA
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [X]      NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
a          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Zaruhi Tokhmakhian
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Approved By
Regional Safeguards  Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)              Date: 19-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/    Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)  Date: 19-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


