                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC7787

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Latin America                    Project ID:      P149670
                            Project Name:       Central America & Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project (P149670)
                            Task Team           Ana Campos Garcia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated        01-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSDU                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Other Financial Sector Development (50%), Other Private Sector Development
                                                (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     53.01                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                       53.01
                              Total                                                                         53.01
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the fiscal resilience of the Central
                           American countries, the Dominican Republic, and CARICOM member countries to catastrophic
                           events resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall. This will be achieved by:
                           a)      Establishing the necessary conditions for Central America and the Dominican Republic (the
                           COSEFIN countries) to join the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF) and
                           purchase tropical cyclone and earthquake coverage from it;
                         b)       Facilitating the up-take of CCRIF’s excess rainfall product by supplementing the risk capital
                         that it has allocated to that product so as to enhance its affordability to both the COSEFIN and
                         CARICOM member countries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The Project has two components that have been identified in collaboration with COSEFIN and
                         CARICOM countries and partners and have been aligned with the World Bank Group’s priorities.

                         Component 1: Establishment of Parametric Tropical Cyclone and Earthquake Products for COSEFIN
                         countries within CCRIF

                         Under Component 1, CCRIF will pool the hurricane and earthquake risk of participating COSEFIN
                         member states in a segregated portfolio. This will allow for separation of risk management
                         operations for COSEFIN countries (e.g. pricing, insurance policy format, reinsurance strategy) from
                         those of Caribbean countries. The COSEFIN insurance pool will mimic the existing CARICOM
                         portfolio within CCRIF, which provides parametric insurance for earthquake and hurricane coverage
                         to CARICOM member countries. CCRIF is exploring options for establishing a third segregated
                         portfolio to combine the COSEFIN and CARICOM risk for purposes of securing reinsurance. This
                         could capture nearly all of the diversification and cost benefits that would be achieved from
                         combining the COSEFIN and CARICOM risk in a single, integrated pool.

                         Specific activities associated with this component will involve: (a) coverage of reinsurance costs, and
                         (b) financing of insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermath of a hurricane or
                         earthquake. By covering the main costs associated with providing tropical cyclone and earthquake
                         coverage to the COSEFIN countries, the Project will enable CCRIF to retain more of its premium
                         and other income from the coverage, thereby building its capital to underwrite such coverage more
                         quickly than would otherwise be possible, and leaving a fully capitalized risk retention ability with
                         the Central American portfolio at Project closing. As CCRIF builds its risk-bearing capacity, it is
                         expected that it should be self-sustainable by the end of the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Establishment of an Excess Rainfall Product for CARICOM and COSEFIN countries

                         Component 2 will enable CCRIF to provide excess rainfall coverage to both CARICOM and
                         COSEFIN members. The technical design work that needs to be completed for a country in order to
                         launch the excess rainfall product includes: (i) preparation of a country-risk assessment model; (ii)
                         calibration of this model; (iii) actuarial analyses; and (iv) design of a country-specific insurance
                         based on these parameters. For the CARICOM countries, CCRIF has already generated the country-
                         risk assessment models for excess rainfall and is advancing work on model calibration in
                         collaboration with interested governments and actuarial analyses. In the case of the COSEFIN
                         members, CCRIF would also lead and finance the technical design work to underwrite the potential
                         excess rainfall losses in close collaboration with the interested countries. It is expected that the model
                         work will be completed for both regions during calendar year 2015.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Establishment of an Excess Rainfall Product for CARICOM members.
                         Specific activities associated with this component will involve: (a) coverage of reinsurance costs and
                         (b) financing of insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermaths of an excess
                         rainfall event. This sub-component will cover the main costs of risk retention and transfer for the
                         CCRIF, with regards to the excess rainfall peril of participating CARICOM countries. It would
                         enable CCRIF to accumulate the capital that is raised through income for the purpose of covering
                           excess rainfall events throughout the period of the Project, and thereby leave fully capitalized risk
                           retention ability for CARICOM members with regards to excess rainfall at Project closing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-Component 2.2: Establishment of an Excess Rainfall Product for COSEFIN members.
                           Specific activities financed under this component are: (a) coverage of reinsurance costs; and (b)
                           financing of insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermaths of an excess rainfall
                           event. This sub-component will cover the main costs of risk retention and transfer for the CCRIF,
                           with regards to the excess rainfall peril of participating COSEFIN countries. It would enable CCRIF
                           to accumulate the capital that is raised through income for the purpose of covering excess rainfall
                           events during the period of the Project, and thereby leave fully capitalized risk retention ability for
                           COSEFIN members with regards to excess rainfall at Project closing.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed Project does not contemplate any physical investments, but rather will finance
                           parametric insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for catastrophic events resulting
                           from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall. The Project therefore does not have any
                           safeguards implications.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           As the proposed Project will finance parametric insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs
                           for catastrophic events resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall, no
                           safeguards policies will be triggered and there is thus no need to assess the Borrower’s institutional
                           capacity for safeguard policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The proposed Project will finance parametric
                           BP 4.01                                               insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                                 costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                                 tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                                 rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked
                                                                                 to carrying out any specific investments or
                                                                                 physical works, the Project is not expected to
                                                                                 cause any adverse environmental impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The proposed Project will finance parametric
                                                                                 insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                                 costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                                 tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                                 rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked
                                                                                 to carrying out any specific investments or
                                                                                 physical works, the Project is not expected to
                                                                                 have any impacts on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                 Project will only finance parametric insurance
                                                                payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for
                                                                catastrophic events resulting from tropical
                                                                cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                are not linked to any specific investments or
                                                                physical works. It will not finance any activities
                                                                that could affect the welfare of forest dependent
                                                                communities or the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                Project will not finance any activities that
                                                                involve the procurement or significant use of
                                                                pesticides, but rather will only finance
                                                                parametric insurance payouts and coverage of
                                                                reinsurance costs for catastrophic events
                                                                resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes
                                                                and/or excess rainfall that are not tied to any
                                                                specific physical investment
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The proposed Project will finance parametric
                         BP 4.11                                insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked
                                                                to any specific investments or physical works,
                                                                the Project is not expected to have any impacts
                                                                on physical cultural resources in client
                                                                countries.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The proposed Project will finance parametric
                                                                insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                rainfall. Since none of the payments under the
                                                                proposed Project are linked to any specific
                                                                investments or physical works, the project
                                                                activities will not have any impacts on
                                                                indigenous people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   Since the proposed Project will only finance
                         4.12                                   parametric insurance payouts and coverage of
                                                                reinsurance costs for catastrophic events
                                                                resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes
                                                                and/or excess rainfall that are not linked to any
                                                                specific investments or physical works, it will
                                                                not cause any involuntary resettlement as
                                                                defined by the policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No   This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                Project will neither support the construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                                                                 investments which rely on services of existing
                                                                                                                                 dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            Project will only finance parametric insurance
                                                                                                                                 payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for
                                                                                                                                 catastrophic events resulting from tropical
                                                                                                                                 cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall and
                                                                                                                                 will not affect any international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The proposed Project will exclusively finance
                                 7.60                                                                                            parametric insurance payouts and coverage of
                                                                                                                                 reinsurance costs for catastrophic events
                                                                                                                                 resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes
                                                                                                                                 and/or excess rainfall. Since none of the
                                                                                                                                 payments are linked to carrying out any specific
                                                                                                                                 investments or physical works, the policy on
                                                                                                                                 disputed areas is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No Social or Environmental Assessment is required beyond the initial screening.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ana Campos Garcia
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 06-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                                                                                                Date: 11-Mar-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
