                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1067
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Micronesia, Federated States of Project ID: P151754
                            Project Name:      Pacific Islands regional Oceanscpe Program - Federated States of Micronesia
                                               (P151754)
                            Task Team          John Virdin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       23-Oct-2014                            Estimated   22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GENDR                                   Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (20%), Other public sector governa nce (20%), Rural
                                              policies and institutions (20%), Regional integration (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.50           Total Bank Financing:                     5.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  5.50
                              Total                                                                                        5.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective of the PROP to strengthen the management of selected Pacific Island
                           oceanic and coastal fisheries, and the critical habitats upon which they depend. This will provide the
                           basis for sustainable and increased economic benefits to the region from this resource. More

                                                                        Page 1 of 13
                         specifically, the program will strengthen: (i) the national and regional institutions responsible for the
                         management of the oceanic fisheries; (ii) the local and national institutions responsible for the
                         management of the coastal fisheries; and (iii) the institutions responsible for the conservation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         natural habitats that support them. As such, the program will provide a direct contribution to the
                         Bank’s twin goals to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity in the region, as: (i) strengthened
                         and more sustainable management of the tuna fisheries will increase the size of this resource and the
                         value of access to it for foreign investment, which PICs can capture in the form of public revenues
                         re-invested for poverty reduction and/or foreign direct investment in local value addition to expand
                         job opportunities, depending on the local context; (ii) stakeholder-managed coastal fisheries will be
                         better managed and more productive, enhancing rural livelihoods and food security throughout the
                         region and particularly for the bottom 40 percent of income distribution; and (iii) both of these
                         outcomes will depend on healthy ocean habitats to support fisheries.
                         3. Project Description
                         The following components and activities of the PROP will be financed in the Federated States of
                         Micronesia (FSM):

                         Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries (US$5.0 million IDA)
                         The objective of this component is to help participating Pacific Island countries strengthen the
                         management of the region’s purse seine and long-line tuna fisheries. Towards this objective, the
                         following activities will be supported by the PROP in FSM:

                         1.1 Strengthen the capacity of NORMA to sustainably manage the shared tuna fisheries

                         1.1.1: Disbursements to NORMA for costs linked to indicators for strengthened tuna fisheries
                         management (US$2.575 m)
                         This activity would disburse funds directly to NORMA to reimburse against eligible expenditures for
                         costs linked to indicators for strengthened management of the tuna fisheries. Such eligible
                         expenditures would be tracked and subject to World Bank safeguards. Disbursements will be made
Public Disclosure Copy




                         annually to NORMA (with an advance for the first year upon effectiveness of the project) upon
                         independent third-party verification that the following management measures have been achieved
                         (expenditures for each indicator are priced equally):

                         •       Improving compliance with the VDS for the purse seine tuna fishery:
                         o       The number of days fished in FSM waters does not exceed its annual allocation of fishing
                         vessel days (PAE)
                         o       100% of fishing vessel days are recorded annually according to agreed criteria
                         o       100% of fishing vessel days used and sold are disclosed annually to the PNAO Fisheries
                         Information Management System (FIMS) and other parties
                         •       Expanding the coverage of the VDS or compatible systems for all tuna caught in FSM’s
                         national waters:
                         o       100% of tuna catch within FSM’s national waters that is encompassed within the VDS or a
                         compatible system

                         Additionally, though not linked to disbursements, these expenditures would also support NORMA to
                         increase efficiency and flexibility as appropriate:
                         •       Increasing efficiency and flexibility of the VDS:
                         o       (Yes/no) more flexible measures are applied, such as creating multi-zone and multi-year
                         days, development of competitive VDS marketing arrangements, long-term contracts, creation of


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         secondary markets, etc., that increase the value of a vessel day above the baseline (gradually phased
                         in)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The expenditures reimbursed would support improved fishery sector governance and management
                         arrangements, increased surveillance to enforce fisheries management measures, real-time
                         monitoring of tuna fishing activities through the Vessel Monitoring System (VMS), the National
                         Observer Program, and increased capacity for NORMA to participate in regional and sub-regional
                         fisheries management arrangements. Eligible expenditures would include:
                         •        Fuel and additional costs to support increased fisheries surveillance patrols (both sea and
                         aerial patrols) including training in fisheries surveillance and legislation, and regional coordination/
                         harmonization on surveillance with other PICs, in complement to the funding currently provided by
                         the Governments of FSM and Australia, and from penalties (some of which go into a MCS
                         Revolving Fund) as well as the operational support (aerial patrols, ship-rider agreements, joint
                         exercises) from the governments of Australia, USA, New Zealand and France;
                         •        Training and expanded participation of NORMA staff in fishery industry economic,
                         biological and operational analysis to allow development of negotiating positions with industry and
                         in PNA meetings;
                         •        Continued expansion and enhancement of the National Observer Program by at least 100
                         percent: recruitment of 10 additional observers and 2 de-briefers per year, observer and de-briefer
                         training and work attachments; and
                         •        Policy, legislative and human resource development leading to the establishment of a
                         sanitary competent authority for fish caught in the country’s waters.

                         In terms of fisheries surveillance, the country’s Maritime Police Unit (within the Department of
                         Justice) currently carries out surveillance and enforcement of the country’s fisheries legislation on
                         behalf of NORMA, as well as other surveillance activities (including drug- and people-trafficking)
                         via one coastal search-and-rescue and three ocean-going patrol vessels, two of which have been
                         provided and partially supported by the Government of Australia. The Maritime Police utilize the
                         Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) through connection to the satellite-based vessel monitoring system
Public Disclosure Copy




                         run by FFA as a means of detecting potential infringements, as well as conducting periodic
                         comprehensive patrols and inspections of fishing vessels. Parts of the southern and northern borders
                         of FSM’s exclusive economic zone adjoin high seas areas (some of which are the subject of
                         international agreements which prohibit or control fishing) and these are high-risk areas for
                         infraction.

                         The Maritime Police increasingly conduct joint patrols with neighboring countries under provisions
                         of the Niue Treaty. Additional cooperation arrangements are expected to be developed under Niue
                         Treaty subsidiary arrangements. In addition the Department of Justice is actively promoting sub-
                         regional cooperation among legislators in neighboring countries in order to harmonize legislative
                         approaches, improve information-sharing, develop enforcement capacity and streamline prosecution
                         and judicial processes. Coupled with this is a need for training and capacity-building in fishery legal
                         issues for attorneys, enforcement officers and fishery agency staff.

                         Obstacles to the effectiveness of surveillance activities in FSM include inadequate information and
                         communications technology to enable patrol vessels to communicate with each other and with shore
                         bases in FSM’s four states; inability to track vessels via the International Maritime Organization
                         (IMO) Automated Identification System (AIS); insufficient safety and technical equipment for use in
                         boarding; and inadequate integration of national and international databases on aspects of
                         surveillance and enforcement. Financing of additional sea-days by patrol vessels is also a constraint,

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         although less so than in some other countries.

                         In addition, NORMA is interested in exploring opportunities to purchase aircraft airtime to increase
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aerial surveillance, potentially using small locally-based aircraft normally engaged on inter-island
                         flights. Under such arrangements the importance of surface patrols increases, since this is the primary
                         way in which infringements detected by aerial surveillance are followed up and punitive actions
                         implemented.

                         1.1.2. Goods and services needed for achievement of the disbursement-linked indicators (US$2.425
                         m)
                         Financing will be provided for procurement of specific goods and services needed to meet the
                         disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) for strengthened management of the tuna fisheries. Services
                         will include technical assistance to support a comprehensive review of NORMA’s roles, functions,
                         human and financial resources and organizational structure, and then implementation of any reforms
                         and technical assistance required to improve the Agency’s effectiveness and capacity for governance
                         of the oceanic fisheries sector more broadly. This will be a multi-year institutional strengthening
                         process involving at least the following elements: (i) functional/ organizational review and (if
                         needed) restructuring of NORMA; (ii) economic analysis to assist in adding value to the VDS and in
                         optimizing allocation issues among domestic and bilateral fleets and regional/ sub-regional access
                         arrangements; (iii) operational review to identify improvements and efficiency gains; (iv)
                         formulation and implementation of a human resources development plan - including technical
                         assistance to expand NORMA capacity on targeted issues such as implementation of the
                         recommendations of the PNA VDS Review, implementation of WCPFC obligations, economic
                         analysis, observer management and legal reviews; and Development of an Industry Communications
                         Strategy; and (v) development of an industry Communications Strategy for the sector. In addition,
                         hardware, software and bandwidth expansion to enhance internet access for NORMA will be
                         supported, enabling better utilization of vessel monitoring and fisheries information management
                         systems, and real-time e-reporting from vessels. Furthermore, hardware and software acquisition will
                         be supported to enable for real-time monitoring of vessels by observers. Lastly, equipment will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include information and communication technology for enhanced maritime surveillance and safety.

                         Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries (US$0.3 million IDA)
                         The objective of this component is to support participating countries to sustainably manage defined
                         coastal fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased benefits, i.e. coastal
                         fisheries such as bêche-de-mer (BDM) that (i) can generate export earnings for the country, and/or
                         (ii) support livelihoods, food security and dietary health.

                         Coastal fishery resources are of key importance in supporting livelihoods, food security and dietary
                         health in FSM. However the nature and economic contribution of coastal fisheries varies
                         significantly among the four States, as also do governance and management arrangements. These
                         involve various forms of traditional, local and state control and jurisdiction, with the national
                         government playing a coordinating and facilitating role through the Department of Resources and
                         Development (DRD). Because of the diversity of management arrangements there will be high
                         transaction costs involved in operating independently in four separate states. To ensure that the
                         specific contexts are taken into account with wide stakeholder consultation, this component will be
                         phased in over time, beginning with an initial activity financed from this Grant to support a
                         feasibility and project design. This feasibility and design work will identify areas where subsequent
                         PROP funding can best add value to help coastal communities to sustainably manage defined
                         fisheries and subsequently enhance production. This will be undertaken during the first year of

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         implementation, with identified activities to be undertaken in subsequent years with additional
                         financing. DRD has indicated that the focus should be on the adoption of ecosystem approaches to
                         the management of coastal fisheries in the four states, while acknowledging that the activities in each
Public Disclosure Copy




                         state are likely to be different because of varying resource endowments, exploitation practices and
                         economic potential.

                         Component 3: Sustainable Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats
                         This component aims to help identify revenue streams to sustainably finance the conservation of
                         critical habitats that underpin oceanic and coastal fisheries in the region. Towards this objective, the
                         component will include activities to establish: (i) Pacific Marine Conservation Development
                         Financing Mechanisms to support the growing number of large marine protected areas (MPAs) in the
                         region; and (ii) a pilot Pacific Blue Carbon regional program for small to medium scale fishery
                         habitats. The aim of this component is not to provide sustainable financing for all regionally-
                         significant fisheries habitat conservation efforts, but rather to provide the catalytic upstream finance
                         needed to identify, develop and achieve consensus on the mechanisms to deliver such financing, and
                         then to help secure this financing from other sources, for example from the GEF, international
                         foundations, etc. Thus the financing from this component aims to leverage significant additional
                         finance to the region for conservation of critical fishery habitats. This component also provides
                         climate c hange co-benefits by supporting mitigation, in the form of conservation of vegetated
                         coastal habitats that sequester significant amounts of carbon. This component will be implemented at
                         the regional level.

                         Component 4: Regional Coordination, Implementation Support, Training and Monitoring and
                         Evaluation (US$0.2 m IDA)
                         The objective of this component is to provide regional coordination, implementation support and
                         program management, to ensure a coherent approach to program implementation and wide
                         dissemination of results and lessons learned; as well as regional and national implementation support
                         and training as needed for the program to achieve its objectives. Towards this objective, this
                         component would include support for national program management, monitoring and evaluation, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         well as collaboration with the regional program support unit located within FFA (see Annex 7).

                         4.1 National program management, monitoring and evaluation (US$0.2 m)
                         This includes the costs of additional staff needed for NORMA to manage the national designated
                         account for the PROP, with support from FFA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         FSM comprises four semi-autonomous states (Chuuk, Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap) which together
                         have a total land area of around 700 square km, and a population of just over 100,000 persons. FSM
                         has a very large exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of over 2.8 million square kilometers, and tuna
                         fisheries provide both a key source of revenue.

                         FSM is a home to a comprehensive Protected Areas Network (PAN), with the first site to become
                         part of Palau’s PAN is Lake Ngardok, which supplies vital drinking water to the nation’s capital,
                         Melekeok State, and is the largest natural lake in all of Micronesia. Communities from the island of
                         Yap in the Federated States of Micronesia created the Nimpal Channel Marine Conservation Area
                         (MCA).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         Valerie Hickey (GENDR)
                         Olha Krushelnytska (GENDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The aim of the project is to help improve
                         BP 4.01                                      environmental and resource quality in FSM in
                                                                      order to increase the economic benefits generated
                                                                      by the goods and services from healthy ocean
                                                                      ecosystems. As such, the overall impact of the
                                                                      project is expected to be highly positive and none
                                                                      of the eligible investments include activities that
                                                                      would generate significant risk or irreversible
                                                                      adverse impacts in the coastal or oceans fisheries
                                                                      targeted by the program. However, some
                                                                      investments under Components 1 and 2 may
                                                                      generate minor to moderate site specific and time
                                                                      bound adverse environmental impacts that can be
                                                                      readily mitigated through standard mitigation
                                                                      measures, when screened properly.

                                                                      Additionally, Component 3 (Sustainable
                                                                      Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery
                                                                      Habitats) might result in creation of the Marine
                                                                      Protected Areas (MPAs), in which case any
                                                                      potential access restrictions will be addressed
                                                                      through a detailed Process Framework (Annex E).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The project also envisages TA for sustainable
                                                                      financing and potential of protected areas, which
                                                                      may lead to potential minor environmental impact
                                                                      downstream. The Interim Guidelines on the
                                                                      Application of Safeguard Policies to TA
                                                                      Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and TFs
                                                                      Administered by the Bank is applied. Mechanism
                                                                      for administering safeguards in TA activities will
                                                                      include integration of safeguard policy
                                                                      requirements into the Terms of Reference of
                                                                      studies. As such, the safeguard documentation
                                                                      prepared for the project applies equally to the TA
                                                                      component(s) and Terms of References for the
                                                                      TA activities will be approved by the Bank to
                                                                      ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the
                                                                      Bank safeguard policies.

                                                                      At this stage in project design, the specific
                                                                      investments that may generate minor to moderate



                                                              Page 6 of 13
                                                                     adverse impacts include: small scale
                                                                     infrastructure works to allow for inspection of
                                                                     fish catch at landing sites and restocking of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     beche-de-mer and establishment of the associated
                                                                     small scale drying facilities. Potential adverse
                                                                     impacts will be limited to waste management,
                                                                     construction noise, and health and safety of
                                                                     workers.

                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide
                                                                     investments that may generate any adverse
                                                                     environmental impact. Screening form will be
                                                                     used to screen for environmental and social
                                                                     impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Project activities will not involve significant loss
                                                                     or degradation of natural habitats. Most of the
                                                                     project activities will be in the marine areas
                                                                     (coastal and ocean) of the FSM which are known
                                                                     sites rich in biodiversity. All program activities
                                                                     are designed to enhance positive and sustainable
                                                                     returns to these important habitats.

                                                                     The Program level ESMF contains measures to
                                                                     properly manage the risk of any unforeseen
                                                                     adverse environmental impact on natural habitats,
                                                                     including critical natural habitats, as well as
                                                                     measures to enhance the program's positive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     environmental outcomes.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           OP4.36 was triggered for the whole Pacific
                                                                     Islands Regional Oceanscape Program, as
                                                                     component 3 will include the technical assistance,
                                                                     scientific and survey expertise, and legal and
                                                                     regulatory support in order to enable participating
                                                                     countries to pilot trials to assess their blue carbon
                                                                     potential, limitations and opportunities and
                                                                     participate in blue carbon markets, and would
                                                                     create conservation incentives for coastal
                                                                     communities to conserve the mangrove habitats,
                                                                     the policy is triggered. Specific sites and activities
                                                                     in FSM, if any, will be identified during the
                                                                     project implementation.

                                                                     The program level ESMF includes a screening
                                                                     form to ensure that the negative impacts on
                                                                     mangrove forests of any downstream activities
                                                                     under Component 3 are addressed, and any


                                                             Page 7 of 13
                                                                         positive impacts are enhanced. TOR for the
                                                                         studies proposed under sub-component 3 will
                                                                         integrate policy requirements of OP 4.36
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
                                                                         dispose of pesticides, including bactericides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project will not involve any major civil
                         BP 4.11                                         works. Small scale infrastructure works are
                                                                         foreseen to allow for inspection of fish catch at
                                                                         landing sites and restocking of beche-de-mer and
                                                                         establishment of the associated small scale drying
                                                                         facilities. Given the small scale works involved,
                                                                         the policy is not expected to be triggered. A
                                                                         chance finds procedure is included in the ESMF
                                                                         and EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           OP4.10 was triggered for the whole Pacific
                                                                         Islands Regional Oceanscape Program - series of
                                                                         projects, which is designed to include any of the
                                                                         11 PICs who are member countries of the World
                                                                         Bank and are eligible to participate upon their
                                                                         readiness. Some of the countries in PICs have
                                                                         indigenous peoples.

                                                                         However, in FSM this policy has not been
                                                                         triggered, as according to the World Bank
                                                                         assessment there are no indigenous people in the
                                                                         country.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Project activities may require small-scale coastal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                            land acquisition. It is expected that market-based
                                                                         or voluntary donation will be the common
                                                                         approach. Any voluntary land donations will meet
                                                                         the World Bank requirements through the
                                                                         application of the Voluntary Land Donation
                                                                         Protocol appended to the ESMF in Annex D.

                                                                         Although it is considered unlikely, certain
                                                                         program activities may involve the involuntary
                                                                         acquisition of land and/or removal of assets.
                                                                         Accordingly, the policy will be triggered and a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF, presented
                                                                         in Annex C) has been prepared. Subsequently,
                                                                         Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans will
                                                                         ensure that all affected persons are compensated
                                                                         for involuntary acquisition of land and/or removal
                                                                         of assets at full replacement cost.
                                                                         In case of downstream establishment of the
                                                                         MPAs, which could potentially restrict access to



                                                                 Page 8 of 13
                                                                                resources, IAs will select appropriate safeguard
                                                                                instrument(s) according to the responsibilities
                                                                                defined in the ESMF (and in particular the Annex
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                on Process Framework).

                                                                                To address potential restriction of access to
                                                                                resources, a Process Framework (PF) has been
                                                                                prepared in compliance with requirements stated
                                                                                in OP 4.12 (See Annex E of the ESMF).
                                                                                Neither this project nor the possible downstream
                                                                                investments from project’s TA will involve
                                                                                building dams nor depend on an existing dam
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              Neither this project nor the possible downstream
                                                                                investments from project’s TA will involve
                                                                                building dams nor depend on an existing dam.
                            Projects on International           No              Following discussion with LEGEN and the RSA,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                it was agreed that there will be no impacts from
                                                                                this project or its possible downstream
                                                                                investments on international waterways as
                                                                                described under OP 7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Any project activities in areas which may be
                            7.60                                                disputed will be declared ineligible and not
                                                                                included in the project.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall impact of the project is expected to be highly positive and none of the investments
                              include activities that would generate significant risk or irreversible adverse environmental or
                              social impacts.

                             The project includes investments for both ‘physical’ goods and services, as well as ‘soft’ activities
                             such as technical assistance. Most of the physical investments would be made at the national level,
                             while ‘soft’ activities would be implemented at both the national and regional level.

                             Examples of the type of activities (salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                             analysis), which have the potential to incur adverse environmental or social impacts are as follows:
                             - Component 2, Sub-component 2 may include support to restock beche-de-mer if it is deemed a
                             viable method to sustainably restore stocks. If so, hatchery facilities based on native brood stock
                             would be used. Support would include supplying fishers with juveniles to restock near shore
                             habitats. This activity will not involve introduction of non-native species nor involve the purchase,
                             distribution, use or disposal of bactericides during implementation. However, investments in the
                             area of small enterprise development associated with bêche-de-mer valued added processing may
                             include installation of small scale civil works (e.g., solar dryers) for drying.
                             - Component 3 investments related to the TA for sustainable financing of MPAs, and potentially


                                                                        Page 9 of 13
                          blue carbon. Activities under Component 3 Subcomponent 1 will support research to assess the
                          unique physical and ecological aspects of the MPAs that would generate ecosystem services (like
                          spawning or feeding grounds for tuna which migrate beyond EEZs of host nations) and that could
Public Disclosure Copy




                          be incorporated into a system of payment for environmental services. Subcomponent 2 will
                          include TA in order to assess blue carbon potential and participate in blue carbon markets, and will
                          help identify potential blue carbon sites. Small scale infrastructure works are not expected to be
                          financed by the project.

                           The scale and likelihood of adverse impacts arising from these activities is limited, and the types
                           of mitigation activities well-known and proven. As such, the project is found to be Category B
                           interventions.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential impacts of the project will be identified during the preparation of the project
                           activities for FSM. The ESMF provides guidance for the project implementation agencies on the
                           preparation of appropriate safeguard instruments to respond to the potential impacts found during
                           the preparation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           These will be considered within the project in consultation with all affected stakeholders and
                           knowledgeable and interested peoples.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The program-level ESMF was prepared under the PROP to outline the process by which potential
                           adverse impacts will be identified and robust instruments prepared as part of each project.

                          Program implementation will involve a single agency as the national focal point entity and one or
Public Disclosure Copy




                          two regional agencies involved in implementing regional activities and overall program
                          coordination and monitoring. These include:
                          •       National Oceanic Resource Management Authority (NORMA) in Federated States of
                          Micronesia
                          •       Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA)
                          •       The Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) in regard to coordination and monitoring of
                          regionally executed activities.

                          FFA, representing its member countries participating in the PROP, has experience with World
                          Bank safeguards because of the link to IDA-financed operations. NORMA has a general
                          knowledge on bank safeguard policies as it was briefed on the PROP safeguard requirements
                          during the preparation missions. NORMA has an adequate capacity, with a legal expert able to
                          advice on bank’s safeguard policies. During the project implementation, NORMA will hire a
                          PROP Project Coordination, who will also be supported by the FFA Regional Support Unit.

                          The World Bank will provide necessary training and development of staff to the Project
                          implementing agency in the first year of the implementation to build its capacity and provide
                          implementation support during the actual determination of the range of activities to be included in
                          the “menu” of country’s support.



                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA)
                           Activities in Bank- Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank will apply for
                           the TA provided by the project. Accordingly, Terms of References for the TA activities will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           approved by the Bank to ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the Bank safeguard policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESMF requires an inclusive, participatory community needs assessment process, screening
                           criteria, and forms to document broad community support and consensus on priority subprojects.
                           Subproject Consultation and Action Plans will be developed in the early part of implementation.
                           Community consultations will be facilitated and documented by suitably qualified personnel in the
                           Project Management Unit. Ongoing monitoring and community consultations by such personnel
                           will assess whether broad community support is maintained during implementation.

                           Project stakeholders include both men and women from affected communities whose livelihoods
                           are implicated and/or who depend on migratory fisheries; the private sector (fishing industry from
                           harvesting through to value chains / processing and investment); the public sector (national
                           ministries, regulatory and trade promotion authorities); and international bodies including regional
                           fishery bodies. The numbers and specificity of stakeholders can only be determined once the
                           precise nature and location of the activities under each project are identified.

                           Draft ESMF was first circulated among all implementation agencies on July 28, 2014 for review.
                           Subsequent consultations on the Environmental and Social safeguard policies where conducted on
                           August 15, 2014 in Majuro, RMI with representatives from the fisheries agencies of FSM
                           (NORMA), RMI (MIMRA), Solomon Islands (MFMR) and Tuvalu (TFD), as well as the
                           representatives from the FFA, PNAO and SPC. At this meeting, NORMA, MIMRA, MFMR, TFD
                           and FFA (implementing agencies) agreed on the process of preparing and incorporating safeguard
                           instruments in the implementation arrangements. After the consultations, countries worked with
                           the FFA and agreed on the final version of the ESMF, which was formally submitted to the Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on September 23, 2014 by the FFA on behalf of all IAs. In addition to the regional consultation in
                           RMI, national consultations were held in Tuvalu and Solomon Islands – to ensure stakeholder
                           awareness and feedback in regard to the specific country context within the Component 2 (which
                           is not applicable to FSM). Consultation minutes are attached in the ESMF.

                           ESMF Disclosure: ESMF was disclosed on October 23, 2014 and is available through the World
                           Bank website (http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/docsearch?query=E4664), as well as
                           through the website of the FFA.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                23-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                               23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                  23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                  23-Oct-2014
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of program-level ESMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?

                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: John Virdin
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Josefo Tuyor (RSA)                             Date: 19-Nov-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Christophe Crepin (PMGR)                       Date: 19-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
