                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA4410
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P133261
                            Project Name:      Guizhou Rural Development Project (P133261)
                            Task Team          Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Jun-2014                       Estimated   29-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Crops (30%), Animal production (20%), Irrigation and drainage (20%), Agro-
                                              industry, marketing, and trade (20%), Agricultural extensi on and research (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     140.11           Total Bank Financing:                100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 40.11
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   100.00
                              Total                                                                                   140.11
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to demonstrate a model for agricultural sector restructuring
                           and modernization, improved organizational arrangements, and strengthened public service delivery
                           in the Project Counties of Guizhou Province.



                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be implemented over a period of five years. The project will include four
                         components, as described below:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Modernization of Agricultural Key Commodity Value Chains. This component will
                         support: (a) the development or improvement of value chains for selected agricultural commodities
                         and products with local comparative advantage (key commodities); (b) the establishment of new
                         project farmer cooperatives or the improvement of existing cooperatives producer cooperation
                         arrangements; and (c) the strengthening of forward and backward marketing linkages. The specific
                         activities to be supported under this component are arranged along the following five sub-
                         components:

                         a) Farmer Cooperative Development, supporting the construction of management offices and small
                         buildings for project farmer cooperatives and procurement of basic office furniture and office
                         equipment, including computers, printers, copy machines, software, and office furniture.

                         b) Farmer Cooperative Development Fund (CDF), providing financing support to newly or existing
                         project farmer cooperatives for cooperative-level investments in nurseries, advanced breeding
                         stations, cooperative-level production facilities and equipment for improved seed production, storage
                         facilities for agricultural produce, small scale pre-processing and processing facilities, and other
                         small-scale cooperative infrastructure, goods, and services, as well as annual farm inputs, such as
                         seeds and fertilizer.

                         c) Value Addition, providing co-financing support to cooperating agro-enterprises for investments in
                         facilities, equipment and technical services for the commercial processing, post-harvest handling,
                         storage and packaging of agricultural products based produced by farmer cooperatives on agreed
                         cooperation agreements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         d) Market Exploration and Development, supporting investments in marketing studies, product
                         promotion, up-grading of quality standards and food safety monitoring, certification, labelling and
                         brand naming as well as investments for the construction of product markets.

                         e) Risk Prevention and Mitigation, supporting expenditures to finance agricultural crop insurance
                         fees for poor households for selected crops with the purpose to pilot crop- and livestock insurance
                         schemes.

                         Component 2: Public Infrastructure and Services, providing investment support for (i) the
                         construction of production road infrastructure, such as off-grade access roads to village production
                         areas or processing and marketing facilities, tractor roads, field tracks, and foot paths; (ii)
                         construction of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, land preparation and terracing; (iii)
                         establishment of communications and procurement of information infrastructure and equipment; (iv)
                         construction of public market facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure and goods
                         necessary to facilitate and complement investments under Component 1. The component would also
                         finance public services for project cooperatives, including food safety testing and control through
                         government entities, public extension and training services, as well as marketing systems, agriculture
                         research, and technology transfer provided by government and private entities. The component
                         would also finance advisory services for project cooperatives, including salaries, training, and related
                         cost of cooperative advisors.


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         Component 3: Training and Capacity Building, providing financing for farmer technical training and
                         cooperative management training, expenditures for extension technicians and technical services for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparing training materials, including for ethnic minority groups and women, cooperative advisor
                         support, review and improvement of investment proposals for key commodity value chains,
                         safeguards awareness and implementation training, and others.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, supporting the county, prefecture
                         and provincial PMOs with office equipment, vehicle rental fees, training, domestic and international
                         training, and provide incremental operating funds for regular supervision, monitoring and evaluation,
                         acceptance checks, and for safeguards implementation supervision and monitoring. In addition, the
                         component would finance two subject studies, including a study over poverty reduction, agriculture
                         development, rural sectors in poor areas, and a study on how to improve the investment environment,
                         governance, and fair benefit sharing for cooperatives and enterprises in project areas.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guizhou Province is located in southwest China. About 80 percent of land area of Guizhou Province
                         belongs to the limestone and karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains. These areas are
                         characterized by relatively fertile but often shallow soils and are subject to severe water and soil
                         erosion and management problems. The unique geographic conditions and the limited availability of
                         productive farmland, combined with underdeveloped infrastructure, pose specific challenges to
                         agricultural development and environmental management. The project would be implemented in the
                         karst areas of the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains, northeast and northwest of the province
                         respectively, involving 11 counties in the prefectures/ municipalities of Bijie, Zunyi and Tongren.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Xin Ren (EASCS)
                         Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project is expected to bring about positive
                          BP 4.01                                            social and environmental benefits to the poor
                                                                             rural area of Guizhou Province. Two components
                                                                             will involve activities that may have adverse
                                                                             environmental impacts. Component 1 will
                                                                             support agricultural activities and agro-product
                                                                             processing. Component 2 will finance
                                                                             investments in rural infrastructure (access roads
                                                                             and tracks, irrigation, public market facilities etc),
                                                                             necessary for Component 1. These potential
                                                                             negative impacts can be avoided and/ or mitigated
                                                                             through appropriate environmental management
                                                                             measures.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             Agriculture-related activities would take place on
                                                                             existing household farmland and no expansion
                                                                             into fragile mountain areas is foreseen. Through
                                                                             the EA screening process, a number of national


                                                                     Page 3 of 11
                                                                         and provincial level natural reserves have been
                                                                         identified in the vicinity of the project area.
                                                                         Improved agricultural practices and expected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         income increases for farmers from the project will
                                                                         reduce the current pressure of encroaching. Some
                                                                         project activities, such as semi-grazing of some
                                                                         animals or rural infrastructure construction, might
                                                                         affect these natural habitats negatively because of
                                                                         their proximity, if not managed properly. OP4.04
                                                                         is therefore applicable to highlight the importance
                                                                         of eco-system protection among the project
                                                                         entities during implementation and ensure
                                                                         appropriate mitigation or protective activities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            OP/BP4.36 is not applicable. The project will not
                                                                         impact any forest ecosystems. All agricultural
                                                                         activities will take place on existing farmland.
                                                                         Rural road investments will include primarily the
                                                                         rehabilitation and improvement of existing roads.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Due to the expansion, intensification and
                                                                         diversification of agricultural activities under the
                                                                         project, changes in the application of pesticides
                                                                         for pest and disease control are foreseen. A Pest
                                                                         Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared
                                                                         centered around the principals of integrated pest
                                                                         management (IPM).
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            Surveys conducted during the EA process verified
                         BP 4.11                                         that none of the project activities will be in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         vicinity of or affect physical cultural resources, as
                                                                         defined by this OP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The social assessment identified ethnic minority
                                                                         communities of the Miao, Yi, Tujia, and Gelao in
                                                                         9 counties, 39 townships and 138 administrative
                                                                         villages. The assessment also identified
                                                                         indications of higher vulnerability in ethnic
                                                                         minority villages. An Ethnic Minority
                                                                         Development Plan was developed for all ethnic
                                                                         minority villages that incorporates the
                                                                         recommendations of the social assessment on
                                                                         how to address vulnerability and allow for full
                                                                         and effective project participation of ethnic
                                                                         minorities in the project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           No involuntary resettlement is expected under the
                         4.12                                            project. The project will not be part of any
                                                                         ecological resettlement programs. The project
                                                                         will involve some small-scale land acquisition for
                                                                         civil works at the village level that will be built



                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                                                                 on existing available land. Any needed land
                                                                                 adjustments will be coordinated and agreed at the
                                                                                 village-level and will be voluntary. In cases
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 where infrastructure construction extends beyond
                                                                                 individual villages and where the need for land
                                                                                 acquisition arises, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                 Framework (RFP) will apply and guide the
                                                                                 process. The RPF will also apply to enterprises
                                                                                 participating in the project that might acquire land
                                                                                 for the implementation of project-related
                                                                                 activities. The RPF provides the principles and
                                                                                 procedures for land acquisition in the project,
                                                                                 describes provisions for compensation and
                                                                                 mitigation measures of any negative impact from
                                                                                 land acquisition, includes a grievance redress
                                                                                 mechanism, and sets up M&E and institutional
                                                                                 arrangements in the event of land acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The project will support only small irrigation
                                                                                 facilities such a water tanks or small irrigation
                                                                                 ditches at the farm level. The project will not
                                                                                 involve any dam construction.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Environmental Impact Assessment describes baseline conditions and assesses the potential
                              impacts of all major types of project activities. The Environmental Assessment confirms that the
                              project is expected to generate positive environmental benefits in the project areas. Two
                              components will involve activities that may have adverse environmental impacts that require
                              mitigation. Component 1 will support agricultural production activities and agro-products
                              processing. Component 2 will finance investments in rural infrastructure, including the
                              construction of access roads and fields tracks, market facilities, irrigation infrastructure, public
                              market facilities. Most of these activities are small scale and dispersed over the project areas. Road
                              construction will primarily involve upgrading of existing roads. The project does not impact on
                              forests or protected areas. Adverse impacts on the environment are expected to be moderate. Some
                              agro-product processing, e.g. potato starch processing, walnut oil production, fertilizer production
                              from manure and slaughter house operation, may be water use and pollution intensive during their
                              operation, if managed improperly. The Environmental Assessment confirms that any negative
                              environmental impacts resulting from these activities can be mitigated. The expansion,
                              intensification and diversification of agricultural activities will likely result in increases in the
                              application of pesticides for pest and disease control. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been


                                                                         Page 5 of 11
                         prepared, focusing on the principles of integrated pest management (IPM). An Environmental
                         Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared that specifies the proposed mitigation measures,
                         related training and monitoring, as well as the supervision arrangements for environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management.

                         Although an EMp has been prepared during project preparation, during project implementation,
                         when additional information on the various cooperatives and enterprises sub-investments and
                         related infrastructure become available the PMOs will develop site specific measures to be
                         included in the EMP for sub-investments, subject to Bank review in order to address potential site
                         specific impacts.

                         During project implementation, the task team will continuously work the project management
                         offices to improve the site-specific mitigation measures in the EMP as the cooperative-level and
                         enterprise investment plans are being developed.

                         The Social Assessment identified four areas of opportunities to maximize positive project impact.
                         The improvement of local infrastructure will have a positive impact and this impact can be
                         maximized through careful identification of infrastructure that both serve agricultural production
                         needs and the needs of local communities. Through the formalization of cooperatives, the
                         individual and collective self-development capacity of rural households will be enhanced. This
                         will take place if training activities are actual capacity-building opportunities and not only skill
                         development programs, and if a broad number of households in the project villages actively
                         participate in the development of the local cooperative. The project is also an opportunity to
                         reinforce management and other entrepreneur skills among cooperative investors. This, together
                         with new market facilities, will allow enhanced and more sustainable market access for local
                         produce as well as easier purchases of agricultural inputs and equipment. The Chinese domestic
                         feasibility study also includes a social assessment section that confirms the importance of rural
                         infrastructure and capacity building to generate positive social project impacts. No potential large
                         scale or risk of significantly irreversible negative social impact was identified through project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP4.12. No involuntary resettlement is expected under the project. The
                         project is not located in areas of ecological resettlement and not supporting current ecological
                         resettlement program. The project also does not support farmland consolidation or the acquisition
                         for farmland by agro-enterprises. The project will involve some small-scale land acquisition for
                         civil works at the village level that will be built on existing available land. Any needed land
                         adjustments will be coordinated and agreed at the village-level and will be voluntary. In cases
                         where infrastructure construction extends beyond individual villages and where the need for land
                         acquisition arises, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) will apply and guide the process. The
                         RPF will also apply to enterprises participating in the project that might acquire land for the
                         implementation of project-related activities, such a civil works construction. The RPF provides the
                         principles and procedures for land acquisition in the project, describes provisions for
                         compensation and mitigation measures of any negative impact from land acquisition, includes a
                         grievance redress mechanism, and sets up monitoring & evaluation as well as institutional
                         arrangements in the event of land acquisition. The RPF has been prepared in compliance with the
                         current Chinese legal and policy framework for land acquisition and with the World Bank’s Policy
                         on Involuntary Resettlement (OP4.12).

                         Indigenous Peoples OP4.10: Four ethnic groups, the Miao, Yi, Tujia and Gelao, have rural

                                                                   Page 6 of 11
                           communities in the project area, as identified by the social assessment. These meet the
                           characteristics of indigenous peoples under the operational policy. An Ethnic Minority
                           Development Plan (EMDP) has been prepared to enable ethnic minorities to fully participate in,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and benefit from, the project and to ensure the protection of their interests and rights in land and
                           resources. Key elements of the EMDP include: (a) the recruitment of qualified cooperative
                           facilitators and trainers that are familiar with local cultures and speak local languages in villages
                           where a language gap is present; (b) an enhanced mobilization and participation process at village
                           community level; (c) a reinforced capacity building program with a related budget; and (d) a
                           required minimum proportion of ethnic minority people among cooperative members, cooperative
                           project workgroups and training course participants. Assistance or participation of the Ethnic
                           Minority Affairs Commissions at various levels will be invited as and when required, and a
                           grievance mechanism has been established.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Over-grazing can lead to deterioration of grassland, soil erosion and even exacerbate stony
                           desertification which is already widespread in part of Guizhou Province. Animal waste
                           management is another concern related to husbandry due to considerable non-point pollution from
                           improper handling of manure and over expansion of husbandry that exceed the capacity of the land
                           to absorb manure as nutrient. Overuse of fertilizer and pesticides, common in rural China, can lead
                           to water and soil contamination and eutrophication in the long term. The project will bring in new
                           opportunities for rural households to participate in farmer cooperatives or other community-based
                           producer organizations, access to improved agricultural production technologies, and improved
                           agricultural infrastructure and public services, and these are expected to have positive impacts on
                           the environment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project design alternatives were analyzed in the Environmental Assessment, including a without-
                           project scenario, to avoid and minimize adverse impacts from the outset. Different methods of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           manure treatment that are suitable for both household level (simple piling with soil cover versus
                           biogas production) and medium scale husbandry (larger biogas, septic tank, anaerobic digestion,
                           composting or conversion of manure to fertilizer) were compared. Conventional planting and pest
                           control practice were also compared respectively. Options of technical designs and specific
                           location selection of civil works were carefully considered and compared to avoid acquiring land.
                           As confirmed by the Environmental Assessment, all planned civil works would be built either on
                           existing state land or in project villages where land will be voluntarily provided by villages.
                           Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic, as well as
                           environmental and social factors, which helped to minimize the needs for additional land
                           acquisition.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment. The Guizhou Provincial Office of Poverty Reduction and Development will serve as
                           the Project Management Office (PMO) with its branches in counties as County PMOs. It has
                           previous experience with Bank projects beginning in the mid-1990s. Staff turnover and changes
                           have affected PMO capacity and capacity in environmental management and safeguards
                           supervision is expected to be relatively weak. Capacity building has been an integral part of the
                           project preparation process to address environmental safeguard issues. The Borrower has engaged
                           a qualified institute (Guizhou Provincial Academy of Environmental Science) to carry out the EA,


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                           based on which the EMP has been developed to mitigate any adverse impacts. Agricultural experts
                           at county and provincial level have been engaged to develop the PMO. To ensure the EMP and
                           PMP implementation, institutional arrangement and responsibility of each party for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation and supervision are specified. The EMP and PMP both include a budgeted
                           training program and monitoring plan. During project implementation, the task team will
                           continuously work the project management offices to improve the site-specific mitigation
                           measures in the EMP as the cooperative-level and enterprise investment plans are being
                           developed.

                           Social. The PMO has hired a professional consulting institute to conduct a social assessment
                           which included extensive surveys and consultations through questionnaires, interviews and group
                           discussions. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) and an Ethnic Minority Development Plan
                           were prepared to guide future possible land acquisition and ensure that the needs and interests of
                           ethnic minorities are properly addressed in the project design and implementation. The RPF
                           provides the principles and procedures for potential land acquisition in the project, describes the
                           provisions for compensation and mitigation measures of any negative impacts from land
                           acquisition, includes a grievance redress mechanism, monitoring and evaluation and respective
                           institutional arrangements for implementing land acquisition. The EMDP include key mitigation
                           measures such as: (a) the recruitment of qualified cooperative advisors and trainers, who speak
                           local languages, and the preparation of culturally appropriate materials for training; (b) training
                           programs for PMO staff on culturally appropriate interaction and training to ethnic minorities; (c)
                           training ethnic minority in agricultural production and resource development where they have
                           strengths, avoiding or tackling market risks of their products or livelihoods; (d) assistance or
                           participation of the Ethnic Minority Affairs Commissions at various levels, as and when required;
                           (d) provision of budgets and designated staff in the PMO to implement the EMDP, including
                           regular monitoring and evaluation, and reporting of EMDP implementation

                           The Guizhou Provincial PMO will have overall responsibility to coordinate and oversee the RPF
                           and EMDP implementation, including management and supervision, training and capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                           building, and preparation of project progress report based on the reports and monitoring
                           information from each project county, etc. Each county PMO will take respective responsibility
                           for specific implementation of RPF and EMDP as required, including hiring qualified social/
                           resettlement experts for social and resettlement monitoring, supervising implementation of the
                           mitigation measures together with related local authorizes and stakeholders, promoting good
                           practice of resettlement and social development. Each PMO at provincial and project county level
                           will assign a dedicated social staff to coordinate social safeguards work, together with related local
                           government departments in charge of local land requisition.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A full social assessment was undertaken by a specialized research institution during project
                           preparation. A project stakeholder analysis was completed during the social assessment that
                           demonstrated that all primary stakeholder categories have a positive stake in the project. They
                           share an interest in the development of cooperatives and in the improvement of agricultural skills
                           among farmers, and rural infrastructure improvement is a priority for all of them. Rural
                           households see a need to development more formal cooperatives and expect that such cooperatives
                           will help reduce market risks. Members of existing cooperatives plan to invest into the
                           development of their cooperative. They are also interested in more formal cooperatives as well as
                           in learning from other cooperatives. Agribusinesses view cooperatives as a means to reduce their


                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                           risks and move into processing, and individual businesses other than cooperative investors are
                           interested in linking up with cooperatives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During the social assessment process, field visits took place in January 2014 in each of the 11
                           project counties, with an average of 4 days per county. A quantitative survey with 1,013
                           respondents was combined with close to 100 focus group discussions in project villages and
                           around 400 interviews with households and local cadres. The social assessment included
                           consultations with households in 49 villages or 20 percent of all project villages. The social
                           assessment successfully involved women and ethnic minority people. Women account for 47
                           percent of survey respondents and half of focus group discussions have been held with women
                           groups, while 23 percent of the project’s ethnic minority villages have been covered. In addition to
                           the social assessment, the project’s domestic feasibility report includes a summary social impact
                           assessment section. The World Bank task team also undertook a screening of risks and
                           opportunities through a series of stakeholder interviews in the project area.

                           The Environmental and Social Assessment report and safeguards instruments have been disclosed
                           locally (in Chinese language) and through the World Bank Infoshop (in English language).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        28-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              22-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              18-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              18-May-2014
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        28-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Jun-2014



                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            28-May-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 26-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Iain G. Shuker (SM)                               Date: 27-Jun-2014




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
