                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5886
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                              Project ID:    P129647
                            Project Name:      Peru Strengthening Sustainable Management of the Guano Islands, Isles and
                                               Capes National Reserve System Project (P129647)
                            Task Team          Christian Albert Peter
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       21-Oct-2013                          Estimated   05-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEN                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (60%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Other
                                              environment and natural resources management (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      15.92           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         5.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          8.92
                              GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
                                                                                                                           2.00
                              (KFW)
                              Total                                                                                       15.92
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The project’s global environmental objective is to improve the overall management of marine and
                         coastal ecosystems of the Guano Islands, Islets, and Capes National Reserve System of Peru
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (RNSIIPG) and protect its biological diversity in representative pilot sites.

                         The Project Development Objective is to improve the management effectiveness of the RNSIIPG by:
                         (i) securing sustainable financing through the establishment and operation of an endowment fund and
                         other sources of revenue; (ii) developing socially viable biodiversity management models; and (iii)
                         building stakeholder capacity and scientific foundations, through training and adequately assessing
                         and monitoring biodiversity and ecosystems dynamics.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will be funded by the Global Environment Facility (GEF) with a US$8.92 million grant.
                         The government of Peru will provide an additional in-kind contribution of US$5 million through
                         SERNANP. The German Development Bank (KfW) will provide US$2 million from a pre-existing
                         debt-for-nature swap to match an endowment fund to be established as part of the project.
                         Additionally, KfW has committed with the government of Peru a grant of €10 million that will serve
                         as parallel financing for the project, and will also support the financing of marine and coastal
                         protected areas with a special emphasis in RNSIIPG. No allocation from this grant has been included
                         in the project, as the preparation of the feasibility study for the grant has not yet begun. Specific
                         cooperative measures and their corresponding financial arrangements will be identified once the
                         feasibility study is completed.

                         The project will have four components: (1) institutional strengthening; (2) collaborative regional
                         management; (3) monitoring and evaluation; and (4) project management.
                         Component 1: Institutional strengthening. Total amount: US$6,906,670; GEF: US$3,396,670;
                         SERNANP: US$1,510,000; KfW matching fund towards endowment fund: US$2,000,000.
                         This component will build capacity at SERNANP and other institutions involved in the management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of marine and coastal resources. Target interventions will include (a) development and
                         implementation of strategically selected planning and management instruments; (b) development and
                         implementation of stakeholder training plans in key knowledge and skill areas; (c) implementation of
                         infrastructure, staffing, and support systems in selected pilot areas (including a systemwide database
                         for monitoring biodiversity); and (d) development and implementation of financial sustainability
                         mechanisms to finance recurrent management costs and ensure the long-term sustainability of
                         interventions after project end.

                         Component 2: Collaborative regional management. Total amount: US$4,216,000; GEF: US
                         $4,000,000; SERNANP: US$216,000.
                         The project will develop socially viable marine management models through locally implemented
                         collaborative subprojects in 10 representative pilot sites selected by SERNANP and local
                         stakeholders during project design. These subprojects will cover a representative range of activities,
                         including artisanal fisheries, tourism, research, and education. Subproject implementation will build
                         on the model of the community-based Program for Sustainable Economic Activities (Programa de
                         Actividades Económicas Sostenibles, PAES), first devised for the GEF-World Bank project on
                         Participatory Management of Protected Areas (Gestión Participativa de ?reas Naturales Protegidas,
                         GPAN) and then refined for the ongoing GEF-World Bank project on Strengthening Biodiversity
                         Conservation through the National Program for Natural Protected Areas (Programa Nacional de
                         ?reas Naturales Protegidas, PRONANP). Subprojects will include their own individual and specific


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         monitoring and evaluation systems as part of the project’s overall performance monitoring and
                         evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Monitoring and evaluation. Total amount: US$4,375,080; GEF: US$1,101,080;
                         SERNANP: US$3,274,000.
                         Project monitoring and evaluation will be carried out at four levels: (a) biodiversity monitoring, by
                         establishing an ecological baseline in key pilot sites and a biodiversity monitoring and evaluation
                         system; (b) monitoring of management effectiveness of the reserve following guidelines established
                         in the GEF-World Bank Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT), using a modified METT
                         designed during project preparation; (c) monitoring and evaluation of collaborative subprojects,
                         under mechanisms established within each subproject; and, (d) safeguards, including through
                         financial and administrative monitoring.

                         Component 4: Project management. Total amount: US$424,888; GEF: US$424,888.
                         Project management will be implemented, monitored, and evaluated by a dedicated project
                         coordination team (PCT) under the supervision of SERNANP, who will be the project’s technical
                         and operational executing agency. PCT will coordinate with other project partners (including
                         IMARPE, AGRO RURAL, and DICAPI) and subproject executing entities. PCT staff, including the
                         team coordinator, procurement specialist, and administrative assistants, will share their costs pro rata
                         according to their participation in other project components. The Peruvian Trust Fund for National
                         Parks and Protected Areas (Fondo de Promoción para las Areas Naturales Protegidas del Perú,
                         PROFONANPE), will maintain the fiduciary responsibility for the project, providing disbursements,
                         supervising the use of funds, and managing the endowment fund. RNSIIPG’s Technical Coordination
                         Group will provide technical advice on project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Guano Islands, Islets and Capes National Reserve System comprises 33 sites located along the
                         Peruvian Coast. 20.        The project will directly enhance the conservation status of 84,454 hectares
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of marine area and 2,952 hectares of land area, or approximately 62 percent of the reserve’s total
                         surface. This coverage does not represent a direct measure of project success, as it includes a wide
                         array of social, ecological, and institutional issues that the project is targeting. In addition, the
                         representativeness of this area means that the project is directly addressing RNSIIPG management
                         topics in their entirety. The project will be implemented in ten sites (Lobos de Tierra, Lobos de
                         Afuera, Guañape, Santa Don Martín, Salinas, Pachacámac, Asia, Chincha, Ballestas, Coles), which
                         have been selected during the preparation phase.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)
                         Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               This policy was triggered since SERNANP’s
                          BP 4.01                                              low experience in managing marine protected
                                                                               areas might result in potential adverse
                                                                               environmental impacts. This project is classified
                                                                               as Category B. The project is expected to have
                                                                               significantly positive environmental outcomes as



                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                                                                     it will improve biodiversity conservation and
                                                                     natural resources sustainable use practices in
                                                                     ecologically very important marine and coastal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     areas throughout the strengthened implementation
                                                                     of the National Reserve of the Guano islands,
                                                                     Islets and Capes. The project might support
                                                                     small-scale infrastructure in guano islands and
                                                                     capes, including demarcation, visitor centers,
                                                                     trails, as part of the surveillance and control
                                                                     activities. The Project will also support the
                                                                     preparation of management plans, monitoring
                                                                     plans, surveillance and control plans. Possible
                                                                     negative impacts from these small-scale
                                                                     investments are expected to be low, localized and
                                                                     reversible.

                                                                     An Environmental Assessment (EA) has been
                                                                     prepared by the grant recipient, and reviewed by
                                                                     the Bank, to assess and prevent or mitigate
                                                                     potential environmental impacts. Given the risks
                                                                     associated with living in the Guano Capes and
                                                                     Islands and surveillance in coastal areas,
                                                                     measures on occupational health and safety has
                                                                     also been included in the EA.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            This policy was triggered given the location of
                                                                     the project interventions within the critical natural
                                                                     habitat comprised by the National Reserve on
                                                                     Islands, Islets and Guano Capes. Endangered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     species living in the National Reserve might be
                                                                     negatively affected by visitors, resource users,
                                                                     including researchers, and reserve rangers if
                                                                     proper measures/protocols are not adopted. The
                                                                     EA will ensure this policy is addressed
                                                                     appropriately. Moreover, increased effectiveness
                                                                     in management of the National Reserve might
                                                                     induce socioeconomic pressures in other natural
                                                                     (marine and coastal) habitats outside the National
                                                                     Reserve.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No             This policy was not triggered since the Project
                                                                     will not affect forests or forest dependent
                                                                     community. All the activities will be developed in
                                                                     the coastal and marine areas of the RNSIIPG.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No             This policy was not triggered since the Project
                                                                     will not purchase or promote the use of pesticides
                                                                     or other agricultural chemicals.




                                                             Page 4 of 8
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            This policy was triggered since it is likely that
                         BP 4.11                                         historical monuments and/or archaeological
                                                                         artifacts may be found in some of the Guano
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         capes and islands.. The EA includes appropriate
                                                                         measures for the management of physical cultural
                                                                         resources found in the Project sites. Such
                                                                         measures include compliance with the
                                                                         regulations defined by the Ministry of Culture
                                                                         regarding preservation of historical sites and/or
                                                                         archaeological monuments and artifacts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                         area
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes            Given the size and economic importance of the
                         4.12                                            existing and emerging threats, the management of
                                                                         RSNPIIG will require high levels of inter-
                                                                         institutional coordination, highly participatory
                                                                         approaches with local stakeholders, efficiency
                                                                         and specific management plans that provide both
                                                                         increased protection and that guide the
                                                                         interventions and investments of relevant sectors
                                                                         to prevent and mitigate the potential impacts of
                                                                         the existing threats.

                                                                         A Social Assessment was developed during the
                                                                         preparation stage to understand livelihood
                                                                         dynamics and guide the selection of pilot project
                                                                         activities that combine more sustainable marine
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         resource use with enhanced livelihoods. The
                                                                         policy is triggered because the project will
                                                                         support the implementation of protected areas
                                                                         that could limit access to natural resources in
                                                                         some of the selected areas. To mitigate potential
                                                                         adverse impacts on livelihoods the client has
                                                                         prepared a Process Framework that includes the
                                                                         sub-projects identified during the preparation
                                                                         phase of the project which are part of Component
                                                                         2.

                                                                         The project will not result in physical
                                                                         displacement of the people nor will it affect
                                                                         assets.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             This policy was not triggered since the Project
                                                                         will neither support the construction or
                                                                         rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                         investments which rely on the services of existing
                                                                         dams



                                                                 Page 5 of 8
                            Projects on International           No                This policy was not triggered since the Project
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 will not finance activities involving the use or
                                                                                 potential pollution of international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   This policy was not triggered since the Project
                            7.60                                                 will not finance activities in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                N/A
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                It is expected that the project will have an overall positive impact on the environment and
                              communities living inside and adjacent to the Reserve. However, some of the activities that will be
                              supported by the project may result in changes in how community membersuse these resources
                              and the transition may be a challenge. The transition will be mitigated by a number of activities,
                              including training for the technical staff of SERNANP as well as other stakeholders (including
                              DICAPI, AGRORURAL), responsible for screening for negative impacts per the Process
                              Framework ) as well as outreach activities to key stakeholders, such as fishermen and their
                              Cooperatives, private tour operators, etc.). Participatory planning processes that will be undertaken
                              annually as part of the preparation of the Annual Operating Plans will support these efforts.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                A first measure taken by the borrower will be a MOU between SERNANP and PROFONANPE
                              to implement measures described in the environmental and social assessments (safeguard
                              instruments). SERNANP will be ultimately responsible for the implementation, supervision, and
                              monitoring of the project activities in RNSIIPG. In addition, SERNANP will (a) supervise PCT;
                              (b) prepare the terms of reference for technical studies and conduct the quality control of these
                              studies in coordination with PCT; (c) if applicable, in coordination with PROFONANPE
                              participate in the selection and recruitment of private sector nonprofit organizations to manage
                              administration contracts within RNSIIPG; (d) prepare the annual operational plans and progress
                              reports that may be required by PAC or PROFONANPE; and (e) conduct the necessary
                              coordination and communication with PROFONANPE and local executing agencies. SERNANP
                              will actively carry out and supervise field activities in RNSIIPG, including implementation of
                              measures contained in the social and environmental safeguard instruments prepared for this
                              Project, through PCT, the Coastal Marine Unit, and the protected area administration. SERNANP
                              has prior familiarity with World Bank social and environmental safeguards through preparation
                              and implementation of PRONANP.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                The project will directly benefit local populations living in the influence area of and working


                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                           inside RNSIIPG, including local artisanal fishers and fishing communities, tour operators and their
                           families, and people providing land-based support (such as caterers, mechanics, boatwrights, local
                           communities involved in the processing of fishing produce, and tour guides). Other stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                           involved are students and educators who will become part of the project’s new outreach initiatives.
                           Civil society groups, such as grassroots conservation organizations and women’s associations, will
                           benefit from the project’s highly participatory and equality-focused approach. Key stakeholders at
                           the central government institutions include SERNANP, IMARPE, AGRORURAL and DICAPI.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           05-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        29-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                                  04-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The documents have been published on the websites of PFONANPE and SERNANP,
                                         hard copies are also available at their respective offices.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           05-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        29-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                                  04-Sep-2013
                           Comments: The documents have been published on the websites of PFONANPE and SERNANP,
                                         hard copies are also available at their respective offices.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Christian Albert Peter
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Emilia Battaglini (SM)                        Date: 04-Oct-2013




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
