                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3844
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                             Project ID:    P143334
                            Project Name:      FIP: Environmental regularization of rural lands in the Cerrado of Brazil
                                               (P143334)
                            Task Team          Maria Bernadete Ribas Lan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   18-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GENDR                                  Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (60%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%),
                                              General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (60%), Land administration and management (20%),
                                              Environmental policies and institutions (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      58.91           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   26.43
                              Strategic Climate Fund Credit                                                              32.48
                              Total                                                                                      58.91
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to: (i) enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Environment
                           (Ministério do Meio Ambiente, MMA) and nine State Environmental Agencies to receive, analyze
                           and approve rural environmental cadastre entries and link them to the national system (Sistema de

                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         Cadastro Ambiental Rural, SICAR); and (ii) support, in selected municipalities, landholding
                         registration in the CAR system.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Strengthening the Environmental Agencies’ capacity to implement the CAR system.
                         The aim of this component is to: (i) empower OEMAs’ to receive, analyze, and approve rural
                         environmental cadastre entries and link them to the national electronic system (Sistema de Cadastro
                         Ambiental Rural, SICAR), and (ii) establish the necessary conditions to implement or connect to the
                         SICAR, in terms of staff training, maps, imagery and thematic bases, and operational infrastructure,
                         including equipment and technical tools. This Component will include the following subcomponents:

                         •       Subcomponent 1.1: CAR Developed, Implemented and Integrated in the States’ Systems.
                         This subcomponent includes: (i) the creation, adaptation and completion of computer systems, such
                         as the CAR database, user interface modules, off-line modules for registration, electronic modules
                         for automated analysis of registers into the CAR, to detect inconsistencies in the registration entries
                         submitted, thus minimizing the need for manual analysis; (ii) field inspections; (iii) filed surveys; and
                         (iv) "web-service" systems interconnecting state systems with the SICAR.

                         •       Subcomponent 1.2: OEMAs and Teams Structured and Trained to Guide, Receive and
                         Analyze Cadastres. This subcomponent includes: (i) carrying out studies, training and analysis for
                         SICAR requirements, process flow, registry procedures, and mapping of beneficiaries, including the
                         procurement of operational infrastructure, such as computers, vehicles, and equipment for field
                         inspections, and (ii) design and development of OEMAs’ related capacity, including dissemination
                         and mobilization efforts, field visits, verification of enrollment, and supervision, with the support of
                         equipment and vehicles.

                         •        Subcomponent 1.3: Support to the OEMAs’ Project Management Team. This subcomponent
                         includes: (i) structuring of the project's management team working conditions to monitor
                         dissemination and mobilization actions; (ii) field visits and verification of landholders’ engagement;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and (iii) carrying out studies and analysis related to operations and methodologies for CAR
                         implementation.

                         This component would finance workshops and meetings, acquisition of equipment and other utilities,
                         software, hardware, licenses, travel, studies and information technology assistance. The Component
                         also includes the contracting, mobilization and training of OEMA teams for local management of the
                         process.

                         Component 2: Registration of Landholdings in the Selected Municipalities. The aim of this
                         component is to obtain up-to-date environmental cadastral data that contains information about
                         smallholders, their landholdings, and their enrollment in the CAR system of the OEMAs, focused on
                         47 selected municipalities. This Component will include the following subcomponents:

                         •       Subcomponent 2.1: Thematic Basis Available to the Municipalities. This subcomponent will
                         focus on surveying, mapping and georeferencing of land use and rural holdings in each of the
                         targeted OEMAs and municipalities.

                         •      Subcomponent 2.2: Communications Campaign and Mobilization in the Selected
                         Municipalities. The communication campaign and the mobilization will seek to inform, raise
                         awareness, mobilize and engage local governments, stakeholder and landholder representatives in the


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         selected municipalities about the CAR, its purpose, what it involves, how it will be carried out, and
                         its advantages for landholders and local governments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Subcomponent 2.3: Service Desks and Joint Efforts in the Selected Municipalities. In order
                         to better serve small and large farmers, service desks will be established with the support of local
                         governments, partner organizations and unions in the selected municipalities, with qualified staff and
                         equipment, to guide farmers, to carry out the registration process, and to assist farmers with the
                         documentation required to file the registration with the environmental agencies.

                         •        Subcomponent 2.4: Cadastre of Small Landholdings. This subcomponent will focus on
                         surveying, mapping, georeferencing and enrollment of small landholdings in the SICAR, in each of
                         the targeted municipalities.

                         •       Subcomponent 2.5: Recovery Plan for Degraded Areas. This subcomponent will focus on
                         environmental assessment in each of the selected municipalities and, when necessary, recovery of
                         degradedareas plans of the landholdings within the selected municipalities. It will prepare a
                         diagnostic sampling with the environmental status of the rural landings in the selected municipalities,
                         with emphasis on the APPS and RLs.

                         Under this Component, institutional arrangements will be sought with local partners to help create
                         legitimacy for the Project, and to secure the active support of local governments, especially through
                         the provision of logistical support in the selected states and municipalities.

                         This component would finance acquisition of satellite images, publications, communication
                         consultants, communication materials, workshops, seminars, meetings, follow-up visits, travels,
                         exchange visits and training. The Component also includes studies and field analysis, geoprocessing
                         services, training, technical assistance, acquisition of computers and equipment, operational
                         infrastructure, and special customized vehicles, and travel expenses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation. The aim of this component is to
                         support the Project's effective and efficient management and administration (in close coordination
                         with other projects that support the CAR under MMA), monitoring and evaluation. This component
                         will finance studies, training, travel, technical assistance, administrative services, limited acquisition
                         of software and computers, and operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is expected to have an overall impact on the effectiveness and efficiency of Federal and
                         State-level environmental management. The Project core area will include a total of nine Federative
                         Units: Goiás, Tocantins, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Maranhão, Paraná, and
                         São Paulo States; and the Federal District.

                         The Cerrado biome, located in central Brazil, covers almost one quarter, or 2.04 million km2, of the
                         country, with a mosaic of 23 types of vegetation consisting of tropical savannas woodland,
                         grasslands and forest. It is considered one of the world’s 34 biodiversity hotspots by Conservation
                         International. The rapid expansion of agriculture in the Cerrado biome has caused the conversion of
                         natural vegetation to alternative land uses (deforestation) and has also increased the use of slash-and-
                         burn as an agriculture practice. The Cerrado had lost about 48% of its forest cover by 2010.
                         Estimates indicate that deforestation in the Cerrado is proportionally more severe than that of the


                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         Amazon.

                         Distributed over 11 States and 4 geopolitical regions (North, Northeast, Center-West and Southeast),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Cerrado biome is mostly occupied by private landholdings. Some 78% of about one million
                         landholdings in the biome are small landholders (up to 4 fiscal modules), but occupy only 15% of the
                         area of all landholdings, whereas 22% of the larger landholdings occupy 85% of the area.

                         The Ministry of Environment published Decree No 97, on March 22, 2012, which lists 52
                         municipalities that are deemed priorities under the PPCerrado that require immediate actions to
                         prevent and control deforestation, as these are the municipalities with the highest levels of
                         deforestation for the years of 2009-2010, and the ones that have an area of remaining native
                         vegetation of more than 20% of their total area or have protected areas.

                         The Project’s implementation strategy is to register the small landholdings in 47 selected
                         municipalities. The following criteria were used to select the municipalities: (i) a deforestation rate
                         greater than 25 km2, observed from 2009 to 2010; (ii) areas of remnant native vegetation larger than
                         20 percent of the municipality or existence of protected areas (Indigenous Lands, Quilombola
                         Territories and Conservation Units); (iii) Decree 97/2012, which lists 52 municipalities deemed
                         priorities under the Action Plan to Prevent and Control Deforestation and Fires in the Cerrado Biome
                         (PPCerrado); and (iv) municipalities that are not financially supported by external funds or grants to
                         carry out a landholding cadastre. The 47 selected municipalities cover an area of 285,479 km2, or 11
                         percent of the Cerrado Biome, where nearly 40 percent of the native vegetation has been cleared. .
                         The population in these municipalities totals 4.55 million people, 11 percent of whom live in rural
                         areas.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)
                         Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed Project is a conservation Project,
                         BP 4.01                                              and it is rated as Category B and is expected to
                                                                              have a positive impact on the environment
                                                                              because it seeks to promote the rural
                                                                              environmental cadastre of holdings by
                                                                              landholders. The nature and scale of the proposed
                                                                              investments in environmental regularization will
                                                                              not have significant adverse impacts. Potentially
                                                                              adverse social impacts are expected to be small,
                                                                              as they will be avoided or minimized through
                                                                              appropriate preventive and mitigation measures.
                                                                              Notwithstanding these positive impacts, the
                                                                              proposed Project will be working in some
                                                                              sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas.
                                                                              The Brazilian Forest Code (Law 12.651 of 2012)
                                                                              requires landholders to retain natural vegetation
                                                                              on steep slopes, along watercourses (up to a given
                                                                              distance from the margin) or in the vicinity of


                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                                 springs. These areas are APPs (Area of
                                 Permanent Preservation). In addition, the holdings
                                 must also set aside and area called Legal Reserve
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 (Reserva Legal – RL). In this context, the Rural
                                 Environmental Cadastre (CAR) has been
                                 introduced as an additional tool to monitor and
                                 control forest deforestation and getting properties
                                 registered in the CAR is a first step towards
                                 bringing them into compliance with Brazil’s
                                 Forest Code.
                                 The CAR is an electronic system of geo-
                                 referenced identification of privately owned rural
                                 landholdings, containing the delimitation of the
                                 APPs, RL and remaining natural vegetation inside
                                 the landholding, for the purposes of control and
                                 monitoring.
                                 Based on the preliminary assessments undertaken
                                 and previous projects, no negative impact is
                                 expected since: (i) CAR promotes the compliance
                                 with existing laws without creating any additional
                                 conservation requirements and/or restrictions to
                                 the use of natural resources by landholdings; (ii)
                                 CAR, as defined by the law, cannot be used as an
                                 evidence for land regularization; and (iii) the
                                 Project will not work on land tenure issues. It is
                                 important to highlight that only private lands are
                                 going to be mapped, excluding all areas that
                                 overlaps with lands claimed for Indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Lands. Also, the Project will not register any
                                 landholding under dispute between private parties
                                 in the CAR system.
                                 To avoid misunderstandings and make sure that
                                 CAR process and implications are well
                                 understood among landholders the proposed
                                 Project’s approach includes wide-ranging
                                 outreach communication campaign to mobilizes
                                 all landholders and cover all landholdings in the
                                 selected municipalities. The experience gained
                                 with the MMA’s previous projects shows that
                                 conducting the process in close consultation and
                                 cooperation with the landholdings minimizes the
                                 potential conflicts and better responds to their
                                 needs and demands.
                                 Thus, the MMA prepared an Environmental and
                                 Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                                 including social and environmental assessments,
                                 to provide guidance on potential issues that could



                         Page 5 of 13
                                                                     arise during Project implementation. The ESMF
                                                                     report was revised and approved by the Bank and
                                                                     has been disclosed and disseminated through
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     MMA website since 1/21/2014. This report
                                                                     contains a detailed description of the
                                                                     environmental impacts of Project activities and
                                                                     identifies preventive/corrective measures. The
                                                                     ESMF also include measures to be taken to avoid
                                                                     potential social conflict that could result from
                                                                     project activities and an analysis of economic or
                                                                     social impact project activities might have on
                                                                     vulnerable groups, traditional communities or
                                                                     poor rural dwellers.
                                                                     Stakeholder consultations have been carried out
                                                                     and Project approach and activitie s proposed
                                                                     have received broad support by state
                                                                     governments, producers’ organizations, as well as
                                                                     INCRA. As a result of these preliminary meetings
                                                                     it was agreed that the Project will adopt
                                                                     mechanism to keep stakeholders fully informed of
                                                                     Project implementation activities. Others
                                                                     meetings have been held in the target States and/
                                                                     or municipalities from March to June 2013, when
                                                                     the environmental and social issues that may
                                                                     potentially arise during implementation, and
                                                                     proposed actions to address any adverse Project
                                                                     impacts have been discussed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Activities under proposed Project should lead to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     positive impacts on natural habitats, such as their
                                                                     conservation and recovery). Given that OP 4.04 is
                                                                     triggered and therefore all planning activities
                                                                     must follow World Bank policies, identifying
                                                                     monitoring and management activities to prevent
                                                                     or mitigate any possible negative impacts. The
                                                                     rural environmental cadastre procedures will
                                                                     comply with: (i) the Brazilian Forest Code (law
                                                                     12.651 of 2012); (ii) Brazilian legislation on
                                                                     protected areas (SNUC - Law 9,985 of 2000,
                                                                     Decree 4,340 of 2002 and Decree 5,758 of 2006);
                                                                     and (iii) national, State, and local laws on natural
                                                                     habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           This Project will contribute to the conservation of
                                                                     the Cerrado biome. It is expected to have a
                                                                     positive impact by avoid deforestation and
                                                                     maintenance of natural vegetation in parts of
                                                                     private privately owned rural landholdings (all
                                                                     land on steep slopes, along water courses (up to a


                                                             Page 6 of 13
                                                                        given distance from the margin) or in the vicinity
                                                                        of springs, protecting environmental services and
                                                                        values of natural vegetation. These areas are Area
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        of Permanent Preservation (APPs). The Project
                                                                        will also contribute to conserve and/or restore
                                                                        special areas in the private landholdings, which
                                                                        are to be set aside and preserved and are known
                                                                        as a “Legal Reserve” (RL).
                                                                        The ESMF consider the requirements of OB/
                                                                        BP4.36 whenever restoration and plantation
                                                                        activities are being planned.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           This policy is not being triggered because the
                                                                        proposed Project will not support the purchase or
                                                                        increased use of pesticides and other agricultural
                                                                        chemicals and defined under the policy. The
                                                                        proposed Project will not include any support for
                                                                        forest plantations or other agriculture land use
                                                                        which would promote pest management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           It is not expected that Project implementation
                         BP 4.11                                        activities would have any negative impact on
                                                                        archeological or physical cultural resources. This
                                                                        policy is not being triggered at this time.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The Project will be implemented in 67 selected
                                                                        municipalities at the Cerrado Biome and benefit
                                                                        private landholders. There are 19 indigenous
                                                                        lands in ten of these selected municipalities. They
                                                                        are: (i) In the state of Maranhão: Canabrava/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Guajajara, Rodeador, Porquinhos and Kanela
                                                                        Indigenous Lands (Barra do Corda municipality);
                                                                        (ii)      In the state of Mato Grosso do Sul state:
                                                                        Kadiwéu (Porto Murtinho), Nioaque (Nioaque),
                                                                        Buriti and Buritizinho (Sidrolândia), and
                                                                        Jatayvari and Pirakua (Ponta Porã); (iii)In the
                                                                        State of Mato Grosso: Bakairi and Marechal
                                                                        Rondon (Paranatinga), and (iv) In the State of
                                                                        Tocantins: Parque do Araguaia, Inawebohona and
                                                                        Utaria Wyhyna/Iròdu Iràna (Pium), Palmas and
                                                                        Funil (Tocantínia), and Kraolandia (Itacajá and
                                                                        Goiantins).
                                                                        However, OP 4.10 is not triggered because: (i)
                                                                        the Rural Environmental Cadastre (CAR) is a tool
                                                                        for monitoring and controlling deforestation in
                                                                        private landholdings and the provisions in the
                                                                        Forest Code establish special procedures for
                                                                        registration of indigenous lands and quilombola
                                                                        territories that Rural Environmental Cadastre
                                                                        (CAR). Therefore CAR procedures do not fully


                                                                Page 7 of 13
                                                                       apply to indigenous lands – as defined under the
                                                                       Federal Constitution, the Indigenous Statute and
                                                                       other national legal and administrative provisions,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       regardless of whether such areas have formally
                                                                       been demarcated or not – or public lands and (ii)
                                                                       the Project will not interfere with Indigenous
                                                                       Lands as the Rural Environmental Cadastre
                                                                       (Cadastro Ambiental Rural – CAR) will not be
                                                                       required from indigenous lands.
                                                                       The ESMF includes a summary assessment of
                                                                       Indigenous Peoples found at the selected
                                                                       municipalities and the potential impacts of
                                                                       implementing CAR in areas surrounding or
                                                                       nearby Indigenous Lands, which are deemed
                                                                       positive because CAR will contribute to the
                                                                       maintenance and/or recovery of APP and RL, the
                                                                       protection of water streams and the recovery of
                                                                       the vegetation cover around the Indigenous
                                                                       Lands.
                                                                       The ESMF has also set the screening process to
                                                                       identify and avoid overlaps between landholdings
                                                                       and indigenous lands as well as the procedures to
                                                                       be followed when (chances-finding) landholdings
                                                                       overlap with Indigenous Lands are found. In these
                                                                       cases, The National Indigenous Foundation
                                                                       (Fundaçao Nacional do Indio – FUNAI) will be
                                                                       notified and the landholding will not be registered
                                                                       in CAR until of information provided by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       landholder are checked and unless the land tenure
                                                                       issues about the overlapping areas are solved. In
                                                                       short: no landholding will be registered in CAR if
                                                                       it is found to overlap with land claimed by
                                                                       indigenous peoples, even in cases where such
                                                                       land is not yet declared or registered as
                                                                       indigenous land. FUNAI will also have access to
                                                                       all the information and tools produced by the
                                                                       CAR system (SICAR).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The project does not involve the taking of land
                         4.12                                          and, consequently, involuntary population
                                                                       displacement and/or negative impacts on
                                                                       livelihoods are not envisaged. In accordance with
                                                                       the Bank’s OP 4.12, the Involuntary Resettlement
                                                                       policy is not triggered because the proposed
                                                                       Project will not cause involuntary physical
                                                                       resettlement or economic displacement insofar as:
                                                                       (i) no person would be displaced or relocated
                                                                       from his/her landholding or lose any of his/her



                                                               Page 8 of 13
                                                                          assets as APP and RL remain part of his/her
                                                                          private landholdings; (ii) the Rural Environmental
                                                                          Cadastre (CAR) focuses on regulating natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          resources management on a national and State
                                                                          level (Presidential Decree 7029/2009); (iii) the
                                                                          Project would not restrict the management of
                                                                          natural resources; (iv) the Project will not register
                                                                          in the CAR system any land which is the subject
                                                                          of dispute between private parties; and, (v) the
                                                                          enforcement of restrictions will not affect access
                                                                          to natural resources in protected areas.
                                                                          The land use restrictions of Permanent
                                                                          Preservation Areas (APP) and Legal Reserves
                                                                          (RL) have been applied to private landholdings
                                                                          since 1965 and impose no access restrictions to
                                                                          natural resources. Activities supported by the
                                                                          project will comply with the Brazilian Forest
                                                                          Code and the Brazilian legislation on protected
                                                                          areas (SNUC - Law 9985 of 2000, Decree 4340
                                                                          of 2002 and Decree 5758 of 2006). They will be
                                                                          carried out in accordance with addendum 2166-67
                                                                          to the Brazilian Federal Law 4771/65, which
                                                                          allows for sustainable agroforestry activities in
                                                                          small rural properties as long as they do not
                                                                          change the overall character of the forest cover
                                                                          and do not alter ecosystem functions in the area,
                                                                          whereas allows larger landowners to compensate
                                                                          the productive use of areas in their landholdings
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          that should be converted to APPs by establishing
                                                                          them in other areas. Accordingly to the Brazilian
                                                                          law, APPs and RL are not designated or treated as
                                                                          protect areas. Therefore, the Project will not
                                                                          affect the rights or welfare of landholders nor
                                                                          their dependence on, or interaction with, the
                                                                          forest.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No            The proposed Project will neither support the
                                                                          construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
                                                                          support other investments related with services of
                                                                          existing dams.
                            Projects on International       No            This policy is not triggered because the project
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          will not affect any international waterways as
                                                                          defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           This policy is not triggered because the project
                            7.60                                          will not work in any disputed areas as defined
                                                                          under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                  Page 9 of 13
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           This Project will focus on the most critical areas of the Cerrado Biome, enabling the scaling-up of
                           the CAR to other municipalities and biomes through the implementation of the SICAR, and the
                           application of lessons learned from its implementation.

                          During Project preparation the team carried out a detailed assessment of potential impacts on
                          private landholders from registering their landholdings in the CAR system. The assessment
                          concluded that the legal framework gives special treatment to small landholdings or family
                          agriculture landholdings , settlements, agrarian reform projects, demarcated Indigenous Lands, and
                          traditional communities that make collective use of their territory. For these landholdings, the
                          proposed Project will provide technical assistance to landholders in their cadastral statements.
                          CAR registration for this group is covered by the government. Medium and large landholders will
                          not receive direct assistance in preparing their entries in CAR, but can benefit from the service
                          counters to be set up in the states and municipalities where they can receive guidance, ask
                          questions and request geographic information.

                          The assessment shows that the Project is expected to generate the following socio-economic
                          benefits: (i) enabling landholders to access the resources and other assistance services provided
                          under the ABC Plan; (ii) assurance to landholders that they are fulfilling part of the environmental
                          legislation requirements, enabling them to undertake investment in agricultural products that will
                          allow them to access a range of markets which require such compliance; (iii) establishment of
                          enabling requirements for landholders, (including land reform settlers and traditional
                          communities) to access target rural credit as PRONAF, and (iv) increase of both employment and
                          income for landholders (including land reform settlers and traditional communities) and other
                          partners in the business chain generated by farming activities, therefore contributing to poverty
Public Disclosure Copy




                          alleviation.

                          The CAR certificate is not the same as the environmental licensing of economic activities on rural
                          properties. However, without the CAR certificate, no license will be issued by the OEMAs after
                          2017. Car will not register any landholdings under dispute.

                           The proposed Project is expected to have a positive environment impact as it seeks to promote the
                           rural environmental cadastre of holdings by landholders. It is rated as Category B. The nature and
                           scale of the proposed investments in environmental regularization will not have significant adverse
                           impacts. Notwithstanding these positive impacts, the proposed Project will be working in various
                           sensitive biodiversity and dry forest areas. Since 1964, the Brazilian Forest Code requires
                           landholders to retain natural vegetation on steep slopes, along watercourses (up to a given distance
                           from riverbanks) or in the vicinity of springs. In this context, the CAR has been introduced by the
                           new Forest Code as an additional tool to monitor and control deforestation. Registration of
                           properties in the CAR is a first step toward bringing them into compliance with Brazil’s Forest
                           Code.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           During project preparation, the Bank team reassessed the institutional capacity of MMA and the
                           other state agencies that will implement the project.
                           MMA prepared the Project’s Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to
                           address safeguard compliance and propose actions, where needed, to ensure adequate technical
                           capacity. The ESMF raised the positive and negative impacts of the environmental regulation
                           process, considering the current Forest Law, state laws and Bank safeguards. The ESMF also
                           defines a number of preventive and mitigating actions in the ten most relevant municipalities, and
                           seeks to present alternatives to prevent or minimize the diagnosed impacts. Such measures do not
                           represent direct actions of the CAR–FIP project; instead they indicate strategies to be adopted in
                           order to complement actions and more effectively achieve the goals set out by the Project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           There are multiple stakeholders with different expectations for the timing of project execution and
                           results achievement. Considering the specific activities, the main beneficiaries are the following:
                           (i) public goods such as natural vegetation and dry forest; (ii) MMA, (iii) and OEMAs, because
                           activities may affect cadastre and licensing practices. The Cerrado Biome’s overall rural
                           population is expected to benefit from Project implementation. Thus, there are an estimated six
                           million indirect beneficiaries, i.e. people who live in rural areas of Brazil’s Cerrado Biome.

                          MMA prepared the Project’s environmental and social management framework (ESMF). The
                          ESMF raised the positive and negative impacts of the process of environmental regulation,
                          considering the current Forest Law, the State Laws, safeguards. The ESMF also defines a number
                          of preventive and mitigating actions in the ten most relevant municipalities, and seeks to present
Public Disclosure Copy




                          alternatives to prevent or minimize the diagnosed impacts.

                          The consultation process was conducted in two stages. The first consisted of preliminary meetings
                          to discuss the concept of the proposed Project. These meetings took place from May to November
                          2012 and included several meetings in Brasília with representatives from the states in the Cerrado
                          Biome.
                          The second stage included four information and four consultation workshops applying
                          participative methodology for the design and survey of demands of each federation unit, taking
                          into account aspects such as technical and institutional capacity, infrastructure and logistics, and
                          previously established criteria in the scope of the BIP: (i) the first workshop took place in Palmas,
                          Tocantins, on December 12, 2012, and was attended by representatives of the Governments of the
                          States of Maranhão, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul and Tocantins, as well as representatives of
                          MMA; and (ii) the second workshop, held in Brasília on January 24, 2013, took advantage of the
                          presence of entities representing agribusiness and state managers of the ABC Plan, in the ABC–
                          FIP project consultation workshop (low carbon emission agriculture in the Cerrado). There were
                          representatives of the Federation of Farmers of Goiás; the National Confederation of Agriculture
                          (Confederação Nacional da Agricultura, CNA); the National Rural Learning Service (Serviço
                          Nacional de Aprendizagem Rural, SENAR); the Organization of Brazilian Cooperatives
                          (Organização das Cooperativas Brasileiras, OCB); the Banco do Brasil; the Ministry of
                          Agriculture, Livestock and Supply (Ministério da Agricultura, Pecuária e Abastecimento, MAPA);


                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                           the Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation (Ministério da Ciência, Tecnologia e
                           Inovação, MCTI); the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation (Empresa Brasileira de
                           Pesquisa Agropecuária, EMBRAPA); and the CAR Steering Group of the Federal District and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bahia, among others; (iii) the third workshop was held on January 30, 2013, in Brasília with
                           representative bodies of family farmers and traditional populations, NGOs and research
                           institutions. There were also representatives of MMA, MAPA and INCRA, and (iv) the fourth
                           workshop, held on January 31, 2013, in Brasília, was a public consultation with state
                           environmental agencies, agricultural and rural technical assistance, land reform, environmental
                           police and municipalities. There were also representatives of the Governments of the States of
                           Goiás, Minas Gerais, São Paulo, Piauí, Mato Grosso do Sul, Maranhão and the Federal District.
                           The activities proposed by the Project have received broad support by OEMAs, producers,
                           community organizations based on consultations with representatives thereof. No major issues
                           were raised, and the proposed project received strong support from the groups consulted.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           21-Jan-2014
                           Comments: http://www.mma.gov.br/images/arquivos/desenvolvimento_rural/car/
                                         avaliacao_socioambiental_car_fip_cerrado.pdf
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [       ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests


                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Maria Bernadete Ribas Lan
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                            Date: 10-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)                         Date: 21-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
