                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC6841

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Chile                             Project ID:      P124908
                            Project Name:       Chile FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant (P124908)
                            Task Team           Peter Jipp
                            Leader:
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSAR

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          3.80                   Total Bank Financing:           0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Financing Source                                                              Amount
                               Borrower                                                                        0.00
                               Carbon Fund                                                                     0.00
                               Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                        3.80
                               Total                                                                           3.80
                            Environmental
                            Category:
                            Is this a     No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to assist the Recipient in carrying out the Readiness
                           Preparation Activities.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) prepared by the Government of Chile identifies a broad
                           set of activities to support the country in strengthening its technical and institutional capacities to
                         participate in a future REDD+ mechanism. The financial envelope needed to cover the set of
                         activities needed to reach REDD+ Readiness in Chile has been estimated to USD 13.68 million in the
                         R-PP. This envelope will be supported by different sources, which include multilateral and bilateral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financing arrangements in addition to the Chilean government’s own contribution. The FCPF
                         Participants Committee (PC) authorized grant funding of $3.8 million in March 2013 (PC14) based
                         on Chile’s submission of its R-PP in October 2012, while the Government of Chile will provide
                         significant funding in the amount of USD 4.919 million. Recently, the country registered a Forestry
                         NAMA with the Secretariat of the UNFCCC, for which the Swiss Government has contributed
                         approximately US$3 million. That, together with funding currently being negotiated with the private
                         sector at the national level, is expected to finance the priority activities of the REDD+ Readiness
                         process, which will allow the country to build a strong base for further engagement in the REDD+
                         process.

                         The FCPF grant will only finance specific activities included in components 1 and 2 of the R-PP.
                         These activities have been selected after technical discussions with the National Forestry Corporation
                         (CONAF), taking into account the technical and financial needs of Chile’s REDD+ Readiness
                         process, the comparative advantage of the World Bank in supporting them, as well as the
                         complementarity with support made available by other partners. It should be noted that the activities
                         to be financed by the FCPF in support of the REDD+ Readiness Program in Chile do not include the
                         implementation of REDD+ programs or activities on the ground. The FCPF support is limited to
                         analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes and awareness-raising at the national
                         and sub-national levels.

                         The specific REDD preparation activities Chile intend to carry out in preparing its Readiness
                         Package are described in the R-PP, and include: strategy development through stakeholder
                         consultations, analytical work, capacity-building, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                         (SESA), and technical work to establish a national forest Reference Emission Level/Reference Level
                         and monitoring system. These activities are funded by the FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant of $3.8
                         million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The FCPF Grant will support the following components:

                         Component 1: Readiness Organization and Consultation (USD 870,915).
                         1.1 National Readiness Management Arrangements (USD 298,915)
                         1.2 Information Sharing and early Dialogue with Key stakeholder Groups - FCPF USD 172,000
                         1.3 Participation and Consultation process (USD 400,000)
                         Component 2: REDD+ Strategy preparation (USD 2,629,085).
                         2.1 Land Use, Drivers of Land Use Change, Forest Law, Policy and Governance (USD 70,000)
                         2.2 REDD+ Strategy options (USD 2,257,085)
                         2.3 REDD+ Implementation framework (USD 104,000)
                         2.4 Social and Environmental Impacts: SESA and ESMF (USD 198,000)

                         Activities to be financed by the FCPF would not include any physical investment or the
                         implementation of any REDD program on the ground.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant does not entail physical investments or pilot projects on the
                         ground. Instead, the grant will finance a number of analytical and diagnostic studies as well as a
                           series of consultation meetings and workshops with relevant stakeholders. While Readiness
                           Preparation is conceived as mostly strategic planning at this stage, key policy and regulatory
                           precedents are being set at the readiness phase that will have downstream impact at the national level
Public Disclosure Copy




                           once the national REDD+ strategy is ready to be implemented.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The executing agency will be the Chilean National Forestry Corporation (CONAF) responsible for
                           overseeing all forestry activities in the country, including management of incentive programs for
                           plantations and native forest management, national parks, fire prevention and suppression and
                           environmental impact assessments for activities in forest areas. CONAF headquarters are in
                           Santiago, and they maintain a large and diverse staff throughout the country in regional and local
                           offices. Notably, CONAF has a dedicated technical team at the national and regional level with
                           experience and systematic engagement with a broad range of stakeholders, including indigenous
                           peoples, campesino communities, small producers, etc.

                           As REDD+ involves a wide-range of stakeholders, interests may differ and the national REDD+
                           process may require negotiation as part of the consultation process. The potential need for mediation
                           and management of conflict among stakeholders is taken into account throughout the process and
                           expertise will be sought for in this area. Budget is allocated to recruit social development expertise in
                           order to lead the multi-stakeholder and multi-level consultation process.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)
                           Mi Hyun Bae Mbayo (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This project is classified as Category B. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                               Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                                                                 (SESA) being carried out under the project in
                                                                                 compliance with OP/BP 4.01 will serve to
                                                                                 identify, avoid, and mitigate the potential
                                                                                 negative environmental and social impacts
                                                                                 associated with future activities to be supported
                                                                                 by the final REDD+ strategy by providing
                                                                                 guidance and key elements for the preparation
                                                                                 of an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                 Framework (ESMF). The SESA will also
                                                                                 influence the final national REDD+ strategy, by
                                                                                 ensuring that social and environmental risks are
                                                                                 factored in the preparation of the strategy.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes              The application of this policy seeks to ensure
                                                                                 that all options proposed in the National REDD
                                                                                 + Strategy take into account the conservation of
                                                                                 biodiversity, as well as the numerous
                                                                                 environmental services and products that natural
                                                                                 habitats provide to Chilean society. Overall,
                                                                 REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                                 significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
                                                                 as the country puts in place an effective strategy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 to reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will
                                                                 address issues related to natural habitats and
                                                                 potential impacts of the National REDD+
                                                                 Strategy, which will later be included in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                                 significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
                                                                 main goal of the program is to reduce
                                                                 deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                                                 contributing to the well-being of forest-
                                                                 dependent communities. Potential impact of the
                                                                 National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests
                                                                 will be assessed through the SESA and included
                                                                 in the ESMF. The SESA and associated ESMF
                                                                 will
                                                                 reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
                                                                 Operational Policy regarding forest
                                                                 management, in particular as these relate to the
                                                                 establishment of plantations and use of critical
                                                                 forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This policy could be triggered depending on the
                                                                 final scope of the National REDD+ Strategy.
                                                                 Agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                                                 activities, for instance, could trigger this policy,
                                                                 depending on the methods employed by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 concrete activities on the ground to manage
                                                                 pests. The SESA will address
                                                                 critical issues related to pest management, as
                                                                 necessary, and these will also be included in the
                                                                 key elements for the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy could be triggered if REDD+
                         BP 4.11                                 activities promote actions in areas containing
                                                                 sites deemed physical cultural resources (PCR).
                                                                 Though it is not anticipated that the project will
                                                                 have negative impacts on any such sites, the
                                                                 existence of any such sites and the
                                                                 corresponding need to trigger this policy will be
                                                                 determined once the National REDD+ Strategy
                                                                 is completed. If triggered the ESMF will include
                                                                 provisions for how to address preservation of
                                                                 known PCR and how to address chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   SESA began at the formulation phase and will
                                                                 continue throughout the readiness phase with
                                                                                                                                 the participation of indigenous peoples in
                                                                                                                                 identifying the key issues and providing
                                                                                                                                 recommendations for the design of the National
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Strategy. As part of the formulation phase,
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples participated in the regional
                                                                                                                                 SESA workshop for the Araucania and Bio Bio
                                                                                                                                 where they assessed the risks and benefits of the
                                                                                                                                 proposed REDD+ strategic options from their
                                                                                                                                 own perspective and contextual realities.
                                                                                                                                 CONAF plans to carry out the required social
                                                                                                                                 assessment and prepare an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                                                 Planning Framework (IPPF) in close
                                                                                                                                 consultations with indigenous peoples’
                                                                                                                                 communities, as a specific chapter of the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF. , prior and informed consultations with
                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples will be carried out as per the
                                                                                                                                 policy in seeking broad community support on
                                                                                                                                 the National Strategy. Chile has also committed
                                                                                                                                 to follow its obligations under ILO Convention
                                                                                                                                 169 on Indigenous and Tribal Peoples.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           During the readiness phase, SESA plans to
                                 4.12                                                                                            assess the potential restrictions of access to
                                                                                                                                 natural resources as part of the design phase of
                                                                                                                                 the National Strategy and provide the adequate
                                                                                                                                 recommendations from the perspective of
                                                                                                                                 stakeholders. CONAF will prepare the required
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework and Process
                                                                                                                                 Framework (PF) in close consultations with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 indigenous peoples, campesino and other small
                                                                                                                                 farmers. The RPF will manage impacts in the
                                                                                                                                 event of potential relocation and/or land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition of indigenous peoples and small
                                                                                                                                 farmers as a result of the implementation of the
                                                                                                                                 national strategy on the ground. The PF will
                                                                                                                                 help manage the potential risk of restriction of
                                                                                                                                 access to forest resources. The RPF and PF will
                                                                                                                                 be prepared as a specific chapter of the ESMF.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jun-2015




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             The SESA will be conducted to identify and address the environmental and social benefits and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             risks of the REDD+ strategy based on a participatory approach and integrates the World Bank’s
                             environmental and social operational policies. As part of the SESA process, an ESMF will be
                             prepared to manage and mitigate any possible risks and potential for eventual investments and/or
                             activities on the ground once the national strategy has been designed. The ESMF is intended to be
                             a live document that may evolve and be updated overtime when new REDD + strategy options and
                             projects or activities (including investments), or policies/regulations are identified during
                             implementation of REDD+.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Peter Jipp

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                            Date: 28-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                            Date: 01-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
