INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1097
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jan-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Comoros                     Project ID:  P150754
Project Name: Comoros Social Safety Net Project (P150754)
Task Team       Andrea Vermehren
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Jan-2015                Estimated    17-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (80%), Health (20%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (20%), Social safety nets (50%), Nutrition and
food security (20%), Other rural development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       6.00             Total Bank Financing:     6.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
IDA Grant                                                                     6.00
Total                                                                         6.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase poor communities' access to safety net and
nutrition services.
3. Project Description
The proposed project would build on the successful implementation and lessons learned from the
Page 1 of 9


﻿Comoros Emergency Crisis Response Project implemented by the FADC (Fonds d'Appui au
D6velopment Communautaire) , as well as global experiences, in particular from other countries in
Africa, Latin-America, South and East Asia. It provides an opportunity to further develop the
conceptual framework and institutional capacity to offer safety net, disaster response and nutrition
services to strengthen poor families ' and communities' resilience to poverty and natural disasters. It
would: (i) support the establishment of a productive safety net and systems that would provide cash-
for-work opportunities for selected poor families with a view to strengthen their productive capacity,
(ii) provide support to communities and households affected by disasters, by providing emergency
cash-for-work, supporting immediate cleaning and removal of debris after disasters, and
rehabilitating damaged community infrastructure, (iii) improve nutrition of children under five years
of age, and (iv) strengthen the institutional capacity for safety net management, coordination,
monitoring and evaluation.
The project would be governed by the country's Social Protection (SP) and Nutrition policies. The SP
policy is presently being developed by the Ministry of Health & Solidarity, in collaboration with the
Ministry of Labor. The Nutrition policy has already been developed by the Ministry of Health &
Solidarity but lacks implementation. In addition, the project would establish an explicit link between
social protection instruments (such as cash for work activities and community development/
infrastructure) and use these linkages as a response mechanism in the context of the country's disaster
risk management (DRM) framework. Sub-projects will be guided by revised local development plans
with the objective to enhance the economic and environmental resilience of communities (e.g.
through reforestation, rehabilitation of mangroves, terracing, and small water catchment). This shift
towards an integrated social protection and DRM system marks an important step towards better
coordination and more effective service delivery - a significant deficiency in the country as outlined
in the CPS.
An important innovation under this operation is the provision of cash for work opportunities to
selected families over a longer period of time (3 years) accompanied by orientation, training and
practical support in developing the household's productive capacity (1 day per week). This safety net
"plus" approach will need to be coordinated with local agencies such as micro-finance institutions
and local Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) that offer complementary services. Finally, the
project intends to address malnutrition through simultaneous demand and supply side interventions:
The cash for work activities will provide the poorest families with cash income, and the community
a        nutrition activities will enhance the knowledge and practices needed to address malnutrition of
children and mothers.
Project components
Component 1. Establishment of a Productive and Disaster Responsive Safety Net (US$4 million)
The component would support the implementation of two key elements of an effective safety net. It
would (i) build the institutional and operational foundations for a longer term safety net for the
poorest households in selected communities through productive cash for work activities over a three
year period. After this period, the households would be expected to continue to benefit from the
productive activities; and (ii) make available a short-term safety net for disaster affected households
and communities by providing quick recovery support to selected households and communities.
Subcomponent 1.1: Establishment of a Productive Safety Net (US$3.2 million). This sub-component
would provide cash to targeted poor families in exchange for their participation in cash for work
Page 2 of 9


﻿activities. It would build on FADC's experience in implementing cash-for-work activities. The
"productive" safety net modality would offer periodic cash for work opportunities to the poorest
families of selected communities over a three year period with the aim of smoothing their
consumption and supporting them in developing productive activities. Targeting of poorest
O
households would be done through a combination of geographical and community targeting,
enhanced by a daily wage rate below the wor king daily wage. The cash-for-work sub-projects would
focus on activities that have an impact on communities and households' productive capacity and
positive environmental impact as well as resilience to natural and climatic events (e.g. reforestation,
water management, terracing. etc.). In addition, the sub-component would finance small community
infrastructure sub-projects that complement the cash-for-work activities with the objective of
improving the productive basis of the area, but which are too big and complex to be carried out
through cash for work. This would include sub-projects like small-scale water supply and sanitation,
water retention systems, feeder roads etc. that are necessary to support the implementation of the
larger area development. The sub-projects would be selected based on community demands and
prioritized based on their biggest impact with regard to the overall area development plan. In order to
qualify for Project financing, sub-projects must cost less than US$85,000 and would be implemented
in accordance with FADC's Operational Manual for Small Infrastructure. For implementation,
services would be contracted for sub-project planning/design, construction and supervision.
Maintenance of the sub-project would be prepared by providing training to a community committee,
and would be monitored closely during Project implementation.
Subcomponent 1.2 Early Recovery Response to Natural Disasters (US$0.8 million): This
subcomponent would finance activities to support communities and households in the immediate
aftermath of natural disasters. It would support communities in updating their local development
plans to reflect disaster risk management (DRM), and social protection activities in the aftermath of
disasters through cash for work. The subcomponent would be implemented by FADC in close
collaboration with the General Department of Civil Security (Direction G6n6rale de la S6curit6
Civile, DGSC) - the government agency in charge of DRM in cases where a national emergency is
declared. The sub-component would also finance the rehabilitation and reconstruction of small
village infrastructure damaged by natural disasters, and emergency cash-for-work activities for
cleaning up and repair.
Component 2. Improving the nutrition of young children and mothers from poor communities (US$1
o million).
This component would provide preventive nutrition services for the same poor communities to help
households get out of the inter-generational cycle of poverty. The specific objective of this
component is to promote, at the community level, the adoption of appropriate Infant and Young
Children Feeding (IYCF) practices by households. It would focus on ensuring the delivery and
demand creation of a minimum package of nutrition-specific interventions for children under five
years of age, with particular focus on the "first thousand days" window of opportunity (from
pregnancy to two years of age). It would also promote better nutrition and reproductive health for
mothers. The design is partially modelled after the successful and cost-effective National Community
Nutrition program in Madagascar and Bangladesh's Rural Advancement Committee (BRAC)
approach, at the heart of which lies nutrition counseling to change behavior. Three types of behavior
would be promoted, which are in line with the document on Essential Family Practices of Comoros,
namely: (i) Exclusive Breast feeding (EB); (ii) food diversification (in quantity and quality); and (iii)
hand washing before meals (HW). UNICEFwould assist the Government in implementing this
component given UNICEF's unique and strong capacity in the sector.
Page 3 of 9


﻿Component 3: Strengthening Safety Net Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (US
$1 million)
This component aims at supporting the development of key elements of a safety net system. It would
O
U         support the establishment of an effective Management Information System (MIS) including a
beneficiary registry based on geographical and community targeting to provide accurate data on
beneficiaries and program implementation at all times. The component would also help establish
payment systems to transfer cash to the safety net beneficiaries through micro-finance institutions,
where possible. This would include the contracting of a payment agency (or various payment
agencies depending on service availability), and a payment system that would minimize paper-based
transactions, as well as fraud and errors. Coordination activities among key stakeholders involved in
project implementation would also be supported under the component. The component would also
finance the operational costs associated with project administration, monitoring and evaluation,
communication and information, and technical assistance required for project implementation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Nationwide involving all three Islands of the Union of the Comoros.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes          The Environmental Assessment policy is been triggered
OP/BP 4.01                            due to the fact that the proposed project will finance key
civil works activities, namely repair and/or rehabilitation
of small scale village infrastructure damaged by natural
disasters. These civil work activities will be undertaken
through a consultative and participatory process meant
to foster ownership and social accountability. Overall,
the proposed sub-projects are expected to be small in
scale and site specific, typical of category B projects.
Consequently their potential adverse environmental and
social impacts will be very limited due to their localized,
small scale and site specific nature, albeit minor. In
addition, the cash for works activities meant to provide
cash to targeted poor families in exchange for their
participation in small group community work activities
may not expose them to significant risks of HIV/AIDS,
nor damage to existing physical social environment.
However, if adequate mitigation measures are not
considered on time to ensure these risks are contained
and/or minimized to the maximum possible, the ultimate
impacts would be serious.
Since the physical locations of the proposed project
activities to be repaired and/or rehabilitated are
unknown at this stage, the Borrower has prepared an
Page 4 of 9


﻿Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) that was consulted upon and cleared by the
World Bank. It will be publicly disclosed both in-
country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09  No
Physical Cultural Resources No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes         The project is been socially and environmentally
OP/BP 4.12                            categorized as B and has triggered the Involuntary
Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) on the basis of
component 1 foreseen activities; therefore, to ensure due
compliance with the policy requirement when the clear
footprint of the project is unknown, the Government of
the Union of the Comoros has prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF). The main purpose of the RPF
is to clarify applicable resettlement principles,
organizational arrangements, and design criteria. Its
objectives are consistent with avoiding or minimizing
involuntary resettlement or land acquisition where
possible; where unavoidable, ensuring that
compensation and site specific resettlement action plans
(RAPs) are designed and implemented with
sustainability as the prime focus; and ensuring that
affected persons are supported to improve their
livelihood or at least restore them to pre-displacement
levels. The RPF sets out the basic principles and
prerogatives to be followed when footprints become
known, namely the legal and administrative framework,
which includes the systems of land ownership and
tenure as well as the socio-economic characteristics of
beneficiary districts. It also details the consultation and
participation processes, eligibility criteria, and
methodology for valuation of assets and a clear
entitlement policy and compensation payment
processes, as well as a grievance redress mechanism and
an estimated budget to ensure adequate implementation
of the RPF. In order to ensure that implementation of the
RPF is on course and accountability aligned, the RFP
has articulated monitoring and evaluation with clear
Page 5 of 9


﻿delineations of monitoring indicators and the
responsibilities of agencies. The RPF was consulted
upon, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank for
public disclosure, both in-country and at the InfoShop
prior to project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
*Projects on International        No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas  No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed project will finance key civil works activities, namely repair and/or rehabilitation of
small scale village infrastructure damaged by natural disasters. Likely adverse impacts include air,
soil and water pollution, loss of vegetation, soil erosion, traffic accidents, and potential loss of
livelihoods and/or land required for future infrastructure investments. In addition, the cash for
works activities meant to provide cash to targeted poor families in exchange for their participation
in small group community work activities may not expose them to significant risks of HIV/AIDS,
or cause damage to the existing physical and social environment. The proposed activities/sub-
projects will be undertaken through a consultative and participatory process meant to foster
ownership and social accountability. Overall, the proposed sub-projects are expected to be small in
scale and site specific, typical of category B projects. Consequently their potential adverse
environmental and social impacts will be very limited due to their localized, small scale and site
O
)           specific nature, albeit minor.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The planned sub-projects are not expected to iincur any potential indirect and/or long term impacts
resulting from the repair and/or rehabilitation of small scale sub-projects. It is not expected to
have long term adverse environmental and social impacts on future activities in the potential
project areas. Overall project impacts are considered modest and will be site specific. The FADC
has experience and has implemented sub-projects in the past in a satisfactory manner under the
ongoing Comoros Emergency Crisis Response Project (P120631) financed by IDA.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Given that this project is a continuation of the successful of the ongoing Comoros Emergency
Crisis Response Project (P120631) financed by IDA, project alternatives were not considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the exact physical locations of future civil works activities, namely repair and/or
rehabilitation of small scale village sub-projects as well as their potential localized adverse
environmental and social impacts could not be identified prior to the appraisal of the proposed
Page 6 of 9


﻿project, the Borrower has prepared: (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF); and (ii) a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF outlines the policies and
procedures to be followed in the event that resettlement action/compensation plans will need to be
prepared to mitigate potential adverse social impacts due to land acquisition. The ESMF outlines
O
an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are
environmentally and socially sound and sustainable. The ESMF also includes: (i) a basic
description of the natural and physical environment of the targeted project intervention zones in
the three Islands of Comoros; (ii) a clear and coherent process to assess environmental and social
impacts of subprojects to be financed which were improved with the lesson learned and the best
practices developed by the current IDA financing; (iii) guidelines to adequately mitigate (avoid,
minimize or reduce) any environmental and social impacts from financed subprojects; (iv) an
environmental and social management Plan (ESMP) with an estimated budget and timelines; (v)
public consultations and stakeholder participation with women, youth and vulnerable groups,
municipalities and members of the local communiteis; (vi) a grievance redress mechanism that
provides clearer guidance on how potential grievances will be handled throughout the project
cycle; (vii) a monitoring and evaluation mechanism; and (viii) a medical waste management plan
for the health centers to be financed under the proposed project.
At the project level, the FADC has extensive experience in implementing IDA operations as noted
with the ongoing Comoros Emergency Crisis Response Project. The FADC safeguards unit is
composed of an environmental and a social safeguards specialist who are tasked with ensuring
compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies for all activities financed under the
Project. This arrangement will be maintained under the new Social Safety Net Project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include women, youth and vulnerable groups, the municipalities and the local
communities. The Social Safety Net Project preparation process included a participatory
consultative process. Extensive public consultations have been conducted during the preparation
of the ESMF and RPF to take into account the views and perceptions of communities and various
stakeholders regarding the design and scope of the project. The FADC has extensive experience
engaging public consultations and also in the Bank's disclosure policy. During the implementation
of the proposed project, the FADC will initiate the public consultations as early as possible and
will provide all relevant materials in a form and language(s) acceptable and accessible to all
*           beneficiaries involved. The ESMF and RPF have been publicly disclosed in the country and in the
Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comoros                                                  05-Dec-2014
Comments: in rather final draft version
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Page 7 of 9


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                                20-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             10-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
O
Comoros                                                    05-Dec-2014
Comments: In rather final draft version
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[     NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes[X]  No[    NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 8 of 9


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andrea Vermehren
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Peter Ivanov Pojarski (PMGR)       Date: 08-Jan-2015
Manager:
P
Page 9 of 9


