                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC6288

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Zambia                          Project ID:      P144254
                            Project Name:     Zambia COMACO Landscape Management (P144254)
                            Task Team         Indira Janaki Ekanayake
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         10-Dec-2014
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTA3

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (28%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (35%), Agro-
                                              industry, marketing, and trade (24%), Animal production (13%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (13%), Biodiversity
                                              (15%), Land administration and management (25%), Rural non-fa rm income
                                              generation (35%), Rural markets (12%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      1.33                   Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                 1.33
                              Total                                                                       1.33
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project has the following objectives:
                           (i)     Agriculture Land Management/ Afforestation, Reforestation and Revegetation; To increase
                           food production and farm-gate export income per unit area by expanding legume-based agroforestry
                           systems with demonstrated higher sustainable crop yields, and important firewood, materials and
                         tradable carbon production compared to the baseline of traditional smallholder agriculture;
                         (ii)     Energy Demand: To move household energy supply to a sustainable basis by promoting use
                         of fast-growing coppicing leguminous trees in agroforestry systems, establishment of firewood
Public Disclosure Copy




                         woodlots and other plantings, control of destructive charcoal production in natural forests, and
                         introduction of clean and efficient wood stoves to replace open fire cooking and use of charcoal;
                         (iii)    Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD): To protect and expand
                         areas under natural forest and conserve biodiversity through the intensification of food production on
                         existing farm plots by adoption of legume-based agroforestry with in-built firewood fire wood
                         production and avoidance of fallows, which will replace the need for further forest clearing as part
                         of slash and burn agriculture, firewood and charcoal production.
                         C. Project Description
                         The COMACO Landscape Management project will increase smallholder farmer crop yield from
                         sustainable climate-smart agriculture, increase farmer income and welfare, reduce uncontrolled forest
                         loss and degradation and increase net forest cover of the Luangwa Valley while being supported by
                         carbon revenues from a significant increase bio-carbon sequestration across the project area. The
                         project comprises an array of specific interventions as part of an integrated landscape management
                         strategy to conserve biodiversity, improve food production per unit area of cropland, and increase
                         resilience to climate change in a landscape with a carefully designed, ecologically sensitive mosaic
                         of production and conservation functions.

                         As a bio-carbon project, COMACO and its partners intend to pioneer a unique approach to the
                         landscape-wide carbon asset management that combines several approved CDM and Verified Carbon
                         Standard (VCS) methodologies under an umbrella of grouped projects, equivalent to CDM Program
                         of Activities (PoA) to monitor, verify, and monetize carbon increments in the most biologically and
                         economically important carbon pools across the management landscape. Conceptually, the project
                         represents a bridge to a comprehensive landscape management methodology that would eventually
                         achieve the same economic purpose of capturing for trade incremental carbon in a more
                         economically efficient manner.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         COMACO is dedicated to using economic incentives that promote small-holder adoption of
                         improved farming and land use practices on landscapes sensitive to biodiversity loss and wildlife
                         habitat/watershed degradation. The project area is approximately 1,219,888 hectares; 30,000 ha is
                         for reforestation and improved cropland management, and 1,192,464 ha is for REDD.

                         The shift from expansive to intensive farming practices, coupled with the new availability of fuel
                         resources, will help to alleviate the pressure on forest, reducing forest loss and supporting natural
                         forest regeneration in conservation areas. Moreover, new management practices to be rewarded by
                         COMACO will include cessation of post-harvest crop residue burning and collateral forest fire
                         damage, the full suite of no-till and residue retention agriculture practices, dedicated woodlots and
                         border plantings, and the switch to improved cook stoves using firewood from chopping agroforestry
                         and conservation from traditional charcoal braziers to efficient wood stoves in the surrounding area.
                         Supporting these efforts will be the promotion of incentives for sustainably harvested non-traditional
                         forest products (apiaries for honey and wild mushrooms) as alternatives to destructive charcoal
                         production, and the establishment of fire-breaks to protect forest products harvest.

                         The project will expand on the following technologies which have been piloted by COMACO in the
                         project area:
                         (i)      Conservation Farming: The project will expand on COMACO’s current initiatives in
                         conservation farming. COMACO has been exploring and promoting techniques to increase yield and
                         decrease the rate of deforestation and forest degradation from expansive low-yield agriculture in the
                         face of the burgeoning population growth for the past ten years in the Luangwa Valley. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         innovations cover the full range of conservation farming techniques from no-till to agro-forestry,
                         which entails alley-cropping of maize between rows of actively coppiced agro-forestry species such
                         as Gliricidia sepium (GS) and Faidherbia albida (FA). These are both nitrogen fixing and
                         micronutrient cycling species which are also good for accumulating a humus layer in the alleys.
                         Coppicing provides ideal firewood for modern efficient cook stoves and has resulted in the parallel
                         60,000 efficient cook stove project for COMACO farmers.

                         (ii)     Reduced Till Agriculture: Compliance to low tillage practices is a major determinant of
                         COMACO’s incentive payment to farmers when purchasing their surplus crops. These practices
                         include pot-holing of individual planting stations, provision of compost fertilizer in these pot-holes,
                         and mulching of the area around the pot-holes with crop residues from the previous harvest.
                         Through these practices farmers are able to produce maize yields above 2000kgs per hectare without
                         fertilizer which in turn reduces associated carbon costs from increasing farmer dependency on
                         fertilizer.

                         (iii)    Other Sustainable Agriculture: Other measures to increase yield and recover degraded
                         agricultural land include crop rotation with legumes and use of deep-rooted crops such as sunflower
                         to help pull up soil nutrients, and fallow field recovery with velvet beans.

                         (iv)     Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (REDD): The project will scale up
                         on existing initiatives that have resulted in a burgeoning honey market and potentially large wild
                         mushrooms market with added premium pricing when producers demonstrate commitment to forest
                         protection through the cessation of expansive slash-and-burn and rotational fallow agricultural
                         practices. Small holder farmers will gain increased premium prices for their farm commodities when
                         their community effectively implements a community-regulated and enforced land use zoning plan or
                         establishes community conservation areas that exclude land use practices that are destructive to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         forests. The project will utilize one of the existing REDD methodologies approved under the
                         Verified Carbon Standard.

                         (v)     Improved Fire Management: Non-burning of post-harvest farm plots to promote mulching of
                         next season’s crop is an important part of a farmer’s compliance score. No-burning of designated
                         woodland sites used as apiaries is another basis for allocating points for compliance by participating
                         farmers. Their respective points contribute to a community’s overall scoring for market pricing of the
                         commodities COMACO buys from small holder farmers. A comparison between a COMACO and a
                         non-COMACO area using MODIS imagery data has shown a reduced fire history in the COMACO
                         area and the importance of the measures applied by COMACO.

                         (vi)     Alternatives to fuel wood for forest protection: Adoption of GS coppice agroforestry has the
                         potential of becoming a large scale alternative for firewood, both to farmer household use and for
                         sale to urban/peri-urban non-farm households. Coppicing results in annual stem regrowth of long
                         narrow stems of 1-3inch diameter which grows during the dry season. This regrowth makes the stem
                         easy to bundle, store and finally use for cooking. The firewood bundles are suitable for sale to
                         current charcoal users and reduce forest degradation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in the Luangwa Valley in Eastern Zambia. The Luangwa Valley is a
                           mixed woodland landscape dotted with smallholder farms. The soils are depleted of nutrients due to
                           monoculture crops planting by subsistence farmers, and the local practice of burning crop residues,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           which also contributes to soil erosion.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           COMACO has got in-house capacity for implementing safeguards for the project. The Ministry of
                           Agriculture and Livestock (MAL) has a safeguards specialist who is familiar with World Bank
                           safeguards procedures as they have been, and are currently implementing Bankfunded projects.
                           From the borrower’s side, the MAL safeguards specialist will be the main person responsible for
                           ensuring compliance with safeguards issues in the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTA2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             As an agriculture land management /
                           BP 4.01                                            afforestation, reforestation and revegetation
                                                                              project, the proposed landscape project (also
                                                                              see project description) is expected to have both
                                                                              positive and negative impacts and therefore the
                                                                              Bank safeguards policy on Environmental
                                                                              assessment (OP/BP4.01) is triggered. Positive
                                                                              project impact on the environment will be large
                                                                              and significant. An Environmental and Social
                                                                              management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                              prepared to guide the screening and mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              of any negative impact of the project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes             The Bank policy on Natural Habitats (OP/BP
                                                                              4.04) is triggered by the project given the
                                                                              potential conversion of natural habitats either
                                                                              directly or indirectly, through both climate
                                                                              smart agriculture or REDD+ activities as
                                                                              proposed under this project. The expanded
                                                                              agricultural activities would largely be
                                                                              undertaken in the already degraded land areas
                                                                              and with the scaling up of project proposed
                                                                              technologies including soil conservation
                                                                              practices are expected to result in landscape
                                                                              improvements. The establishment of green
                                                                              zones in the participating chiefdoms would lead
                                                                              to a change in the natural habitats but the
                                                                              expected impact is positive. The expected
                                                                              changes in the livelihoods could have an impact
                                                                              on natural habitats and therefore the project
                                                                 ESMF includes proposed measures for
                                                                 mitigating such impacts.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The safeguards policy OP/BP 4.36 on forests is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 triggered by this project as its activities will
                                                                 reduce uncontrolled forest loss and degradation
                                                                 and increase the net forest cover in the project
                                                                 areas within the Luangwa Valley. Project is
                                                                 largely expected to bring positive results under
                                                                 this policy through the demarcation and
                                                                 management of green zones in the valley. In
                                                                 addition to the expected potential positive
                                                                 benefits, the activities related to expected
                                                                 increase in small-holder farmer crop production
                                                                 and scaling up of sustainable climate-smart
                                                                 agriculture may have marginal negative effects
                                                                 on total forest cover and forest tree species and
                                                                 their distribution. The project ESMF includes
                                                                 proposed measures for potential mitigating of
                                                                 negative impacts.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   The safeguards policy OP/BP4.09 on Pest
                                                                 management is triggered. Technology
                                                                 dissemination and scaling up on adoption of
                                                                 climate smart agricultural technologies to be
                                                                 supported by the project could result in the
                                                                 increased usage of agrochemicals by farmer
                                                                 beneficiaries, although the project does not
                                                                 directly advocate the use of pesticides or other
                                                                 chemical fertilizers while the use of organic
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and/ or conservation practices are encouraged.
                                                                 Given the potential risk of use of harmful
                                                                 chemicals (to man and environment), a Pest
                                                                 Management Plan (PMP) has been drafted by
                                                                 the project and is being currently reviewed by
                                                                 the Bank. Once approved the PMP will be
                                                                 adopted for use under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The Physical Cultural Resources safeguards
                         BP 4.11                                 policy OP/BP4.11 is triggered by the project to
                                                                 avoid potential threats that would negatively
                                                                 impact cultural resources related to the
                                                                 expansion of agricultural activities and REDD+
                                                                 activities. Although such impacts could be
                                                                 small or negligible, given the landscape
                                                                 approach and the expected large total hectarage
                                                                 under this proposed project, the policy is
                                                                 triggered as a precautionary measure, and the
                                                                 project ESMF includes proposed measures for
                                                                 mitigating any negative impacts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The Bank policy OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous
                                                                peoples) is not triggered by this project as the
                                                                project activities and target area in the Luangwa
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                valley of the Eastern province does not include
                                                                any indigenous people according to the policy
                                                                definition. The project is however expected to
                                                                have a significant positive effect on all rural
                                                                households participating in the Luangwa valley
                                                                area with the improved access to livelihood
                                                                improvement through carbon credits generated
                                                                by the project activities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The Bank safeguards policy OP/BP4.12
                         4.12                                   (Involuntary Resettlement) is triggered. The
                                                                project is not expected to involve any large
                                                                scale land acquisitions or denial of access to
                                                                normal means of livelihood across the target
                                                                areas. However, in one of the targeted
                                                                chiefdoms under the project it may involve
                                                                some potential beneficiaries being resettled for
                                                                green zone establishment. It may also include
                                                                small-scale land acquisition, resident relocation
                                                                and access limitation to some of the livelihoods.
                                                                The project has already drafted the Resettlement
                                                                Policy framework (RPF). The detailed social
                                                                impact assessment (SIA) will be completed
                                                                once the affected land and residents are
                                                                identified and where these require resettlement,
                                                                cause impact on assets, and / or negatively
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                impact income, these mitigation procedures will
                                                                be further defined, in detail ,in a Resettlement
                                                                Action Plan (RAP) specific to that chiefdom.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The Bank policy OP/BP4.37 on the safety of
                                                                dams is not triggered as the project would not
                                                                involve any construction of water retention
                                                                structures in relation to the component 1 and 2
                                                                that would pose potential hazards to both human
                                                                or animal health and safety. The project will
                                                                not fund any large dams, as defined by OP 4.37
                                                                or or small dams.
                         Projects on International        No    The Bank policy OP/BP7.50 (Projects on
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   International Waterways) is not triggered by
                                                                this project as the proposed project activities in
                                                                relation to REDD+ and agriculture in the
                                                                Luangwa watershed will not potentially impact
                                                                any of the riparian countries of Zambia.
                                                                Increased water use or direct abstraction from
                                                                                                                                 the project activities are not expected and as
                                                                                                                                 such are also not expected to negatively affect
                                                                                                                                 the Luangwa watershed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Bank policy OP/BP7.60) (projects in
                                 7.60                                                                                            Disputed Areas) is not triggered by the proposed
                                                                                                                                 Carbon finance project as the project area is not
                                                                                                                                 geographically located in any disputed
                                                                                                                                 territories of the country.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguards studies have been completed but will be updated once the actual targeted project area
                                      is completely delineated. Draft ESMF, RPF and PMP documents have been drafted by early
                                      October 2013 and are undergoing review.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Indira Janaki Ekanayake

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 22-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 22-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
