INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14703
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Feb-2015, 13-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Western Africa             Project ID:  P126773
Project Name: West Africa Regional Fisheries Program SOP-Cl - Mauritania & Guinea
(P 126773)
Task Team       Berengere P. C. Prince,Aissatou Diallo
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Dec-2014                Estimated    16-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN01                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal       International waters
Area:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (59%), Animal
production (41%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (49%), Environmental
policies and institutions (20%), Other public sector gov ernance (19%), Rural
non-farm income generation (12%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.05            Total Bank Financing:   22.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          1.05
IDA Grant                                                                  22.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           7.00
Total                                                                      30.05
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
A. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of this first phase of West Africa Regional Fisheries Program SOP-C
(formerly APL-C) is to strengthen governance and management of targeted fisheries and improve
handling of landed catch at selected sites.
O
B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The Global Environmental objective of the WARFP SOP-Cl (formerly APL-C 1) is the same as
the PDO: to strengthen governance and management of targeted fisheries and improve handling
of landed catch at selected sites.
3. Project Description
A. Project Concept
To achieve the PDO, the project will invest an estimated total of US$30.5 million in Mauritania and
Guinea, of which IDA will finance US$12 million and GEF US$7 million in Mauritania and IDA
will finance US$10 million in Guinea.
The Project will have four components, and the overall composition is the same for the two countries
(and all other WARFP countries). However, specific focus and hence activities under each
component vary between the two countries because of the differences in the level of fisheries
development, the nature of the industry (e.g. export orientation in Mauritania, substantial domestic
fish consumption in Guinea), and existing commitment by other partners. Project activities have also
evolved with the history of the WARFP reflecting the lessons learned from the implementation of the
earlier SOPs (see Annex 2 for a detailed project description).
Component 1: Strengthening Good Governance and Sustainable Management of the Fisheries (US
$1.40 million IDA and US$6.93 million GEF in Mauritania; US$2.40 million IDA in Guinea). This
component aims to build the capacity of the Government and stakeholders to develop and implement
policies and systems that would ensure that the fish resources are used in a manner that is
environmentally sustainable, socially equitable and economically profitable. The component
contains four key subcomponents:
(i)    Developing the legal and operational policy and strengthening the institutional capacity to
*         enable sustainable management of fisheries resources (long-term agenda);
(ii)   Strengthening the vessel registration systems for accurate assessment and effective control of
fishing capacity (short-term agenda);
(iii)  Introducing new fisheries management schemes in target fisheries, segments, or communities
to align fishing capacity and effort to sustainable catch levels, which is pursued in parallel with
development and implementation of fisheries management plans (medium-term agenda); and
(iv)   Strengthening the system of fisheries-related data collection, compilation and management,
and dissemination and communication in a transparent manner (long-term agenda).
Component 2: Reducing Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated (IUU) Fishing (US$3.09 million IDA
in Guinea). This component aims to reduce IUU fishing activities that threaten the sustainable
management of fish resources by strengthening fisheries Monitoring, Control and Surveillance
(MCS) systems. Mauritania does not have this component as a fisheries surveillance program is
already funded (see paragraph 44).
Page 2 of 8


﻿Component 3: Increasing Contribution of the Fish Resources to the Local Economy (US$7.66
million IDA, US$0.07 million GEF and US$0.3 million self-financing in Mauritania; US$2.47
million IDA in Guinea). This component aims to increase the benefits derived from fish caught in
the EEZs of the countries in particular by investing in infrastructure and institutional capacity that
U        enable improved handling of landed fish and reduction of post-harvest losses.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Regional Coordination (US
$2.94 million IDA and US$0.75 million self-financing in Mauritania; US$2.04 million IDA in
Guinea). This component aims to support project implementation and regional coordination within
the WARFP, ensuring that regular monitoring and evaluation is conducted and the results are fed
back into decision making and project management.
The Project recognizes that a governance and policy framework must be in place before any
substantial investment is made in fisheries-related infrastructure. Thus, as seen in the next section,
the first phase of the Project focuses on fisheries management improvement at the national level and
the second and third phases on regional integration and value chain development. Also, as discussed
in Annex 2, the objectives and activities of components 1 and 2 are closely related. The MCS
systems to be supported in component 2 are one of several tools to achieve the objective of improved
fisheries governance by improving enforcement and compliance of good practice by the participants
in the sector.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
In Mauritania, civil works will be limited to one site, the Fish Market of Nouakchott (March6 aux
Poissons de Nouakchott - MPN), but the project will also finance enhancement measures to the area
directly south of the MPN. This area consists of a fragile dune ridge, 3.5 km long, undergoing
rehabilitation through a coastal cities adaptation to climate change project financed by the Ministry
of Environment and GIZ. In Guinea, the government has significantly narrowed down the target area
to Koukoud6 village in the prefecture of Boffa. However, the actual site selection has not been
finalized as the Ebola outbreak has prevented further field visits/studies. The investment will involve
construction of artisanal fish landing and handling facilities on the coast.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Melissa C. Landesz (GEN07)
Salamata Bal (GSU01)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         Guinea: The construction of fish landing and handling
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               facilities on the coast are likely to generate negative
impacts on the environment and on local communities.
Consistent with an EA category B, these potential
negative impacts are expected to be small to moderate,
site-specific, and can be mitigated. No irreversible
negative impacts are anticipated. Due the Ebola outbreak
crisis, OP 10 para 12 applies to Guinea and the
preparation of the safeguards instruments will be deferred
to project implementation. An Environmental and Social
Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been
developed to guide the preparation of the safeguards
Page 3 of 8


﻿instruments during project implementation. These
documents will be consulted upon, reviewed by the World
Bank and disclosed in-country and the InfoShop within
120 days after project effectiveness and before civil works
can commence.
Mauritania: The rehabilitation of the Nouakchott Fish
Market will include (1) Land acquisition to consolidate
the fish market site; (2) Fencing the whole perimeter of
the site (southern part, existing footprint) for security
purposes. This activity will also include restriction of
access to the northern part of the site (area north of
current footprint) to foster ongoing efforts to protect the
fragile dune ridge. Cars will not be allowed in the
northern section, but local communities will continue to
have access by foot; (3) Road construction and sanitation
works including a wastewater treatment plant; (4)
Construction of warehouses and administrative buildings.
The rehabilitation of the market is likely to generate
potentially negative, site-specific environmental and
social impacts. These impacts are unlikely to be
significant and/or irreversible. The borrower has prepared
an ESIA which was validated by the Bank and disclosed
in-country (12/08/14) and at the InfoShop (12/03/14).
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes           At identification stage, the Program noted the potential to
4.04                                  trigger the natural habitats safeguard (OP 4.04) due to the
possible impacts of infrastructure on such environments.
According to the ESIA for Mauritania, no natural habitats
will be affected by the project's investments. However,
since the site selection has not been completed in Guinea,
OP 4.04 is triggered in the event project financing has an
impact on natural habitats in Guinea.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural        Yes          Neither the Nouakchott Fish Market, nor the general areas
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   considered for site location in Guinea, are protected areas
or known cultural heritage areas. However, the project is
triggering OP 4.11 because the civil works will include
digging may lead to chance finds. The ESIA and the
ESSAF include provisions for chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           Guinea: The project may finance the acquisition of land to
OP/BP 4.12                             facilitate the expansion of fish landing sites and
Page 4 of 8


﻿associated fish handling processing facilities. Due the
Ebola outbreak crisis, OP 10 para 12 applies to Guinea
and the preparation of the safeguards instruments will be
deferred to project implementation. An Environmental
and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
(ESSAF) will be developed to guide the preparation of the
safeguards instruments during project implementation.
These documents will be consulted upon, reviewed by the
World Bank and disclosed in-country and the InfoShop
within 120 days after project effectiveness and before
civil works can commence.
Mauritania: The rehabilitation of the Fish Market will
include land acquisition to consolidate the fish market
site. The management of the Fish Market has begun a
study on the identification of land users and land owners
and has already initiated plans to compensate project
affected individuals. The process has involved all the
beneficiaries and the team had discussions with some of
their representatives during the mission. Mitigation
measures have been provided for in the project. It is
assessed that the impact will not be irreversible and there
is a proper consideration of the impacts by the Fish
Market management. The borrower has prepared a RAP
which was consulted upon, validated by the Bank and
disclosed in-country (12/08/14) and at the InfoShop
(12/04/14).
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Category B for Environmental Assessment (EA) purposes since
potential adverse environmental impacts associated with its investments are generally moderate to
small-scale and site-specific.
In Mauritania, the rehabilitation of the Nouakchott Fish Market will include land acquisition to
consolidate the fish market site; fencing the whole perimeter of the site for security purposes; road
construction and sanitation works including a wastewater treatment plant; and construction of
warehouses and administrative buildings. Localized potential negative impacts from infrastructure
rehabilitation, upgrading, or construction may include air, soil and water pollution, noise pollution,
Page 5 of 8


﻿increase in STI and HIV/AIDS and safety concerns (accidents on the work camps; traffic
accidents), poor management of construction waste, damage to the landscape integrity of the
current site. The borrower has prepared an ESIA and a RAP. The ESIA was consulted upon,
validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country (12/08/14) and at the InfoShop (12/03/14). The
O
RAP was consulted upon, validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country (12/08/14) and at the
InfoShop (12/04/14).
In Guinea, the investment will involve construction of artisanal fish landing and handling
facilities. The potential negative impacts are expected to be small to moderate, site-specific, and
can be mitigated. No irreversible negative impacts are anticipated. The government has
significantly narrowed down the target area to Koukoud6 village in the prefecture of Boffa, but the
actual site selection has not been finalized as the Ebola outbreak has prevented further field visits/
studies. OP 10 para 12 applies to Guinea due the Ebola crisis and the preparation of the safeguards
instruments will be deferred to project implementation. An Environmental and Social Screening
and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been developed to guide the preparation of the
safeguards instruments during project implementation. These documents will be consulted upon,
reviewed by the World Bank and disclosed in-country and the InfoShop within 120 days after
project effectiveness and before civil works can commence.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no major, irreversible, or long-term, negative environmental impacts anticipated due to
project activities. In the case of the Nouakchott Fish Market the ESIA addresses potential
cumulative impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
In Mauritania, there was no alternative site since the project is focused on the rehabilitation of the
Nouakchott Fish Market; however, the ESIA addresses the no project alternative and the
preliminary feasibility study justifies the design choices. Overall, the current rehabilitation plan is
a major improvement for the site in terms of environmental sustainability.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As a regional project, the borrowers' institutional capacity for safeguard policies varies from
country to country. Implementation capacity is weak in Mauritania and in Guinea and will be
supplemented by a technical team embedded in respective Ministry's monitoring and
implementation unit, with oversight provided by a multi-stakeholder national steering committee.
In addition, the regional structure mandated with supporting the management of marine fish
resources, the "Commission Sous-Regionale des P6ches" (CSRP), will be used to help coordinate
and supervise compliance with safeguard policies.
In Mauritania, the PIU will recruit an environmental and social safeguards specialist to support the
implementation of the safeguards instruments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In Mauritania, the draft ESIA went through a public consultation process with key stakeholders in
the line Ministry, the Ministry of Environment, the management of the Nouakchott Fish Market,
relevant associations and NGOs. Their comments and recommendations were addressed in the
ESIA. During the evaluation mission, the safeguards team met with key stakeholders and project
beneficiaries and affected people. They confirmed that they have a good understanding of the
Page 6 of 8


﻿project and highlighted the participative and transparent approach the project has followed in
involving them so far. They told the team that their concerns and recommendations have been
taken into account in the project design which they were able to verify on the updated design
maps. Project affected people and other key stakeholders will be involved in the project
O
C.         implementation through a monitoring and coordination committee.
In Guinea, the ESSAF outlines the process to follow to implement safeguards requirements and
once the instruments are prepared, they will be consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Africa                                                   08-Dec-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Africa                                                   08-Dec-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Page 7 of 8


﻿OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
0          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Berengere P. C. Prince,Aissatou Diallo
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/     Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


