                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA264
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic                     P122229
                                                                            Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     Public Service Reform and Rejuvenation Project (P122229)
                            Task Team       Chiara Bronchi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Oct-2013                         Estimated   17-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTP5                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (60%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        77.00           Total Bank Financing:  77.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                              77.00
                              Total                                                                                  77.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to: improve the human resource management capacity of
                           selected ministries and rejuvenate their workforce.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                     Page 1 of 11
                         1.       The project development objective is to: improve the human resource management capacity
                         of selected ministries and rejuvenate their workforce.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.      The project will address selected priorities in areas that are essential to help the Public
                         Service of DRC move away from a dysfunctional and aging public administration towards a better
                         performing and rejuvenated system. The pronounced fragility of the country, and the fluid national
                         and regional situation, require a focus on basics, and maximum design flexibility and adaptability
                         during implementation of project activities.

                         Project Beneficiaries

                         3.      Direct project beneficiaries will include civil servants eligible for retirement, young
                         graduates seeking to make a career in the public service, and existing civil servants who will acquire
                         access to improved pension benefits and better career prospects in the five target ministries. Indirect
                         beneficiaries will include the population at central and provincial levels, who can expect to see
                         improved performance in public service delivery as the reform progresses.

                         PDO Level Results Indicators

                         4.      The PDO Level Results Indicators are:

                         (a)     PDO Indicator 1: Recruitment of civil servants in the targeted ministries is based on the new
                         organizational norms and procedures (percent of total new recruitments in target ministries);
                         (b)     PDO Indicator 2: Young professionals employed in the public administration after
                         completing their training program to rejuvenate the targeted ministries , of which at least 25 % are
                         women;

                         (c)      PDO Indicator 3: Civil servants eligible for retirement in the targeted ministries have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         received their retirement benefits/packages and retired from active service (percent of total staff
                         eligible for retirement in the targeted ministries);

                         Key Intermediate Results and Indicators

                         Intermediate Result (component 1): Targeted Ministries are restructured according to their revised
                         organizational framework:

                         (i)      Ministries meeting annual restructuring plan targets based on the new organizational norms
                         and procedures;
                         (ii)     Regular Government employees identified and validated through the biometric
                         identification process;
                         (iii)    Cases of irregular civil servants resolved;
                         (iv)     Ministries with transparent mechanisms to manage human resources, including recruitment
                         and promotion of qualified staff;
                         (v)      A cohort of talented Young Professionals is trained according to a well-defined program
                         yearly, of which at least 25 % should be women;

                         Intermediate Result (component 2): A sustainable retirement system for civil servants is established




                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         i.      An external and independent agency to facilitate payment of retirement benefits is recruited;
                         ii.     Civil servants of targeted ministries receiving full retirement benefits;
                         iii.    Grievances/Disputes on retirement benefits solved during the retirement process;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iv.     The civil service pension fund is established;


                         2.       PROJECT DESCRIPTION
                         5.       The proposed project will be financed by a US $ 77 million Specific Investment Loan (SIL),
                         in the form of an IDA grant, aimed at supporting key aspects of DRC public service reform, starting
                         with a pilot of five strategic ministries.

                         6.       In the context of the broader government strategy for public administration reform, the
                         project will have two major areas of focus: (i) supporting the public administration reform program
                         in terms of the implementation of key aspects of the reform monitoring, and coordination, while
                         reviewing and reforming the organization of the targeted ministries and agencies; (ii) rejuvenating
                         the public administration through management of the retirement process (including payment of
                         benefits to the retiring civil servants) combined with legal and technical support for the creation of a
                         sustainable public service pension system and support to the recruitment of young professionals and
                         their integration into the public administration. These areas of focus are expected to set the
                         foundations for future interventions on other aspects of the civil service reform, including a new pay
                         policy and an effective performance appraisal system, as laid out in the Government Strategy.

                         7.      Under the proposed operation, five strategic ministries have been identified and selected by
                         the Ministry of Public Service (No CAB/MIN/FP/USKD/DC/01/FMM/249/GMK/007/2011) and
                         confirmed during the pre-appraisal mission. The list was confirmed by a letter from the Prime
                         Minister on November 9, 2012. The decision on sector ministries was based on two criteria: (i) level
                         of preparedness (extent to which preparatory work has advanced) and (ii) core functions of the
                         government (financial management and HR). Based on these criteria, the following ministries will
                         be targeted for support: the Ministries of Finance (including the three revenues agencies: DGI,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DGRAD and DGDA), Budget, Planning (including Statistics National Institute), Public Service, and
                         Portfolio .

                         B.      Project Components
                         8.      Specifically, the project will cover the following components:

                         Component 1: Supporting the implementation of the public service reform program (US$ 39.7
                         million)

                         9.       This component aims to support the public administration reform program in terms of
                         coordination, implementation, and monitoring progress and impact of key aspects of the reform. It
                         will also assist with a strong communication strategy to build broad consensus around the reform. It
                         will finance technical assistance and diagnostics as they emerge during the reform implementation
                         process and the project implementation arrangements.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening capacity to plan, coordinate, and build consensus on the
                         implementation of the Government’s Public Administration Reform Program (3.6 million US$).

                         10.     Specifically, sub-component 1.1 aims to provide strategic and legal support to the CPMAP
                         and the MPS to implement the key pillars of the Revised Strategy on Public Administration Reform

                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         (see Annex 2 for details on the Revised Strategy). It will also provide technical assistance to build a
                         strong communication strategy to address different audiences including (i) the general public; (ii)
                         civil servants and trade unions, to build understanding and broad consensus on the objectives of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reform and its beneficiaries. Additionally, it will support internal dialogue between management, and
                         (iii) civil servants who will be affected directly by this project to address their concerns. A
                         monitoring mechanism will also be put in place, through periodic surveys to assess the public
                         perception of the reform progress. This should serve to identify communication gaps and also assess
                         the direct and indirect impact of the reform.

                         11.     This sub-component will finance the following activities:

                         (i)      Technical assistance to the CPMAP and the MPS to steer the reform, monitor progress,
                         anticipate problems and solutions in order to advance the reform process efficiently (1.2 million);
                         (ii)     Support the preparation of legal framework for the public administration by putting in place
                         implementation regulations and procedures for a swift enactment of the new Organic Law on Public
                         Services that is expected to be discussed by Parliament before the end of 2013 (0.5 million);
                         (iii)    Support the Government Communications strategy on the Reform, including regular surveys
                         to assess the public perception of the reform by the political leadership, the public administration
                         and citizens possibly with the use of ICT tools (1 million);
                         (iv)     Workshop activities to raise awareness and build consensus among civil servants and trade
                         unions on the key strategic objectives of the reform program (0.9 million).

                         Sub-component 1.2: Supporting the restructuring of the organization and functions of targeted
                         ministries and institutions (US$ 4 million).

                         12.      This component will support all targeted Ministries and the National Institute of Statistics
                         through financing technical assistance to carry out organizational and functional reviews to
                         implement the reorganization of these entities. These reviews will be based on a governance-auditing
                         approach, which aims at reviewing organizational structures, institutional arrangements, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processes and capacity against the institutional mandates. The findings of the audits should be used
                         to re-organize the ministries, help them to elaborate an action plan to improve senior management
                         leadership as well as assessment of staff competences for better delivery of their mission. The overall
                         process will also be supported by the National Secretariat for Capacity Building (SENAREC) --
                         presently supported by the Bank’s project on Establishing Capacity for Core Public Management --
                         that coordinates a network of national and provincial institutions that provide training in rapid results
                         initiatives and result based management to help public institutions improve their performance.

                         13.     This sub-component will finance the following activities:

                         (i)      Technical assistance to undertake organizational/functional reviews and governance
                         auditing for the targeted ministries and agencies (1.5 million);
                         (ii)    Technical assistance to elaborate an action plan based on the recommendations of the
                         organizational audits, including assessment of staff competences and re-assignment according to
                         newly identified needs and functions (2 million);
                         (iii)   Technical assistance to update the national program to strengthen capacity of the Public
                         Service (PRONAREC) according to staff needs and objectives, in coordination with SENAREC and
                         other government training centers and national schools (0.5 million).
                         Sub-component 1.3 Building capacity for HR Data Management and Control (US$ 4 million)
                         14.     The effective management of the public service workforce remains one of the most critical

                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                         binding constraints for the establishment of a functioning public administration. Overall, the DRC
                         government currently has no effective control over the exact number of civil servants, the quality of
                         its workforce, or personnel movement. The number of registered civil servants and security agents
Public Disclosure Copy




                         receiving salaries through the regular payroll system is estimated at 236,000 (excluding teachers) and
                         334,000 (including teachers). However, there are a number of employees that have been hired
                         outside of the regular Civil Service system and irregularly registered with the Ministry of Public
                         Services and that claim a regular pay.

                         15.      The lack of a reliable database and poor documentation and archiving systems implies that
                         neither the Ministry of Public Service nor the hiring ministries know the exact number of civil
                         servants thus impeding their ability to manage careers and retirement and ensure the veracity of the
                         data. In order to remedy this long-standing situation, as well as to set the basis for mastering HR
                         data and set some controls on the management of civil servants including managing their retirement,
                         the Ministry of Public Services started a biometric identification of the civil servants at central and
                         provincial level in 2009. While the identification is expected to be completed by June 2014, the post-
                         collection data verification and treatment has not started as yet. This was due to poor planning and
                         lack of adequate IT equipment and set up. The MPS is already rehabilitating the IT server rooms and
                         planning to acquire an IT security system to control and prevent fraud and irregularities in the system
                         as well as to protect and secure maintenance of the updated/verified HR database produced through
                         the identification. Once the database is cleaned and protected, constant monitoring by the relevant
                         department will be critical to preserve its integrity and to avoid repeating the costly identification
                         exercise.

                         16.     This sub-component will support the MPS to put in place internal rules, procedures,
                         management and control functions that are the pre-conditions for a well-functioning HR management
                         system and will finance the following activities:


                         (i)       Technical assistance to data treatment generated by the biometric census to ensure the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reliability of the data (US$ 1.5 million);
                         (ii)      Independent audit of the data treatment process to ensure the management and integrity of
                         the process (US$ 0.5 million);
                         (iii)     Technical Assistance to build capacity of the department of inspection in the Ministry of
                         Public Service to detect and resolve irregularities. This will include providing IT equipment to
                         facilitate the task, if needed (US$ 0.6 million);
                         (iv)      Capacity building for the HR department of the Ministry of Public Services for HR data
                         management (US$ 1.4 million);

                         17.     In parallel, the PRCG will assist the MPS and Budget to introduce an integrated system that
                         will enable the electronic interfacing of the HR database in the MPS and the payroll in the Ministry
                         of Budget.
                         Sub-component 1.4: Building Capacity to Establish an HR Management System (US$ 1.6 million)
                         18.     A coherent and uniform approach to inform new recruitment procedures and to manage their
                         career development process within the system of public administration has to be defined. Currently,
                         the government has not yet adopted a harmonized approach, leading to a number of ad-hoc initiatives
                         being taken in isolation by the various ministries . Moreover, the failure to establish a transparent and
                         consistent approach increases the risk of using savings generated by the retirement process
                         (component 2) for other purposes, and hence, undermining the sustainability of the retirement
                         program.

                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         19.     This sub-component will finance:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)     Technical Assistance for the design and implementation of human resources management
                         systems including, recruitment, planning, and career management, la (US$ 1.1 million);
                         (ii)    Technical Assistance to support the review and rationalization of pay the system (US$ 0.5
                         million);

                         20.      While the project will provide technical assistance on HR management, it will also support
                         ongoing efforts made by the government towards the rationalization of the pay system. At present,
                         the MPS and Ministry of Budget are running simulations to assess the fiscal implications of reversing
                         the ratio between salaries and the premia in order to make pay system more transparent and equitable
                         and limit discretionary interventions.
                         Sub-component 1.5: Supporting a pilot “Young Professionals Program? to rejuvenate the civil
                         service (US$ 20.8 million)
                         21.      The recruitment of younger and better qualified civil servants and agents can significantly
                         contribute to the revitalization and modernization of the civil service. The government has already
                         started to successfully hire young professionals in Ministerial Cabinets (about 1000 across the prime
                         minister’s office, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Budget, and the Ministry of Agriculture)
                         and would like to have a more structured approach that provides for young professionals to be
                         integrated into the public service. For this goal to be reached, the cost savings generated by the
                         retirement program (component 2) must be used effectively to recruit new staff and invest in the next
                         generation of civil servants.

                         22.      Recognizing, the critical role that the YP programme can play in modernizing the system, the
                         project will provide technical assistance to guide the government in clarifying the Vision and the
                         Objectives of the YP programme, and ensure it is designed in a way that being a YP is an attractive
                         perspective for young graduates. In light of the ambitious target for women young professional (25
                         %), this component will also develop a system that targets women graduates for inclusion in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recruitment and training efforts supported under the YP Program.

                         23.      Moreover, some of the most exceptional YPs will be expected to attend the newly
                         established Ecole Nationale de l’Administration. Finally, the program will also include provisions for
                         the geographic appointments of YPs, to support ongoing efforts to strengthen state presence and
                         effectiveness at the provincial level. Over time, the program is expected to develop a well-recognized
                         ‘brand’ that can help build an ‘esprit de corp’ among the new generation of civil servants, creating a
                         sense of pride and raising the profile of the public administration among young graduates.

                         24.     This sub-component will finance the following activities:

                         (i)      Technical Assistance to establish an effective Program for Young Professionals with clear
                         rules and procedures (defined in a manual of procedures). The program will include training
                         modules, new tools, and working methods to ensure enhanced career prospects and successful
                         integration of the YPs into the public service (US $ 4.3 m);
                         (ii)     Recruitment and remuneration of 500 talented Young Professionals under the YP Program,
                         based on a rigorous needs assessment issued by the organizat ional audits ; US$ 13. million);
                         (iii)    Recruitment and remuneration of 50 senior professionals for coaching and mentoring of
                         young professionals, based on well-identified coaching needs. (US $ 3.5 million)
                         Sub-component 1.6: Implementation Support and Impact Evaluation (US$ 5.7 million).

                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                         25.      The project will be managed by a small implementation unit under the CMRAP (Cellule de
                         mise en oeuvre de la Réforme de l’Administration Publique), which has been created by a ministerial
                         order (Arrêté No CAB.MIN/FP/J-CK/GELB/FMD/GMK/082/2012) in order to ensure effective
Public Disclosure Copy




                         oversight over all actions related to the public administration reform process. The CMRAP will
                         report to the MPS and will serve as secretariat to the inter-ministerial coordination structure chaired
                         by the Prime Minister (CPMAP), and is meant to be a permanent structure within the Ministry of
                         Public Service. Staff will be added to the CMRAP to manage the implementation of the project
                         including a Project Coordinator, an accountant, a procurement specialist, an M&E specialist, a
                         treasurer, and a financial and administration specialist. The team will be supervised by the Project
                         Coordinator, and their costs will be financed by the project.

                         26.     A rigorous impact evaluation (IE) exercise is also proposed as a means of testing alternative
                         approaches to reform and rejuvenate the public service in the targeted ministries, with a view to
                         adopt and scale up those proven to be most effective. Furthermore, given the risks inherent in a
                         project of this nature, the IE will be used as a risk mitigation measure to closely examine the
                         outcomes of select project sub-components and activities to assess whether the project’s benefits
                         outweigh any intended or unintended costs.

                         27.     This sub-component will finance the following activities:

                         (i)      Provision of expert and technical staff for the CMRAP and the Project Implementation Unit
                         (4 million);
                         (ii)     Minor works to refurbish the office space and provide adequate IT and logistics equipment
                         for the CMRAP (0.2 million);
                         (iii)    Technical Assistance for the design and implementation of the Development Impact and
                         Evaluation Initiative to test the effectiveness of alternative approaches to support public service
                         reform and rejuvenation (1.5 million US$).

                         Component 2: Supporting the retirement process (US$ 30.3 Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         28.      While capacity for HR management of active civil servants is being built, it is also very
                         important to support the government in managing the “stock? of civil servants who have reached
                         retirement age and that, according to the law, should have already retired. Recognizing these
                         challenges, and in the effort to promote greater accountability in the retirement process, this
                         component is aimed at supporting the government’s efforts through (a) the preparation and
                         management of the biometric identification process; (b) the payment of benefits for eligible staff of
                         targeted ministries and agencies through an external and independent agency; and (c) the
                         establishment of a civil service pension fund.

                         29.      Identifying the precise number and identity of civil servants eligible for the mandatory
                         retirement is critical to ensure the transparency and the accuracy of the payment of benefits. While
                         the civil servants census is being completed, a specific verification of the workforce that is eligible
                         for retirement ministry-by-ministry will start in order to minimize the risk of irregularities and
                         treated, prevent delaying the reform process. This will also be important to build trust in the
                         retirement syste m among civil servants. The small identification exercise will provide up-to-date
                         information and will allow for corrections of irregularities.

                         30.     Another critical aspect of the retirement process refers to the criteria and methods to be used
                         for calculating benefits and pension benefits. Staff regulations for career civil servants stipulate that
                         pension benefits consist of: (i) severance payment; (ii) repatriation allowance; and (iii) a pension.

                                                                       Page 7 of 11
                         The first two are known as retirement benefits and are normally a one-off payment. Over the past few
                         years, the criteria for calculating retirement benefits have changed, generating different practices that
                         need to be reconciled into a coherent and unique formula.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         31.      Moreover, the credibility of any retirement scheme rests on the reliability of the pension
                         payments. Currently, pension payments are paid out of the national budget in the DRC and they are
                         calculated the base salary. While pensions are being paid, the budget for the retirement benefits that
                         constitute the bulk of the payment have not been made available. As a result, many civil servants
                         have lost faith in the system, and tend to reject retirement plans. To restore confidence in the system,
                         the present government has decided to establish a pension fund with contribution defined benefits. In
                         the 2013 Budget Law they have already set aside funds to enable the creation of the pension fund for
                         civil servants.

                         32.      Recognizing the efforts to promote greater accountability in the retirement process, this
                         component aims to support the government of DRC to: (a) prepare and manage the biometric
                         identification process for retirees; (b) the payment of retirement benefits (retirement plus
                         repatriation) for eligible staff of targeted ministries and agencies, through an external and
                         independent agency; and (c) support to establish a civil service pension fund.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Payment of retirement benefits (US$ 27.5 million)
                         33.      This component will support the retirement of civil servants who have reached the retirement
                         age. Currently, the legal age of retirement in force is 55 or 30 years of service. However, the new
                         legal framework expected to be discussed in Parliament before the end of 2013 will raise the
                         retirement age of civil servants to 62. The MPS has proposed to start retiring civil servants from the
                         age of 62 (or more) or with 30 years (or more) of service onwards . According to the data provided
                         by the MPS, it is estimated that 5979 civil servants will be retired during the period of the project in
                         the targeted ministries for an estimated cost of US$ 18 million for the retirement benefits (See Annex
                         7 for a detailed breakdown of numbers and costs by ministry). This approach has two advantages: (i)
                         by covering only those civil servants that are eligible for retirement under both the current and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposed legislation, it limits grievances and appeals arising from possible changes in the eligibility
                         status; (ii) by selecting the oldest among the civil servants, it reduces the risks of depleting the civil
                         service and also minimizes the social impact on retirees’ welfare.
                         34.      Orientation training on management of finances and on how to open small trades will be
                         made available to those retirees who would like to start a small business or desire to invest part of
                         their benefits. The orientation training will be on a voluntary basis.
                         35.      This sub-component will finance the recruitment of an external and independent agency that
                         will provide the following services:

                         (i)      Independent verification of the formula underpinning the calculation of benefits, to ensure its
                         correct application (US$ 0.5 million);
                         (ii)     Recruitment of an independent agency responsible to verify and finalize the list of eligible
                         civil servants and the management of the payment process after biometric census of the eligible civil
                         servants on the verified list (US$ 23.4);
                         (iii)    An audit a posteriori will be carried out to verify the integrity of the operation of payment of
                         benefits for every group paid (US$ 0.6 million);
                         (iv)      Support the design and delivery of orientation training courses for retirees (UD$ 3 million);

                         Sub-component 2.2: Establishing a grievance and dispute resolution mechanism (US$ 1.5 million)
                         36.    This sub-component will support the recruitment of an independent agency to manage the

                                                                       Page 8 of 11
                         Grievances and Dispute Resolution Mechanisms (GDRM) linked to the retirement process supported
                         by the project. The agency will play a pivotal role by providing help in prevention, management,
                         resolution, and monitoring of potential conflicts related to retirement programs implementation. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                         particular, it will help secure persons or groups of persons affected by retirement programs and
                         ensure that due process will be followed when processing such programs. Learning from past
                         experiences, providing such independent mechanisms is essential to ensure the transparent retirement
                         process and protect rights of retiring staff.
                         37.      This sub-component will finance the following activity:

                         (i)    Recruitment of an independent agency to manage the grievances and dispute resolution
                         mechanism linked to the retirement process supported by the project (US$ 1.5)

                         Sub-component 2.3: Technical Assistance to establish a public service pension fund (US$ 1.3
                         million)
                         38.       This component will assist the Government in creating a pension fund by conducting a study
                         to determine how the fund should be established, governed, financed, and managed to ensure pension
                         payments and their sustainability. The legal advice will be based on options outlined in earlier
                         feasibility studies financed by UNDP in 2005 that are currently being updated by the PRCG. The
                         advice will be provided once Government authorities decide on the type of pension fund they want to
                         establish. In the meantime, the Government will remain responsible for pension payments under the
                         applicable legislation.
                         39.      This sub-component will finance the following activities:

                         (i)      Legal advisory services for the preparation of the legal texts, rules and procedures needed to
                         establish the public service pension fund including an workshop for validation of the proposed texts
                         (US$ 0.3 million);

                         (ii)    Technical assistance to implement systems and procedures for the management of the
                         pension fund. (US$ 1 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Capital City Kinshasa and Provinces

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No




                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                No social safeguard policies are attracted. No environmental safeguards are attracted by the
                              project. The agreed lists of project activities across components do not include the financing of
                              infrastructure activities to be supported under the Project. Civil works involving minor
                              refurbishing in the amount of US$ 200,000 will be done in existing office buildings, with any or
                              limited disturbance of employee's working conditions, and in accordance with local legislation.
                              For this reason, the Project environmental category has been classified as “C? in accordance with
                              Bank OP 4.01.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                No potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
                              area.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                No alternatives necessary
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                Not Applicable
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                No safeguards consultations are envisioned. However, in the event that they become necessary,
                              the main implementing agencies for the project would be consulted. These agencies include the
                              five Ministries included under the project.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.


                                                                        Page 10 of 11
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            n/a
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Chiara Bronchi
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Albert G. Zeufack (SM)                         Date: 25-Oct-2013




                                                                        Page 11 of 11
