                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC4783

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mali                           Project ID:     P131084
                            Project Name:     Mali Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project (P131084)
                            Task Team         Fabrice Karl Bertholet
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Oct-2013                    Estimated       19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTG2                          Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     45.40                   Total Bank Financing:          25.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                              25.00
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                 15.40
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                    5.00
                              Total                                                                    45.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                             1. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project objective is to expand rural access to modern energy services and to increase
                           renewable generation in rural electricity supply.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed operation will support the GoM’s efforts to increase access to basic energy services by
                         low income rural populations located in areas with no prospect of becoming connected to the
                         national electricity grid in the next decade. The proposed operation will increase the viability of
                         electricity service provision in rural areas and contribute to further scaling-up rural access.

                         The project is expected to dramatically increase the renewable energy installed capacity in the
                         existing off-grid power stations and facilitate subsequent gradual expansion of renewable energy
                         fueled mini-grids to underserved areas. In addition to infrastructure investments, the project promotes
                         the market for energy efficient products and will provide extensive capacity-building in the rural
                         energy services sub-sector and the institutional strengthening of AMADER.

                         The Project will be structured around three main components: (1) Investments in solar PV hybrid
                         systems and mini-grids, (2) Development of off-grid lighting markets and energy efficiency, and (3)
                         Project implementation and capacity building.

                         Component 1: Investments in Solar PV Hybrid Systems and Mini-grids (Total cost US$39.1 million
                         total of which IDA US$19.5 million, SREP US$14.9 million and GPOBA US$4.7 million). This
                         component is aimed at increasing renewable energy generation capacity in the existing power
                         stations supplying rural mini grids and expanding those mini grids. The focus of the component will
                         be on solar PV and energy storage on batteries on centers that are not economically connectable to
                         the grid in the next 10 years. The country’s Rural Electrification Master Plan and AMADER’s rural
                         electrification planning and progress reports will serve as a basis to identify potential small rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         towns and villages and the corresponding energy service companies to be targeted for mini-grids and
                         grid extension.

                         Sub-Component 1 A – Hybrid generation: This subcomponent will finance key components of the
                         hybrid systems, mainly Photovoltaic Panels, inverters, batteries, control electronics and adapted gen-
                         sets for hybrid operation. Based on the experience in Mali and other SSA countries, the technical
                         solutions that will be chosen for the batteries and inverters must have properties of modularity. The
                         project will support the increase/replacement of gen-sets where necessary to ensure efficient
                         operation and automatic synchronization with the solar components and batteries. Hybrid solutions
                         have been experimented in about a dozen of rural sites in Mali. The project will contribute to
                         establishing a more systematic approach to hybridization. The ongoing feasibility study will inter alia
                         define optimal technical design for hybridization of mini-grids, based on local characteristics
                         (demand level, load profile, etc) and assess the adequate sizing of the key components of hybrid
                         systems. In addition, based on objective criteria (local demand, capacity and contribution of the
                         operator, regional balance…), the feasibility study will propose a list of sites to be hybridized under
                         the project. For the sites concerned, this analysis will also determine whether part of thermal
                         generation could be replaced through local biodiesel production (principally Jatropha oil) based on
                         local potential for biofuel cultivation.

                         Sub-Component 1 B – Mini grid expansion and densification : The sub-component will support
                         increased access through rural minigrids’ densification and expansion. In addition, the sub-
                         component will finance the installation of solar home systems (SHS) for households that will not be
                         reached by grid or mini-grids because network expansion would not be economically justifiable. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component partially subsidizes the investment cost for household connection to mini-grids, SHSs,
                         and internal wiring for basic electricity service to make electricity affordable to the poor in rural,
                         remote areas. The OBA subsidy for mini-grids densification/extension or installed SHSs will be
                         disbursed on verified outputs.

                         In addition to the GPOBA funded subsidy for household connections, where feasible schools, clinics,
                         local administration facilities, community and local product transformation units in hybridized areas
                         would also be connected (though most such facilities are likely to be already connected and would
                         benefit primarily of expanded service).

                         Component 2: Development of Off-grid Lighting Markets and Energy Efficiency (Total cost US$2.7
                         million of IDA). This component aims to (i) catalyze the markets for off-grid lighting and solar
                         lanterns in target rural areas through the alignment of Project activities with the Bank’s Lighting
                         Africa program, and (ii) improve energy efficiency and promote a rational and efficient use of
                         electricity on targeted mini-grids, including the distribution of Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFLs)
                         and efficient electric devices for productive uses. The two sub-components financed under this
                         component are:

                         Sub-component 2 A – Lighting Africa initiative. Lighting Africa activities financed under the Project
                         will include (a) output-based subsidies to private distributors for the sale of up to one hundred
                         thousand (100,000) Lighting Africa-certified solar portable lanterns and related pico-PV equipment
                         such as plug-and-play Solar Home Systems SHS, and (b) the deployment of about ten thousand
                         (10,000) in public schools in Project target areas. By focusing on demand- and supply-side
                         investments, the proposed activities will leverage what is currently a viable but small and primarily
                         urban-centric market to bring affordable, modern lighting to those who need it most, including the
                         rural poor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 2 B – Energy Efficiency. Building on previous work carried-out under the HEURA
                         project, this component will also finance energy efficiency activities to manage demands on the
                         existing mini-grids. Activities will center on the dissemination of energy efficient equipment to
                         women’s groups and rural production associations/collectives. Equipment to be distributed will
                         include low-energy evaporative air coolers, solar water heaters, and solar-powered equipment with
                         productive uses. This sub-component will also include the distribution of approximately 36,000
                         compact fluorescent lamps (three per household) for the users connected to the hybrid mini-grid
                         systems and the SHS installed under Component 1 (to be financed by GPOBA).

                         Component 3: Project Implementation Support and Capacity Building (US$3.7 million total of which
                         IDA US$2.8 million, SREP US$0.6 million and GPOBA US$0.3 million). This component supports
                         capacity building and technical assistance to AMADER and private operators as well as Project
                         implementation support.

                         Sub-Component 3A – Project implementation support. This sub-component will include four main
                         activities associated with Project implementation:
                         •        Activity 3.A.1: Technical and procurement capacity for AMADER. This activity will
                         provide support to strengthen AMADER´s capacity for Project implementation including hiring two
                         technical consultants and one procurement specialist that will assist on the implementation of the
                         solar PV hybrid mini-systems.
                         •        Activity 3.A.2. Project management support. This activity will provide for the financing for
                         acquisition of equipment, materials, software and vehicles for the carrying out of project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation.
                         •        Activity 3.A.3. Owner’s engineer. This activity will finance an owner’s engineer to supervise
                         the installation of the mini-grid hybrid systems.
                         •        Activity 3.A.4. Studies, Audit, Monitoring and Evaluation: This activity will finance key
                         studies and consultancy required for the adequate implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the
                         Project.

                         Sub-Component 3B - Capacity-building and technical assistance: This sub-component will include
                         two main activities associated with Project implementation:
                         •         Activity 3.B.1. Capacity building for rural electrification actors and stakeholder’s. The
                         Project will support capacity strengthening (technical, financial, environmental and social, etc) of the
                         rural energy actors, in particular rural mini-grid operators and AMADER, and its partnerships with
                         energy sector initiatives. Support will include technical assistance and specialized training for the
                         supervisory and technical personnel of the private energy service providers (rural operators) and of
                         the executing agency. A particular focus will be given to ensuring that hybrid systems are installed,
                         operated and maintained in safe and adequate manner in order to ensure system performance and
                         reliability.
                         •         Activity 3.B.2. Capacity building for the Ministry of Energy. In addition, this subcomponent
                         will support activities to enhance the capacity of the Ministry of Energy to formulate, update, assess,
                         monitor, evaluate and make recommendations with regard to energy sector access development
                         strategy and planning.

                         Sub-Component 3C – Information, education and communications. This sub-component will finance
                         (i) extensive information and promotional campaigns through existing media in rural areas (radio,
                         institutional, grassroots) in order to raise interest and formal requests from operators and rural
                         communities in support of the hybrid mini-systems and mini-grids, (ii) development of off-grid
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lighting markets and energy efficiency activities; and communications between AMADER and local
                         operators, relevant central government (energy, health, education, etc) and local government
                         institutions. To further facilitate understanding and encourage uptake for both energy efficiency and
                         Lighting Africa activities will be supported by a comprehensive consumer awareness package,
                         comprising video and audio public service announcements, promotional campaigns, and rural road-
                         shows providing person-to-person opportunities for demonstrations and consumer education.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Rural areas of Mali; exact locations are not known.
                         The proposed project is a category ‘B’, since the anticipated environmental and social impacts are
                         small in scale and site specific. It is not anticipated that any serious indirect or long term
                         environmental or social impacts will be caused by the project. The project is expected to bring
                         positive benefits to rural communities, individuals and businesses. The project triggers 2 safeguards
                         policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). As the
                         specific locations of project activities are not known, the Borrower is preparing an Environmental
                         and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). These
                         documents will build upon the existing frameworks prepared under the HEURA project on access to
                         energy in rural areas.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The rural electrification agency (AMADER) has built a capacity for safeguard management during
                           the implementation of a previous Bank operation from 2004 to 2012 (Household Energy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Universal Access project HEURA).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The project will mainly finance acquisition and
                           BP 4.01                                           installation/distribution of electronic and
                                                                             electric devices which, though small-sized and
                                                                             site-specific, may induce environmental
                                                                             concerns during their exploitation
                                                                             (maintenance) and at the end of their lifecycle
                                                                             (electronic and electric waste). Further, the
                                                                             project. Further, the potential fostering of hybrid
                                                                             power generation need to be analyzed from the
                                                                             environmental perspective. Therefore, the
                                                                             Environment and Social Management
                                                                             Framework (ESMF) of the former Household
                                                                             rural energy project is being updated to that
                                                                             ends. It will be consulted upon, approved and
                                                                             disclosed in-country and at the Bank Infoshop
                                                                             prior appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              None of the activities to be financed by the
                                                                             project will implemented in natural habitat or
                                                                             induce the use of resources collected from
                                                                             natural habitats which could result in their
                                                                             degradation.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not invest in forest exploitation
                                                                             activities, nor will induce degradation of forest
                                                                             areas.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project comprises no activity which may
                                                                             induce the purchase and use of pesticides or
                                                                             related chemicals. The project will not finance
                                                                             pesticides acquisition or distribution.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The project is not expected to have an impact on
                           BP 4.11                                           or affect physical cultural resources. A Chance
                                                                             Finds procedure is included in the ESMF.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              There are no indigenous peoples in the project
                                                                             area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           This policy is triggered because activities under
                                 4.12                                                                                            component 1 may require some land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 leading to the involuntary resettlement of people
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 and/or restrictions of access to resources or
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods. Because the exact locations are
                                                                                                                                 unknown, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                                 (RPF) is under preparation (updating the
                                                                                                                                 framework developed for the previous rural
                                                                                                                                 access project HEURA). The RPF will be
                                                                                                                                 consulted upon, and disclosed publicly in-
                                                                                                                                 country and at InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance dam or dam-related
                                                                                                                                 investments.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project will not draw water from none of
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            the international waters flowing through the
                                                                                                                                 country (Niger and Senegal), and will not
                                                                                                                                 finance water resources use activities.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This project is not being implemented in any
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF and RPF will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed both in country and
                                      at InfoShop prior to project appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Fabrice Karl Bertholet

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 14-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)                                                                                              Date: 16-Oct-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
