                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA9064
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Morocco                          Project ID:    P131256
                            Project Name:      MA- Noor Ouarzazate Concentrated Solar Power Project (P131256)
                            Task Team          Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Jun-2014                      Estimated   30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSEE                            Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (95%), Public administration- Energy and mining (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (40%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
                                              (25%), Regional integration (10%), Technology diffusion (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    2677.00           Total Bank Financing:               400.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                357.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   400.00
                              African Development Bank                                                                135.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                   238.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                  122.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                             473.00
                              FRANCE French Agency for Development                                                     68.00
                              GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU
                                                                                                                       884.00
                              (KFW)
                              Total                                                                                   2677.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:




                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                          Is this a           No
                          Repeater
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project?

                          2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The project development objective (PDO) is to increase (a) installed capacity (MW) and (b)
                         electricity output (MWh), especially during peak hours, of the Noor-Ouarzazate Solar Complex.
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed Project is designed to support the development of the second phase of the Noor Solar
                         Complex (500 MW). The first phase, the Noor I Project, consists of 160 MW and is currently under
                         construction. The second phase will consist of two distinct plants: (a) a 150-200 MW parabolic
                         trough CSP plant (Noor II); and (b) a 100-150 MW tower CSP plant (Noor III). Both plants would be
                         constructed on lots adjacent to Noor I that have already been acquired by the Moroccan Agency for
                         Solar Energy (MASEN). No new land acquisition will be required for Noor II and III’s sites.

                         The Project is expected to consist of the following components: (a) the construction of the Noor II
                         and III CSP plant by a Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) between MASEN and a competitively
                         selected private partner(s); and (b) help reduce the fiscal impact of this subsidy by lowering the
                         Government of Morocco’s cost of capital through a financing mechanism to improve the long-term
                         sustainability of the Project.

                         Noor II and III have the same associated facilities as Noor I (the water pipeline linking the Mansour
                         Eddahbi dam reservoir with the Noor Solar Complex, the 225 kV Ouarzazate Errachidia transmission
                         line, and infrastructures ancillary to the project site itself) except for the 225 kV Ouarzazate - Tazarte
                         transmission line. The project will entail limited additional land acquisition in the context of
                         associated facilities to the Noor Solar Complex that remain to be built, namely the Ouarzazate -
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Tazarte transmission line and the water pipeline from the Mansour Eddahbi Dam to the site of the
                         Noor Solar Complex. The safeguards documentation for the water pipeline has been disclosed at the
                         World Bank’s infoshop and in-country on 19th of March 2014, and the Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment (ESIA) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the Ouarzazate –
                         Tazerte transmission line has been disclosed on X June 2014 to infoshop and on X June 2014 in-
                         country.

                         The Framework Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (FESIA) prepared under the
                         Ouarzazate Phase I (now the “Noor I”) Project has been revised and updated to cover the
                         environmental and social safeguards issues for the Noor II and Noor III Projects. The FESIA has also
                         been disclosed in-country and at the infoshop on June 26, 2014.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is to be located in the Ghessat council and at the «Tamzaghten Izerki» village, about 10
                         km north east of Ouarzazate city, a town of approximately 50,000 inhabitants situated in south-
                         central Morocco, at about 160 km south-east of Marrakesh. The site is well suited for solar projects,
                         especially for the development of CSP, for the following reasons:

                         The site disposes of excellent solar resources. On-site measurement stations have allowed data
                         collection since 2010, including solar insolation, indicating that the site’s direct normal irradiation


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         (DNI) is significantly higher than typical site qualification limits and used in the preliminary
                         modeling. This conclusion is based on: (a) comparisons of the Noor Solar Complex site data with
                         insolation data from the Andasol site in Granada, Spain and the Solar Energy Generating Systems
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (SEGS) site in the Mojave Desert, California, United States; and (b) an analysis of 30 years of
                         satellite data. These analyses indicate that 2010 was an atypical year.

                         The site disposes of sufficient water resources. Although the area around Ouarzazate is a desert
                         environment, a reservoir of the Mansour Eddahbi dam, with a capacity of 480 Mm3 is located
                         approximately at 14 km from the CSP Noor Solar Complex site. Water use for Noor II and III is
                         limited by the fact that the projects are required to use dry-cooling only. The Noor Complex’s impact
                         on the overall water resources in the region is minimal. Its water consumption has been estimated at
                         approximately 0.8 percent of the regular annual volume of the Mansour Eddahbi dam and 0.5 percent
                         of the overall water resources available in the region once the construction of the Tiouine dam further
                         north is completed. It should be noted that the Tiouine dam is not directly linked with the Noor Solar
                         Complex site, and only the Mansour Eddahbi dam can provide water directly to the site.

                         The site is easily accessible. The site is accessible via paved road originating from the National
                         Highway 10 (“Route Nationale No.10”) or RN10 that runs from the port city of Agadir, at
                         approximately 350 km to the site, through to the city of Ouarzazate. The Agadir port is located at a
                         relatively short distance and for the Noor I project is being used to import and transport heavy
                         equipment from abroad to avoid the Atlas Mountains. The use of the Casablanca port requires
                         crossing the Atlas Mountains.

                         The site is close to the power grid. The existing grid and planned reinforcements by the Office
                         National de l'Electricité et de l'Eau Potable (ONEE) will allow evacuation of the full capacity of the
                         power plants at peak output conditions. Furthermore, Noor II and III power plants will be fitted with
                         thermal energy storage capabilities allowing the optimization of peak outputs to meet the network
                         carrying capacity within reasonable limits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emmanuel Ngollo (AFTSG)
                         Andrea Liverani (MNSSU)
                         Taoufiq Bennouna (MNSEE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project has potential adverse environmental
                         BP 4.01                                              risks in its area of influence mainly due to water
                                                                              consumption and risk of toxic fluid leaks. Unlike
                                                                              conventional power plants, these CSP plants do
                                                                              not generate any air pollution. The updated
                                                                              FESIA (Framework Environmental and Social
                                                                              Impact Assessment) covers the environmental and
                                                                              social safeguards issues for the Noor II and Noor
                                                                              III Projects.
                                                                              As this project is a scale-up activity to the solar
                                                                              thermal plant under construction, cumulative
                                                                              environmental impacts especially on the



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                                                                         ecosystems and soil/groundwater will be assessed
                                                                         in the respective ESIAs for each power plant.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The Project is located on the existing site
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         dedicated for the construction of the Noor Solar
                                                                         Complex where under the first phase (Ouarzazate
                                                                         Phase 1, Noor 1) no natural habitat was affected
                                                                         and the OP 4.04 was not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            There are no forests located near or on the site as
                                                                         the terrain is marked by a desert environment.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            Since there is no agricultural area involved nor
                                                                         any patch of weed requiring the use of chemicals,
                                                                         this policy will not be triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            There are no physical cultural resources on the
                         BP 4.11                                         area of influence of the Noor Solar Complex.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous people on the area of
                                                                         influence of the Noor Solar Complex.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           OP 4.12 was triggered for Noor I and will
                         4.12                                            continue to be triggered for the present project.
                                                                         The large part of the land acquisition needed for
                                                                         the project (mainly for the actual Solar Complex)
                                                                         was carried out during phase I (2,500) hectares.
                                                                         The land acquired for the site consisted entirely of
                                                                         communal land and is of uninhabited, arid, non-
                                                                         agricultural nature with limited revenue potential.
                                                                         Although the sale was based on a willing-buyer/
                                                                         willing-seller agreement, the Bank required a
                                                                         Land Acquisition Plan (LAP) to be prepared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         disclosed. Since the first acquisition an additional
                                                                         l5 hectares have been acquired for Noor I due to
                                                                         soil erosion risks. These have been purchased
                                                                         following a willing-buyer/willing-seller
                                                                         agreement.
                                                                         The only Associated Facility for which a detailed
                                                                         routing remains to be fully defined is the 225 kV
                                                                         Ouarzazate-Tarzate transmission line. Most of it
                                                                         is expected to be undertaken on a voluntary,
                                                                         willing-buyer, willing-seller basis. Under the
                                                                         project the approach to land-take is governed by
                                                                         assessing whether a voluntary versus an
                                                                         involuntary land-take has taken place. This is
                                                                         determined based on prior review of documentary
                                                                         evidence of the land acquisition process followed
                                                                         to ensure full compliance with OP 4.12. Such
                                                                         documentary evidence will take the form of RAP,
                                                                         or Land Acquisition Plan if no resettlement is
                                                                         involved. Subsequent disclosure of such evidence



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                will be based on relevant Bank policies
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes              The needs of raw water for the Noor I cooling
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                system and ancillary use for the site will be
                                                                                satisfied and dependent upon the pumping of
                                                                                water from the existing Mansour Eddahbi dam
                                                                                reservoir. The cooling for the Noor II & III
                                                                                projects will be dry cooling and therefore does
                                                                                not require as much water from the dam reservoir
                                                                                as Noor I. The project’s performance will be
                                                                                dependent upon the performance of the existing
                                                                                dam. Failure or misuse of this dam may have
                                                                                adverse results on the projects’ operation. The
                                                                                monitoring and maintenance procedures as well
                                                                                as past assessments of the Mansour Eddahbi dam
                                                                                (requirements that comply with the Moroccan
                                                                                policy and law on safety of dams, as regulated by
                                                                                the Water Act 10-95) satisfy the requirements of
                                                                                OP 4.37. On this, the mechanism to address the
                                                                                triggered policy is well elaborated in the ESMP of
                                                                                the water pipeline that was disclosed at the
                                                                                Bank’s Infoshop on March 19, 2014.
                            Projects on International        No                 There are no international waterways nearby or
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                associated with the Noor Solar Complex.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The site is not located in a disputed area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Noor II and III CSP and its associated facilities’ environmental considerations include land
                              disturbance/land use impacts; impacts to soil, water and air resources; impacts to wildlife and
                              sensitive species; visual, cultural, paleontological, socioeconomic, and environmental justice
                              impacts (meaning a fair distribution of environmental benefits and burden of impacts) and
                              potential impacts from hazardous materials.

                             Land Disturbance/Land Use Impacts: the Project and its associated facilities may entail limited
                             interference with existing land uses (agriculture and grazing activities) or impact the use of nearby
                             specially designated areas (wilderness areas with oueds, areas of critical environmental concern, or
                             special recreational camping areas).

                             Impacts to Soil, Water, and Air Resources: Construction of Noor II and III facilities on such large
                             areas of land will require grading, and results in soil compaction, potential alteration of drainage
                             channels, and increased runoff and erosion. Engineering methods can be used to mitigate these
                             impacts.



                                                                        Page 5 of 9
                           Parabolic trough and central tower systems typically use conventional steam plants to generate
                           electricity, which commonly consume water for cooling. In arid settings such as the Ouarzazate
                           desert environment, any increase in water demand can strain available water resources. Therefore,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           MASEN decided to use of dry cooling for Noor II and III despite the relatively higher cost of this
                           technology. The required raw water from the dam’s water reservoir will be pumped, conveyed and
                           stored in two water tanks (capacity 15,000 m3 each) at a site adjacent to the Noor Complex. The
                           quantities of water needed to feed the cooling system (dry) of both power plants of the CSP solar
                           complex, estimated at 230,000 m3/yr for Noor II and 125,000 m3/yr for Noor III, could cause
                           conflicts in water requirements for irrigation, potable and industrial needs.

                           The construction and operation of Noor II and III facilities could generate particulate matters,
                           which can be a significant pollutant particularly for the nearby classified/sensitive areas such as
                           the Biosphere reserve of the South Moroccan Oasis during windy conditions.

                           Ecological Impacts: The use of large areas of land for the Noor solar power facilities will
                           adversely affect native vegetation and wildlife in many ways, including loss of habitat;
                           interference with rainfall and drainage; or direct contact causing injury or death (flying birds).
                           These potential impacts on the avifauna will be evaluated and documented in the EIAs for each
                           technology, and mitigation measures proposed. However, the following mitigation/management
                           actions can be taken and will be confirmed in the detailed SESIA that is to be prepared by the
                           winning bidder for the project:
                           (i) preconstruction monitoring to determine the presence of “threatened, rare, endemic“ bird
                           species.
                           (ii) Monitoring should take into account seasonal variation, fly paths and birds’ behavior;
                           (iii) During construction the position and height of the receiver tower should be taken into account
                           at CSP plants developed with a central receiver tower;
                           (iv) Ensure that birds do not get in contact with evaporation ponds i.e. ponds should be covered
                           with wire mesh or netting to reduce the possibilities of a) attracting; b) drowning and c) poisoning;
                           (v) Motivate the need for new power lines to be marked with anti-collision marking devices &
Public Disclosure Copy




                           constructed with bird friendly designs to prevent electrocution.

                           Other impacts: The CSP in Noor II and III will employ oils or molten salts, hydraulic fluids,
                           coolants, and lubricants that may be hazardous and present spill risks. Proper planning and good
                           maintenance practices will be used to minimize impacts from these hazardous materials.

                           CSP solar tower systems have elsewhere been associated with interference with aircraft operations
                           (if reflected light beams of the solar tower are misdirected into aircraft pathways). However, in the
                           case of the Noor Solar Complex, the plant site is located outside of any flight path and thus aircraft
                           operations are not expected to be impacted.

                           Like all electrical generating facilities, Noor II and III solar facilities will produce electric and
                           magnetic fields. Construction and decommissioning of Noor II and III facilities will involve a
                           variety of possible impacts normally encountered in construction/decommissioning of large-scale
                           industrial facilities. Since new electric transmission lines and related facilities (expansion of the
                           existing stations in Ouarzazata and Tarzate and construction of the new CS evacuation station) are
                           needed to service the newly developed solar plant, construction, operation, and decommissioning
                           of the transmission facilities will also cause a variety of environmental impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           in the project area:
                           Potential indirect impacts occur during construction, operation, and dismantling of CSP plants.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Noor II and III will generate no direct air pollution or greenhouse gas emissions during operation.
                           Some power is, however, required in the morning for warming up the heat transmission fluid
                           (HTF) in order to reduce plant start-up times and provide fluid freeze protection, which will
                           generate limited indirect greenhouse gas emissions. Estimates for lifecycle CSP greenhouse gas
                           emissions range from 0.08 to 0.2 pounds of carbon dioxide equivalent per kilowatt-hour, which is
                           far less than the lifecycle emission rates for natural gas (0.6-2 lbs of CO2E/kWh) and coal (1.4-3.6
                           lbs of CO2E/kWh).

                           The primary indirect environmental, health, and safety issues relate to how the core materials
                           (parabolic troughs and mirrors, tower receiver and heliostat reflectors) are manufactured, installed,
                           and ultimately, dismantled and disposed of. Construction of water pipeline (for cooling system and
                           ancillary use), could also cause some habitat loss and fragmentation, while limited long-term
                           alteration would result during the operational lifetime of the Noor Solar Complex as water is
                           obtained from off-site location.

                           The Project incorporates worker safety and security measures to mitigate the use and manage the
                           impacts of hazardous materials (molten salts, heat-transmission fluid, fossil fuel, etc.), fire hazards
                           and other soil pollution on the environment and human health. To ensure that plant facilities
                           comply with the minimum standards to provide worker security and protect the environment,
                           HSSE personnel will permanently monitor the complex’s facilities and report all incidents that
                           may occur during construction and operation of Noor II and III power plants.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives to the CSP plants are conventional fuel power plants, as CSP provides the same
                           quality of power as these plants (especially base load). The alternatives for the Noor Solar
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Complex have been determined through least cost expansion modeling of the energy sector by
                           ONEE using the WASP model. This modeling shows that the main alternative to the Noor I
                           project is a heavy fuel-fired plant. The main alternative to the Noor II and Noor III power plants
                           are LNG-fired power plants (and heavy fuel-fired power plants during the first years of Noor II
                           and Noor III operation). These plants would have more significant environmental impacts than the
                           proposed CSP technology.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           MASEN has the necessary structures in place to manage and implement safeguard policies (with 4
                           specialists in the Sustainable Development Department) pertaining to the construction and
                           operation of the current phase (Noor I) of the Noor project. Additional technical support is being
                           provided by highly qualified international consulting firms. With the expansion of the Noor Solar
                           Complex to include the Noor II and III plants, the capacity for effective safeguards management
                           and implementation and worker health and safety will need to continue to be strengthened.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The updated Framework Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (FESIA) has been
                           disclosed in-country (and through the World Bank InfoShop) in French on June 25, 2014.
                           Additional consultations were held on 9 June 2014 prior to its finalization. All comments provided


                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                           during these consultations will be recorded, and included in the final FESIA where appropriate.
                           Communication and dissemination campaigns form an integral part of activities promoted under
                           this project. Once finalized, the main elements of the FESIA will be disclosed in a form
Public Disclosure Copy




                           appropriate and understandable to public and in MASEN and all provincial public place facilities.

                           MASEN will be provided with technical support and capacity building activities to: (i) prepare
                           MASEN’s action plan for preparing Environmental Safeguards Documents and reports; (ii)
                           establish a monitoring and evaluation system that ensures that project activities are carried out in a
                           sustainable manner from an environmental and social standpoint; (iii) develop adequate
                           management plans to build a long-term CSP operational frameworks for the Noor complex; (iv)
                           improve the Noor project’s environment and social management system from a cost-effective and
                           multi-partnered approach; and (v) implement measures to enhance positive environmental and
                           social impacts of the Noor Project such as the use of alternative opportunities to reduce
                           environmental and social impacts and provide mitigation measures for the CSP construction and
                           operation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      26-Jun-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          26-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          26-Jun-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [        ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [        ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [        ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?

                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                         Date: 26-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                       Date: 26-Jun-2014




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
