                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA7915

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Congo, Republic of              Project ID:    P147456
                                                     Parent         P106975
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:     CG-Add. Fin. Water, Electricity & Urban Dev. SIL (P147456)
   Parent Project    Rep. of Congo - Water, Electricity & Urban Development SIL (LEN) (P106975)
   Name:
   Task Team         Mahine Diop
   Leader:
   Estimated         25-Jun-2014                     Estimated   16-Sep-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GSURR                           Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (100%)
   Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:        150.00                Total Bank Financing: 60.00
   Financing Gap:               0.00
     Financing Source                                                                  Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                  90.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                               45.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                         15.00
     Total                                                                              150.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)

                                           Page 1 of 7
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To increase sustainable access to basic infrastructure and safe drinking water for the inhabitants
   of Brazzaville and Pointe Noire.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To increase access to basic infrastructure services, safe drinking water and electricity to the
   inhabitants of targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe Noire.
3. Project Description
The original project was approved for an IDA amount of US$25.5 million and leveraged US$100
million from the Government. The proposed AF builds on the same strategy and aims at ensuring
sound and effective investments with a co-financing from the country. The Government will
contribute US$90 million to the AF.

The original project has three components which are as follows:

•        Component 1. Urban Infrastructure Services (total cost US$70.5 million of which IDA US
$13.5 million and Government US$57 million). Expanding access to basic social services to the
populations in the project zones through: (i) the development of urban infrastructure and services
including the rehabilitation or construction of socioeconomic infrastructures in the targeted zones in
coordination with the structural investments being carried out by the Government in order to enhance
their effectiveness as economic growth poles (Total cost US$62 million), and (ii) support to the
institutions of the cities of Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire (Total cost US$8.5 million) to improve local
governance, municipal and urban management, and fiscal performance and to the Ministry of
Housing and Urban Planning through the establishment of urban management tools.

•       Component 2, Urban Water Supply (total cost US$45.5 million of which IDA US$8.8
million and Government US$36.7 million). Increasing sustainable access to safe drinking water in
Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire and improving urban water sub-sector management. This is to be
achieved through investments in Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire as well as the provision of support to
the Government and to SNDE towards technical, commercial, and financial recovery of the SNDE
and through the provision of support to (i) expand access to basic services by supplying safe drinking
water mainly through household connections and standpipes; (ii) reduce losses and boost
productivity; and (iii) stabilize the financial situation of the SNDE by establishing a partnership with
the private sector.

•        Component 3, Electricity Sector Reform (total cost US$3.7 million of which IDA US$0.70
million and Government US$2.7 million). Developing a comprehensive strategy for the reform of the
electricity sector and improve the Government‘s capacity to implement the reform through provision
of support to the MEH : (i) on the reform of the electricity sector including a diagnosis of the sector,
short-term measures to stabilize the sector, recommendations for the reform of the sector, among
others and (ii) on key actions needed for the reform including conduction of tariff studies, review and
update of the legal and regulatory framework, assistance on budget implementation and investment
planning, enhancing the Ministry’s capacity to develop policies and manage the sector and also
develop skills in key areas such as economic regulation, economic analysis of projects and M&E.



                                              Page 2 of 7
The AF will continue to cover the areas targeted by the parent project, in Brazzaville and Pointe
Noire.
Proposed changes concern Component III Electricity Sector Reform (IDA US$0.70 million,
Government US$2.7 million) which will be modified as follows:
-        Three new sub-components will be added to the two initial subcomponents: (3.3) SNE
Electricity Distribution and Transmission System Upgrade; (3.4) Improvement of operational
performance of SNE in key business areas, with specific emphasis on sustainable loss reduction;
(3.5) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of SNE.
-        To capture the scope of the new activities, Component 3 will be accordingly renamed
‘’Sector reform, Commercial and Electricity Supply Systems Upgrade’’

•        Sub-component (3.3). SNE Electricity Distribution & Transmission System Upgrade (total
cost US$86 million of which Government US$51 million, IDA US$8.75 million, IBRD US$26.25
million) will focus on technical investments. The sub-component will support investments in
infrastructure to improve the operational efficiency of the distribution system and remove electricity
supply bottlenecks within the network. This improvement will translate into system reliability by
reducing system interruptions and outage times as well as lowering technical and commercial losses.

This sub-component will provide financing to: (a) Rehabilitate segments of the transmission
network; (b) Reinforce and complement the sub-transmission network improvements undertaken by
Government to develop a sound backbone for electricity supply, including the construction of an
electric loop in Brazzaville; (c) Upgrade and extend the distribution network to increase and fully re-
establish its overall transit capacity for a better end-user supply, voltage quality and provide access to
new customers; (d) Implement a simple Demand Side Management (DSM) program through the
distribution of Compact Fluorescent Lamps (CFL) to save energy and help customers manage bills -
which are likely to increase with the termination of the lump sum billing system.

•       Sub-component (3.4). Improvement of operational performance of SNE in key business
areas, with specific emphasis on sustainable loss reduction. (total cost US$50 of which Government
US$30 million; IDA US$5 million; IBRD US$15 million).


The sub-component will finance the incorporation of management information systems (MIS) to
enable efficient, transparent and accountable performance in key business areas including: (a)
Commercial Management System (CMS); (b) Incidents Recording and Management System (IRMS);
(c) Implementing a Corporate Resource Management System (CRMS); and (d) Implementing a
Geographic Information system (GIS)

•      Sub-component (3.5): Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Total US$9.80M
of which Government 6 million; IDA US$ 0.95 million, IBRD US$2.85 million):

This sub-component will finance (a) Institutional Strengthening of SNE (b) Logistics and office
equipment and (c) trainings (d) Studies and consultancies.

The AF will also finance operating costs (US$3,4 million, of which IDA US$0.25 million; IBRD US
$0.75 million and Government US$2.4 million), project management costs (audits and M&E) (US
$0.8 million, of which IDA US$0.05 million; IBRD US$0.15 million and Government US$0.6
million).

                                              Page 3 of 7
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Antoine V. Lema (GURDR)
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

 6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes              The parent Project was rated EA category B. An
 BP 4.01                                            ESMF was prepared and disclosed in December
                                                    11, 2009. The activities of this AF are the same as
                                                    the parent project. The activities that will be
                                                    financed under components 1 and 2 will be site-
                                                    specific, small-scale with limited potential
                                                    impacts. In fact, their impacts will be moderated
                                                    then, successfully managed and mitigated by
                                                    application of good engineering practices. In
                                                    summary, the AF is not expected to induce other
                                                    environmental and social impacts which are
                                                    different from those induced by the original
                                                    project. Taking into account this aspect, the
                                                    existing ESMF has been revised, reviewed and
                                                    disclosed publicly in the country on February 28,
                                                    2014 and at the Infoshop on April 24, 2014 to
                                                    continue serving as a guide to the AF.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

 Pest Management OP 4.09           No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes              Project investments, particularly components 1
 4.12                                               and 2, will induce land acquisition.
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

 Projects on International        No
 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
 7.60



                                            Page 4 of 7
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation
     of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse environmental and social
     impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific. Hence, they will
     be manageable at an acceptable level.

    The project remains EA category B and will not trigger new safeguards policies due to the fact that
    components and activities are the same as in the parent project. The triggered policies are OP/BP
    4.01 and OP/BP 4.12. Safeguard instruments (ESMF and RPF) have all been updated and will be
    implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities during the Additional Financing phase.

     During the parent project’s implementation, Overall safeguard compliance (Environmental
     Assessment OP/BP 4.01 and Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12) is rated Moderately
     Satisfactory due to late preparation of safeguards documents (EMP and RAP). All planned
     documents have been prepared and published in accordance with Bank rules. Recommendations to
     improve performance have been made to ensure that all safeguards requirements are properly
     implemented. These recommendations are being implemented and closely monitored by the Bank
     Safeguards specialists. The impacts of this close supervision are expected to be reflected in the
     overall safeguard rating during the supervision mission of October 2014.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The safeguards instruments of the project, both the original and the new ones, did not identify
     potential indirect and/or direct long-term adverse environmental or social impacts associated to
     this project.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a
     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), to manage potentially adverse environmental and social
     impacts, given that the exact location of future investments are yet to be known

    The ESMF includes standards, methods, and procedures specifying how future activities for which
    location, impacts and scale are unknown will systematically address environmental and social
    issues. It covers: (i) a systematic environmental and social impact assessment for all activities
    before selection and implementation; (ii) procedures for conducting activity-specific ESIAs,
    Limited Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or Environmental and Social Management
    Plan (ESMP); (iii) capacity strengthening and awareness-raising campaigns targeted at relevant
    stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures; and
    (iv) establishment and implementation of a consultation framework for the environmental control
    and monitoring.



                                               Page 5 of 7
  The RPF clarifies the principles, organizational arrangements, and design criteria to be applied to
  investments/sub-projects to be prepared during project implementation. Investment-specific
  Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared, as necessary, in line with the RPF and
  submitted to the Bank for approval.

  The above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability and
  compliance with Congo’s regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank
  environmental and social safeguard policies Activities financed under the project will be screened
  using a standardized approach based on the tools developed under the original project. ESMPs
  will be prepared as needed for the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF. For
  works with negligible impacts environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will
  apply.

  The PIU currently includes an environmental/social specialist who is responsible for safeguards
  compliance. The same staff will continue to oversee the implementation of the project safeguards
  instruments under the AF activities. The Bank Team will also continue to provide technical
  support to the PIU and carry out supervision missions to support safeguards compliance.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Stakeholders to benefit from the AF include: inhabitants in the targeted areas in the cities of
  Brazzaville and Pointe-Noire; the state owned energy utility company - Société Nationale
  d'Electricité (SNE), the state owned water utility company - La Société nationale de distribution
  d'eau (SNDE), ministry in charge of Territorial planning, ministry of health, schools health clinics
  and other public infrastructures. Consultation of stakeholders has been a continuous process during
  project implementation. The additional financing is the result of stakeholder consultations. As part
  of the preparation of safeguards documents for the additional financing, these various stakeholder
  groups were consulted again and their recommendations, comments and suggestions were
  incorporated into the safeguards instruments. The latest consultations took place in Brazzaville and
  Pointe Noire in February 2014.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        03-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Apr-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Congo, Republic of                                                 28-Feb-2014
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        21-Feb-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     16-May-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Congo, Republic of                                                 15-May-2014
  Comments:


                                             Page 6 of 7
   If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
   respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
   Audit/or EMP.
   If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Practice Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:       Name: Mahine Diop
   Approved By
   Practice Manager:       Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (PMGR)                Date: 22-Jul-2014




                                               Page 7 of 7
