                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC4762

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ethiopia                       Project ID:     P133613
                            Project Name:     Ethiopia Geothermal Sector Development Project (P133613)
                            Task Team         Raihan Elahi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         12-Feb-2014                    Estimated       14-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTG1                          Lending         Specific Investment Loan
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    284.00                  Total Bank Financing:       198.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         3.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                              198.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                              24.50
                              ICELAND Icelandic International Development Authority                      3.30
                              JAPAN Japan Bank for Internaitonal Cooperation (JBIC)                     55.00
                              Total                                                                    284.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Development Objective of Geothermal Sector Development Project (GSDP) is to increase
                           geothermal electricity generation capacity of Ethiopia.
                         C. Project Description
                         The geothermal potential within Ethiopia has long been recognized. Assuming a range of power
                         density in the Rift Valley of about 8 MW/km2 at 230°C up to 30 MW/km2 at 300°C it is plausible to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assume the presence of a huge geothermal energy (estimated to be over 10,000 MW). Under a
                         program that began in 1969, geo-scientific studies were conducted in a number of Ethiopian fields
                         and about eighteen were judged to have potential for high-enthalpy resource development, including
                         electricity generation in the Ethiopian Rift Valley. From these areas, deep drilling was undertaken in
                         Aluto Langano and Tendaho and detailed surface exploration was completed in four other areas. A
                         combined steam and binary pilot plant with a capacity of 7 MW was installed and commenced power
                         generation in 1998, but due to problems with plant, gathering system and production wells (scaling)
                         production was stopped in the years 2002-2007. In 2008 the plant was partially repaired and is now
                         operating at about 3 MW capacity. Some other areas are at initial stages of surface exploration, such
                         as: Abaya, Corbetti, Tulu Moye, Gedemsa, Kone, Fentale, Dofan, Meteka, Amoisa, Ayelu, Teo, etc
                         (Figure 4).

                         The proposed Geothermal Sector Development Project (GSDP) will include contributions from the
                         Scaling-up Renewable Energy Program (SREP) which is part of the Strategic Climate Fund (part of
                         the larger Climate Investment Fund, CIF) aimed at demonstrating social, economic, and
                         environmental viability of low carbon development pathways in the energy sector. SREP and IDA
                         resources will leverage funds from Government of Japan, Government of Iceland and Government of
                         Ethiopia to support the development of geothermal sector in Ethiopia. The project will support:
                         geothermal test and production drillings, steam gathering system, power plant, electricity evacuation
                         facilities (substation and transmission lines) of Aluto Langano and Tendaho geothermal sites.

                         The Aluto Langano site is at present drilling exploration wells through an existing project co-
                         financed by IDA and Government of Japan. New developments in the Aluto Langano site under the
                         proposed project is also planned to be co-financed by IDA and Government of Japan. The Aluto
                         Langano site has an existing geothermal power plant that is generating 3 MW. The project site is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         well established with transmission network also staff campsite. However, with the new project, the
                         transmission line will have to be upgraded.

                         The Tendaho site under the proposed project would benefit from the World Bank - Iceland Compact
                         on geothermal. Tendaho site has been selected as several surface studies have been undertaken on
                         this site. Iceland will finance all necessary technical assistance to make this site ready for test
                         drilling. The project will support capacity building through knowledge transfer and specific
                         workshop and training programs that would be identified during the project preparation phase. Most
                         of the technical assistance will be supported by the World Bank - Iceland Compact. The proposed
                         project will only identify the resource base of the Tendaho project site.

                         The project will incorporate lessons learned from the Bank’s substantial engagement in the country,
                         and more generally from the Bank’s wide experience with geothermal project development globally

                         B.      Project Description

                         The proposed GSDP project consists of four components designed to enhance the potential of sites in
                         Aluto Langaro and Tendaho: (i) Aluto Langano Production Drilling, (ii) Aluto Langano Power Plant
                         and Associated Facilities, (iii) Tendaho Geothermal Site Development, (iv) Drilling Rig and
                         Associated Accessories, (v) Capacity Building and Technical Assistance.
                         Component 1: Aluto Langano Production Drilling ($76M: SREP $24.5M, IDA $48.5M, GOI $1.0M
                         and GOE $2.0M): Bank will finance the operating cost of the drilling rig as well as associated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consulting engagement. Further geophysical explorations required to locate the best sites for drillings
                         will be carried out by Iceland, as part of the Iceland – World Bank Compact on geothermal for East-
                         Africa. The SREP National Committee (NC) for Ethiopia (hosted by the MoWE) developed an
                         Investment Plan, in consultation with the multilateral development partners (WB, AfDB, IFC) which
                         was approved by the SREP Sub-Committee in May 2012. The plan included support (US$ 24.5 M. to
                         be channeled through the Bank) for expanded exploration and production drilling activities in order
                         to prove the geothermal resources in the Aluto Langano Field. With a target power capacity of 70
                         MW and an average well capacity of 5 MW (electric), 25% dry wells and 50% reinjection wells, this
                         would require a total of around 26 wells. Of the required 26 wells, 20 wells will be drilled under the
                         proposed project. 4 wells are being drilled under the Additional Financing for Energy Access Project
                         (Cr.4795 ET) and the remaining 2 wells are existing wells that can be used for reinjection. With an
                         estimated average cost for consumables of US$ 3 million per well, this adds up to US$ 60 million for
                         the consumables for 20 wells. The SREP allocation could therefore cover nearly 40% of these costs.
                         The production wells will be drilled using advanced technology, directionally down to a nominal de
                         pth of 2500 meter to maximize the output per well in the range of 5-10 MW.

                         Component 2: Aluto Langano Power Plant and Associated Facilities ($101.5M: GOJ $55M, IDA
                         $46.5M): The associated facilities of the Aluto Langano geothermal power plant, such as, steam
                         gathering system, transmission lines, substations, etc. will be financed by the Bank. The cost of these
                         associated facilities is estimated to be about US$ 46.5 million. The 70 MW power plant at Aluto
                         Langano under this proposed project will be funded by the Government of Japan in two phases. At
                         the first phase a 35 MW power plant estimated to cost about US$ 55 million will be funded by Gov.
                         of Japan for the Aluto Langano site. Construction for the first unit should start in 2015 (when about
                         13 wells have been drilled), while the second unit could be constructed about two years later. It is
                         common practice to operate the first unit for some time to better understand the potential and
                         characteristics of the reservoir, before a decision on constructing a second power plant is taken.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Japan might also finance the second 35 MW power plant in Aluto Langano, if the drilling of wells
                         progresses successfully and the first 35 MW power plant operates satisfactorily.

                         Component 3: Tendaho Geothermal Site Development ($3.0M: GOI $1.8M, GOE $1.2M): Iceland
                         will undertake reconnaissance, surface exploration and associated geophysical and geochemical
                         studies to prepare the Tendaho geothermal site for test drilling. Tendaho is situated in Afar Region
                         near Semera, at the North-Eastern part of Ethiopia. The Tendaho Geothermal Site is within a 100
                         square kilometre area and contains more than one geothermal field. So far, most exploration has
                         focused on the Dubti geothermal field in Tendaho. In the years between 1993 and 1998, 6 test
                         drillings confirmed the existence of a high temperature, shallow reservoir with good flow rates. The
                         utilization of this reservoir could theoretically be very economical, since drillings down to a depth of
                         500 meters would require low level of investments, time and heavy machinery. During the
                         preparation of the proposed project, possibilities to raise additional funds to undertake test drillings
                         in Tendaho will be explored.

                         In the near future and according to information from EEPCo and the GSE, the French (AFD) plans to
                         perform a compilation of historic data to get a basis to decide how and when to further support the
                         project at Dubti, drill several test well s at Dubti and do a feasibility study for the power project. In
                         discussions with the AFD it became clear that AFD and World Bank planned timelines were quite
                         different, and since there are several other extraordinary geothermal fields in the Tendaho site, future
                         support from Bank’s side might be aimed at sites north and south of Dubti, namely Ayrobera and
                         Alalobeda. There, geophysical exploration will have to be done to establish a test drilling program
                         and find the best drilling sites. Again, this could be realized through the Iceland – World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Compact on geothermal for East-Africa. Possibly in cooperation with the GSE, Iceland could explore
                         both sites and select the better one for further development. In future, this site could be supported
                         with a set of four test drillings and several production drillings. Well-head power plants could also be
                         installed on production wells at Tendaho, which will provide geophysical data of the reservoir and
                         also produce electricity during the development phase.

                         Component 4: Drilling Rig and Associated Accessories (IDA $55M): Bank will finance a full size
                         and modern electric drilling rig with equipment and accessories for directional drilling. This rig will
                         be used at the Aluto Langano project site along with the drill that is now being used for the
                         exploration drilling. Use of two rigs will increase the implementation pace of the project.

                         At present, GSE owns two drilling rigs, which were purchased several years ago but was not used for
                         more than a decade. One of these drilling rigs has already been refurbished and is being used at the
                         Aluto Langano site. The other rig is in storage and GSE should investigate whether it could also be
                         refurbished economically. Given that Ethiopia is planning to expand its geothermal resource base to
                         generate electricity, it should consider ensuring access to several drilling rigs in order to develop
                         several sites in parallel.

                         Component 5: Capacity Building and Technical Assistance (GOI $0.5M): Iceland will provide
                         technical assistance to EEPCO to determine a suitable technical specification for the drilling rig that
                         will be procured under the project. Iceland will also help EEPCO, GSE and the Ministry of Water
                         and Energy in identifying and participating at suitable training programs to enhance their capacity on
                         geothermal development. In addition to the specific technical assistance and capacity building
                         support that Iceland will provide to Ethiopia under this component, it will further ensure that proper
                         technology transfer takes place through its support provided to other components of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         GSDP will be located in the Afar Depression and Ethiopian Rift Valley, specifically the project will
                         support: geothermal test and production drillings, steam gathering system, power plant, electricity
                         evacuation facilities (substation and transmission lines) of Aluto Langano and Tendaho geothermal
                         sites. Several scientific studies have been undertaken on these sites, indicating minimal and short
                         term impacts on the environment from deep drilling. Potential impacts on the environment might also
                         be physical, chemical, socio-economic and cultural; and a detailed ESIA (emphasizing social
                         assessment) will be undertaken in both sites before the commencement of the proposed project.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         There is staff in place within the EEPCo to manage safeguards issues and this will be further
                         strengthened under GSDP with dedicated staff for safeguards recruited and placed on project sites. If
                         the project determines that OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People is triggered, there would be the need to
                         strengthen the capacity of EEPCo to document, report and monitor relevant safeguard instruments.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTN3)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          GSDP will finance geothermal testing and
                           BP 4.01                                        production drilling, steam gathering system,
                                                                          power plant, electricity evacuation facilities
                                                                          (substation and transmission lines) of Aluto
                                                                          Langano and Tendaho geothermal sites. The
                                                                          civil works are expected to have major
                                                                          environmental impacts. ESIAs for two of the
                                                                          sites (Alalobad-Tendaho and Aluto) will be
                                                                          prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
                                                                          appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD          The sites are close to some natural habitats. The
                                                                          ESIAs will advise on the impacts and mitigation
                                                                          measures.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                TBD          The sites may affect forests. The ESIAs will
                                                                          advise on the impacts and mitigation measures.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The project does not involve pest management
                                                                          measures.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes          There are few areas in the Ethiopian lowlands
                           BP 4.11                                        that constitute cultural property in the sense
                                                                          described in OP. 4.11. The project would
                                                                          involve excavation or inundation, where chance
                                                                          finds might occur. Some of geographic sites
                                                                          may also have cultural relevance. However,
                                                                          activities will be carried out only in areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          selected by government and local citizens and
                                                                          would give great importance to safeguarding
                                                                          their cultural property. The ESIAs will include
                                                                          mitigation measures or guidance for dealing
                                                                          with physical cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD          The GoE recently agreed with the Bank on
                                                                          Terms of Reference for a screening of ethnic
                                                                          groups in five regions, including Afar, against
                                                                          the defining criteria in OP 4.10, and this work is
                                                                          completed and the WB and government are
                                                                          discussing the recommendations. A social
                                                                          assessment will be undertaken. If it is
                                                                          determined that the GSDP involves indigenous
                                                                          peoples, the required due diligence will be
                                                                          undertaken.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes          GSDP interventions may involve acquisition of
                           4.12                                           land and /or restriction of access to communal
                                                                          natural resources. RPFs for the two sites will be
                                                                                                                                 developed, consulted upon, and disclosed before
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            GSDP will not finance any investments aimed at
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 dam construction.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project does not involve international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not being implemented in any
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TBD.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Raihan Elahi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 07-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Lucio Monari (SM)                                                                                                    Date: 07-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
