                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7290
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Yemen, Republic of                Project ID:    P145361
                            Project Name:     Corridor Highway Project (P145361)
                            Task Team         Andreas Schliessler
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         03-Mar-2014                       Estimated   29-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSTI                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Regional
                                              integration (20%), Export development and competitiveness (20 %), Conflict
                                              prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     191.00           Total Bank Financing:               150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       41.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                               150.00
                              Total                                                                                   191.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is "Improved transport connectivity and safety on the targeted
                           section of the transport corridor between Aden and Taiz".
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         The Yemen Corridor Highway Project is expected to achieve the above mentioned objective though
                         the implementation of two components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Highway construction (US$ 150 million, of which US$ 128 million to be funded by
                         IDA). This component will include mainly civil works for the construction of a sub-section of 55 km
                         of a double carriageway highway between Aden and Noubat Dokaim. This sub-section will
                         complement the 85 km sub-section to be built under a separate project with funding from the Saudi
                         Fund for development which is considered to be an "associated facility". It will also include
                         consulting services for the supervision of construction works for the same section, and technical
                         audits to verify the quality of construction.

                         Component 2: Institutional Support and Strengthening (US$ 22.0 million). This component will be
                         comprised of several subcomponents:
                         •      Preparation activities for other sections of the Saada – Aden Yemen International Corridor
                         Highway which are to be built through future projects, including:

                         a)        Preparation of Environmental and Social Safeguards studies (ESIA, EMP, RAP) for the
                         following sections of the highway: (i) Taiz – Sana’a (Section 2); (ii) Sana’a - Amran (part of Section
                         3); (iii) Amran - Saudi Arabia Border.
                         b)        Update of existing design and feasibility studies for the section between Taiz and Sana’a
                         (Section 2) and between Sana’a and Amran (part of Section 3).
                         c)     Corridor-level study for section between Amran and Saudi Arabia border, and later detailed
                         design and feasibility study for that section.

                         •       Road safety. This will include a review of the existing design of the Aden – Taiz highway
                         section with the specific purpose of detecting and remedying any potential deficiencies of the
                         engineering design in terms of road safety.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Definition of asset management arrangements for the overall Saada-Aden Yemen
                         International Corridor Highway (SAYICH). This subcomponent will include activities required for
                         the establishment of mechanisms for the effective management and maintenance of the new corridor.
                         Although the project will only cover the highway between Aden and Taiz, it will be necessary to
                         establish suitable arrangements for managing and maintaining the entire future road corridor asset,
                         which will eventually connect Aden in the South to the Saudi border in the North. This
                         subcomponent will be developed with an eye to include small and medium-sized local firms as much
                         as possible.

                         •       Communications campaign. This will include the design and execution of the MPWH’s
                         information and communications campaign, for the purposes of building public and stakeholder
                         support for the International Corridor Highway Program.

                         •        Training and capacity building. This subcomponent will also include resources to fund
                         various types of training and capacity building for staff of MPWH, apart from the resources for road
                         safety training and asset management described above.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The wider Saada – Aden Yemen International Corridor Highway (SAYICH) Program will include
                         three main sections:


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         •       Section 1: Aden – Lahj – Taiz (140 km)
                         •       Section 2: Taiz – Ibb – Dhamar – Sana’a (214 km)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Section 3: Sana’a – Amran – Saada (Albain border) (358 km)

                         At this time, the Government has only secured funding (by the Saudi Fund for Development) for a 85
                         km subsection of Section 1, between Taiz and Noubat Dokaim. The proposed IDA-funded project
                         would cover the remaining part of Section 1, namely the southernmost 55 km between Aden and
                         Noubat Dokaim. Section 1 of the SAYICH is considered a viable stand-alone project. The SDF-
                         funded sub-section is considered an "associated facility" to the sub-section to be funded by the
                         project. Section 1 is located in three governorates (Aden, Lahj and Taiz).

                         For Section 1, the necessary land acquisition and resettlement is concentrated in several pockets
                         along the planned highway, mostly along the SFD-funded sub-section where about 90% of the
                         project-affected people live. The sub-section to be funded under the proposed IDA-funded project
                         has relatively little sensitive land acquisition since it includes long stretches in desert areas without
                         any productive activities.

                         The terrain is mostly flat or slightly rolling between the coastal town of Aden and Noubat Dokaim.
                         Further north towards Taiz it becomes more hilly and mountainous. Very few watercourses of
                         significance traverse the project area. The road is designed as a long-distance highway with
                         specifically designed access and exit points. Several possible alignments for the new highway were
                         analyzed and compared. The choice of the alignment was made based on several criteria, including
                         minimizing environmental and social impacts, such as keeping the alignment away from settlements
                         as much as possible and reducing the need for acquiring productive land. Nevertheless, some
                         settlements along the alignment may need shielding from the effects of fast traffic on the new
                         highway. The chosen alignment is not anywhere near protected areas.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nina Bhatt (MNSSU)
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Policy will be triggered. Environmental and
                         BP 4.01                                                Social Assessment and Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No               Policy is not triggered as per ESIA.

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No               Policy does not apply as the project will not be
                                                                                implemented in any forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09               No               Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                procure any pesticides nor will it induce an
                                                                                increase in the current non-existent to low levels
                                                                                of pesticide use.



                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             Policy will be triggered due to the possibility of
                            BP 4.11                                             chance finds of cultural or historic resources
                                                                                during the construction of the new highway, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                also because cultural resources (mosques, graves)
                                                                                are affected by the construction activities.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              Policy is not triggered as indigenous people as
                                                                                defined in the policy are not present in project
                                                                                areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             Land acquisition and resettlement impacts will
                            4.12                                                not be avoidable. A Resettlement Action Plan will
                                                                                be prepared.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                include construction of dams as defined by the
                                                                                policy.
                            Projects on International           No              Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                undertake any activities in the catchment areas of
                                                                                international waterways and shared aquifers.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Policy is not triggered as project activities will
                            7.60                                                not be implemented in any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Due to the nature of the project as construction of a new highway (as opposed to upgrading of an
                              existing highway), the project may have significant environmental and social impacts which need
Public Disclosure Copy




                              to be managed and mitigated. The proposed project is therefore considered a “Category A” project,
                              meaning that it is “likely to have significant adverse environmental and social impacts that are
                              sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented”.

                             Environmental impacts:
                             The potential negative impacts of the road construction activities include (i) removal of vegetation,
                             (ii) air pollution from emission of gases, dust and noise from construction plants and vehicles, (iii)
                             risk of safety for residents, (iv) risk of damage to cultural properties of local importance which
                             could be near the alignment, (v) changes to local drainage near water courses or borrow areas, in
                             cases where watercourses are encountered, (vi) water pollution close to water courses, (vii) unsafe
                             conditions for workers as well as (viii) stress on local population and resources due to temporary
                             influx of large population of workers.
                             During operation phase, increased air pollution from vehicle movement and hazard due to road
                             accidents are possible. To a lesser degree, increased severance of populations on either side of the
                             new highway may occur.
                             The potential environmental impacts have been addressed through the ESMP.

                             Social impacts:
                             The key adverse social impacts of the project are largely related to land acquisition and
                             resettlement. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared not only


                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           for the IDA-funded road sections between Aden and Noubat Dokaim, but also for the adjacent
                           section between Noubat Dokaim and Taiz which is funded by the Saudi Fund for Development
                           under a different project. The ESIA shows that the impacts due to land acquisition and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           resettlement are spread among three Governorates (Aden, Lahj, and Taiz) and affect 5 districts and
                           74 villages or small settlements. According to census survey results, a total of 2,685 households
                           are likely to be affected by land acquisition. Due to the large average household size, a total of
                           31,695 persons will be affected. These households earn their livelihood primarily through
                           agriculture, Qat cultivation, wage labor and through small businesses.
                           A total of 1,224.8 hectares of land is to be acquired permanently for the project. Land acquisition
                           will be most important in Lahj Governorate (909.6 ha.), significant in Taiz Governorate (277.9
                           ha.), and relatively minor in Aden Governorate (37.3 ha). The impact of land acquisition on
                           livelihoods is likely to be significant in many cases. Of the 2,159 individual plots involved in land
                           acquisition, 1,318 are to be acquired in their entirety (100%) while the remaining 841 plots are to
                           be acquired in part. Of a total of 1,329 agricultural plots affected, 721 will be acquired in their
                           entirety. While this impact is significant, it is offset in part by the pattern of multiple landholdings
                           by households that is prevalent in the project area.
                           In addition to land acquisition, YCHP will require substantial demolition of structures and
                           relocation of residents. In all, 170 households (or 2,789 people) will be required to relocate.
                           Among the governorates, Taiz will require the greatest relocation (2,546 people), compared to 233
                           in Lahj and 10 people in Aden.
                           The likely negative social impacts have been addressed through the ESMP and the RAP.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long-term impacts are mostly linked to the increased emissions of pollutants to the air
                           environment. This is due to the additional traffic generated by the new road. The increase in
                           pullutant load by the year 2040 for both sections is as follows: Vehicle traffic levels in the “with
                           project” scenario are about 1.59 times higher than in the “without project” scenario. The increases
                           in pollutants are as follows: HC – 2.21 times, CO – 2.53 times, NOx – 2.15 times, SO2 - 2.13
Public Disclosure Copy




                           times, CO2 – 2.13 times, Particulate Matter – 2.13 times, Lead – 2.19 times higher. Despite the
                           significant increases, the overall dispersed pollution levels are still deemed to be at non-critical
                           levels, which is partly due to the near-absence of other sources of pollution in most of the project
                           area.

                           The project will generate a number of important socioeconomic benefits: Despite the depressed
                           business activities in Aden during the recent years, the city of Aden is nevertheless relatively
                           prosperous compared to many other areas of Yemen. The highway section between Aden and Taiz
                           which is to be built under the proposed project would expand the relatively prosperous Aden’s
                           market into hinterland areas and improve access to supply chains for Lahj and Taiz Governarates
                           which are marked by far deeper poverty. The project is expected to promote shared prosperity in
                           the following ways:
                           •        In the short term, the construction itself of the road would bring important short-term
                           benefits through job opportunities for thousands of workers, unskilled and skilled, including those
                           who have been repatriated from Saudi Arabia and Gulf states in the recent past. First, during the
                           construction period a large number of skilled and unskilled workers will be employed by private
                           contractors, resulting in important income generation (about 1.28 million person-days of unskilled
                           work alone during the 3 to 4 years of project execution, at a rate of about US$ 18 per day).
                           Unskilled workers, which in economic terms are part of the bottom 40% of the population, will
                           typically be recruited from the area of the physical works, resulting in direct income generation for


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           this group in the area of the road. Second, the construction would also bring large-scale business
                           opportunities for many Yemeni firms who will be involved in the construction activities, as
                           contractors, sub-contractors and as suppliers of goods and services. It is these direct short-term
Public Disclosure Copy




                           benefits that are of specific importance in the context of the ongoing political consolidation and
                           unification process.
                           •        In the medium and long term, the new Saada-Aden Yemen International Highway
                           (SAYICH) Program, of which the Corridor Highway Project is the first part, is expected to bring
                           trade facilitation and general economic revitalization, by lowering transportation costs and travel
                           times, reducing overall trade costs, and by bringing access to international markets through Aden
                           deeper into the country. The highway will also provide better access by rural populations to
                           markets and services located in the larger cities along the new highway (Aden, Lahj and Taiz).
                           Most social services, such as general healthcare, emergency medical services, education, etc. are
                           located in the cities and the new highway will provide faster and easier access to those.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The alignment of the planned highway was chosen using several different criteria, among which
                           were to minimize negative environmental and social impacts, such as avoid proximity to human
                           settlements as much as possible. This has been largely achieved along the IDA-funded section
                           between Aden and Noubat Dokaim where the volume of needed resettlement is low. On the SFD-
                           funded section between Noubat Dokaim and Taiz significant resettlement will be necessary,
                           especially in the area close to Taiz. There are no legally protected areas for flora or fauna along the
                           alignment or even near the alignment.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Client has agreed to apply Bank safeguards policies to the entire new highway between Aden
                           and Taiz. An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), an Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (ESMP) and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) have been prepared and
                           integrated with the project documents, including the civil works contracts. The ESMP requires the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of measures by the MPWH as well as by the civil works contractor. The
                           supervision consultant will monitor the implementation of the ESMP and report regularly on
                           progress to the MPWH. The implementation of the ESMP will be the responsibility of PIU the
                           MPWH. It is recruiting a full-time environmental/social specialist to assist the Project Director on
                           all environmental aspects. The environmental/social specialist will interface with the Bank, the
                           road works supervision consultant and with the road contractors, as well as with other stakeholders
                           such as the Yemen EPA, to ensure that all ESMP measures are implemented. The environmental
                           coordinator will be the key liaison with the Bank and with other stakeholder departments of the
                           GoY, for implementing the management measures that are to be implemented directly by the
                           MPWH, as opposed to those that are to be implemented through the contractor for works. A
                           written agreement between MPWH and the Yemen Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has
                           also been reached which defines the roles and responsibilities of each party and describes the third
                           party monitoring and evaluation to ensure the effectiveness of the measures for environmental
                           management. The PIU will also be responsible for implementing the Resettlement Action Plan.

                           An external independent monitoring agency will also be used to verify the full implementation of
                           the ESMP and the RAP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           Extensive consultations have been carried out with a wide range of stakeholders during the project
                           preparation stage. These have included consultations with local residents (male and female) in the
                           project area where the draft ESIA and ESMP were discussed. MPWH also plans to continue
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultations and outreach in the project area during the project implementation stage. In addition,
                           a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for environmental and social impacts will also be
                           implemented.

                           As part of project preparation, discussions with the Yemen EPA have been held and their views
                           have been obtained on the ESIA and ESMP. A Memorandum of Understanding is expected to be
                           signed between the MPWH and Yemen EPA to clarify the role of each party and to ensure the
                           adequate implementation of the ESMP measures.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      28-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         28-Feb-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Yemen, Republic of                                                  28-Feb-2014
                           Comments: The draft ESIA and ESMP were disclosed in Yemen as follows: (i) on the website of
                                         the Ministry of Public Works and Highways, (ii) in printed version in the
                                         Headquarters of the MPWH in Sana'a and in the MPWH branch offices in Taiz and
                                         Aden. Newspaper advertisements were published in local papers informing the
                                         public about the availability of the draft ESIA and ESMP on the MPWH website and
                                         in the MPWH offices indicated above.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      28-Feb-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Yemen, Republic of                                                  28-Feb-2014
                           Comments: The draft RAP was disclosed in Yemen as follows: (i) on the website of the Ministry
                                         of Public Works and Highways, (ii) in printed version in the Headquarters of the
                                         MPWH in Sana'a and in the MPWH branch offices in Taiz and Aden. Newspaper
                                         advertisements were published in local papers informing the public about the
                                         availability of the draft RAP on the MPWH website and in the MPWH offices
                                         indicated above.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Andreas Schliessler
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                   Date: 04-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Veevers-Carter (SM)                      Date: 04-Mar-2014



                                                                        Page 8 of 8
