                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6762
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P132739
                            Project Name:      Neeranchal National Watershed Project (P132739)
                            Task Team          Grant Milne
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Dec-2013                       Estimated   10-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDA                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Agricultural extension
                                              and research (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (50%), Other environment and natural resources
                                              management (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     357.00           Total Bank Financing:                178.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        178.50
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               178.50
                              Total                                                                                     357.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support IWMP through technical assistance to
                           improve incremental conservation outcomes and agricultural yields for communities in selected sites,
                           and adoption of more effective processes and technologies into the broader IWMP in participating
                           project states.

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                          3. Project Description
                         The project would be implemented through four components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Central Institutional and Capacity Building (US$ 11.3 million), would strengthen the
                         capability of key national and state watershed institutions to more effectively plan, coordinate,
                         deliver, and monitor integrated watershed programs; undertake relevant policy analyses; develop
                         watershed strategies; and report on progress.

                         Component 2: National Innovation Support (US$ 32.0 million) would develop and disseminate
                         innovative knowledge, tools and systems to participating states to improve watershed planning,
                         program implementation, agricultural intensification, water management, and livelihoods.

                         Component 3: Support to IWMP in Participating States (US$ 301.9 million) would improve the
                         effectiveness of state-level IWMP operations for farmers and communities, convergence-integration
                         with other relevant sectors and schemes, and adoption of innovative practices.

                         Component 4. Project Management and Coordination (US$ 11.8 million) would ensure effective and
                         efficient project management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would provide technical assistance and demonstrative investments in order to enhance
                         the outcomes of the Integrated Watershed Management Program (IWMP), which is a flagship
                         scheme of the Government of India and operational in all the 28 States. Neeranchal would
                         predominantly focus on dry-land areas in eight states: Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat,
                         Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan and Uttarakhand. The states
                         present a wide range of physical characteristics ranging from hilly terrain in northern India
                         (Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh) to forested highlands in central India (Madhya Pradesh and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Chhattisgarh) on one hand to drier landscapes of the western India (Rajasthan and Gujarat) on the
                         other. The eight states also vary in terms of agro-climatic and/or agro-ecological zones with widely
                         varying temperature and rainfall profiles. Broadly, all the states have small and marginal farmers
                         with small sized farmlands facing the challenges of climatic variations with current low levels of
                         resilience to climate change. The project design for state-level investments would build on the model
                         in the new Bank-supported Karnataka Watershed Development Project II, as well as lessons learned
                         from earlier Bank-supported watershed projects , and smaller bi-lateral programs . The project would
                         primarily focus on technical support, complementing ongoing and planned field investments by
                         IWMP, NREGS, and other government programs (minor irrigation, agriculture, tanks, etc.) and may
                         finance some activities as pilots and demonstrations. Technical and institutional capacity built
                         through project would result in improving the efficiency and outcomes of the IWMP.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Anupam Joshi (SASDI)
                         Surbhi Dhingra (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              A number of activities and approaches that
                          BP 4.01                                            Neeranchal would finance have the potential to



                                                                     Page 2 of 9
                                                                         influence both the environmental setting and
                                                                         social fabric within a given landscape and
                                                                         therefore, an assessment is required triggering
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         this policy. The potential impacts, if any, need to
                                                                         be identified and mitigated for ensuring
                                                                         sustainability of investments.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             Areas that would receive benefits from the
                                                                         technical assistance as well as demonstrative
                                                                         investments on watershed activities are either
                                                                         private agricultural lands and/or common
                                                                         property resource areas. Many natural habitats,
                                                                         including forestland, non-forestland with tree
                                                                         cover, pastures/meadows etc. may be involved
                                                                         and therefore, this policy is triggered for ensuring
                                                                         that these areas do not undergo any degradation
                                                                         and people dependent on these common property
                                                                         resources continue to enjoy the access and rights
                                                                         they currently are entitled to.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Some of the watersheds may include legally
                                                                         defined forest areas and therefore, this policy is
                                                                         triggered for ensuring that activities in forestlands
                                                                         are aligned with their management/working plans
                                                                         and do not result in any significant adverse
                                                                         impact on forest quality and quantity.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             This policy is triggered to control the chance
                                                                         increased use of pesticides by farmers, which has
                                                                         implications for the quality of soil and water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         environment as well as public health concerns.
                                                                         An Integrated Pest Management Framework has
                                                                         been developed due to various locations of
                                                                         proposed interventions across multiple states.
                                                                         Limited amounts of pesticides may be procured,
                                                                         through unlikely, for demonstration purposes. No
                                                                         banned pesticides (formulated products that fall
                                                                         in WHO classes IA and IB, or formulations of
                                                                         products in Class II) would be procured.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              No excavation is expected. Demonstrative
                         BP 4.11                                         works are on the surface and/or on already
                                                                         existing farmlands and common property
                                                                         resources. Cultural resources (properties), if any,
                                                                         for example, religious sites, sacred groves etc.
                                                                         would not be disturbed through avoidance of
                                                                         these.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Tribal communities exist in some of the
                                                                         watersheds that would be taken up under the
                                                                         project and therefore, this policy is triggered for



                                                                 Page 3 of 9
                                                                                  ensuring that these communities receive adequate
                                                                                  benefits from the project and supported activities
                                                                                  are not in violation of acceptable social norms
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  and customs. An Indigenous Peoples Framework
                                                                                  has been developed and included in the ESMF.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No                Land acquisition of any kind is not part of the
                            4.12                                                  project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                Only small check dams (generally up to 3 m
                                                                                  height) are to be supported as demonstrative
                                                                                  structures for showcasing design guidelines and
                                                                                  standards. This would not result in large water
                                                                                  impoundments and flood risk due to failures of
                                                                                  these structures. There is also vast experience in
                                                                                  constructing small check dams in local watershed
                                                                                  programs. This policy is therefore, not triggered.
                            Projects on International            No                The activities would not result in any changes in
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  water balance in any international waterways and
                                                                                  therefore, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              As part of project preparation, key safeguards issues have been identified associated with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              proposed project activities through a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA). It
                              included collection and collation of secondary data, stakeholder consultations, situational analysis,
                              risk analysis, limited field based primary surveys and policy analysis at the national, state, district,
                              block/project, watershed and community levels.

                              The key social challenges identified are: (i) ensuring participation, inclusion of vulnerable groups
                              and equity through mobilizing individuals and institutions at different levels and locations; (ii)
                              creating opportunities for landless other than labor in watershed works; (iii) challenges of gender
                              mainstreaming in decision making process and building women asset base and gender based
                              discrimination; (iv) gender sensitization of Gram Panchayats and other watershed related
                              institutions; (v) building accountability and transparency in decentralizing service delivery and
                              improving its performance, particularly for convergence and distribution of benefits to avoid
                              incidences of elite capture; (vi) ensuring increased participation of tribal/indigenous communities;
                              (vii) absence of a robust grievance redress system, other that functioning of the Right to
                              Information (RTI) Act; and (viii) ensuring that people/communities continue to enjoy their rights
                              and entitlements on common property resources.

                              The key environmental challenges identified are: (i) soil erosion due to faulty practices, in
                              untreated areas resulting in loss of potential productivity gains, increased surface runoff and local
                              loss of soil biota; (ii) overgrazing of remaining common property resources and increased spread


                                                                          Page 4 of 9
                           of invasive species, including in aquatic ecosystems and chance introduction of exotic species; (iii)
                           lowering of groundwater and its quality; (iv) limited opportunity for mainstreaming sustainable
                           environmental practices at the watershed level through convergence of various schemes; and (v)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           challenges of developing technical capacity to arrest land degradation, reduce soil erosion and
                           improve groundwater status at the implementation level.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Given the nature of project support and generally positive outcomes of watershed development
                           interventions, no potential indirect and/or long term impacts are envisaged due to anticipated
                           future activities in the project areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           A typical watershed development program, which is implemented as a standalone project was
                           considered but rejected as the current demand is for technical and value added support to improve
                           the outcomes of the larger Government funded IWMP.

                           A top down department led project design was considered for undertaking various watershed
                           activities and works but rejected. Instead, based on the social and environmental issues and the
                           gaps identified in the SESA, the project would strengthen the existing and/or new institutions at
                           the grassroots level to enable local communities participate in planning and construction of
                           watershed facilities and subsequently operate and maintain the systems on their own.

                           Support in the form of only technical assistance was considered, but partially modified to include
                           limited demonstrative investments for fully showcasing the investment cycle from planning,
                           coordination up to field level investments. The project is only financing technical assistance in
                           components 1 and 2. For component 3, the project is only financing technical assistance for core
                           activities linked with IWMP in selected sites. The project is therefore not financing operational
                           soil and water conservation works such as field bunds, farm ponds or check dams. In addition
Public Disclosure Copy




                           however, participating states will also be supported for minor office upgrading, and small scale
                           research pilots and demonstrations to showcase new approaches and innovations that could be
                           scaled up into IWMP at a later date. For these small scale pilots and demonstrations, the project
                           could therefore finance small trials of new types of soil and water conservation measures,
                           conservation agriculture demonstrations, Integrated Pest and Nutrient Management (IPNM), etc.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As part of project preparation, four experienced and independent environment and social
                           development consultants were contracted by DoLR who were supervised by an experienced team
                           leader. This team undertook a Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA)
                           foridentifying, among others, key policy gaps, institutional shortfalls, technical shortcomings
                           along with assessing the current state of watershed development, impacts of watershed
                           investments and inclusion and participation of communities in watershed development programs.
                           Stakeholder consultations were held and a situational analysis was undertaken, which also
                           incorporated stakeholder views and feedback for identifying key environmental and social issues
                           related to watershed programs. Although the scope of the project is largely technical assistance
                           with limited demonstrative investments, a Free Prior Informed Consent was conducted during
                           stakeholder consultations at the watershed level by informing the potential beneficiaries about the
                           nature of the project and potential interventions planned under it.


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                          Although the project’s primary support is in the form of technical assistance, it does provide an
                          opportunity to positively influence the watershed outcomes under IWMP. This justifies the need
Public Disclosure Copy




                          for looking at the policy/institutional level issues in the watershed sector and not limit to the
                          impact-mitigation approach. Therefore, the SESA is being conducted in two phases. The first
                          phase of SESA is an impact-centered one that provides an analysis of the current state of
                          watershed development and its potential outcomes and covers the potential impacts and
                          compliance with safeguard policy regime. It also includes an Environmental and Social
                          Management Framework (ESMF) to address project’s potential negative and positive
                          environmental impacts (both direct and indirect) and develop measures to prevent, minimize,
                          mitigate and compensate for adverse impacts and enhance the positive impacts. The second phase
                          of SESA would be a policy level SESA and will be undertaken during initial days of project
                          implementation. It will focus on mainstreaming environmental and social mitigation action,
                          processes for improving watershed outcomes, effective steps for monitoring and building human
                          resource capacity for ensuring inclusions and participation of the vulnerable communities, among
                          others. It would suggest measures to introduce key policy and process changes in the ongoing
                          IWMP and would also benefit from initial experience of bringing in technological support in
                          community level watershed planning and coordination.

                          The borrower has low capacity to address safeguard policy issues. There is limited prior
                          experience of implementing Bank projects. While watershed improvement is generally associated
                          with positive impacts, capacity to address environmental and social issues is currently weak,
                          especially at the subproject levels. Given the fact that implementation of central schemes is
                          administered at the state level, coordination with multiple states on safeguards may pose a
                          challenge. Given the technical assistance scope of the project, with only limited demonstrative
                          investments on the ground (such as, water and soil conservation works, constructing check dams
                          and other erosion prevention structures etc.), there may be only minor environmental and/or social
                          safeguards issues to be mitigated. The project will support institutional development, generation
                          and adoption of new and innovative technology for watershed planning, and training and capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                          building of stakeholders and the SESA has drawn from ESMF and EMPs of other Bank funded
                          watershed projects.

                           To improve the capacity, an Environment and Social Cell (ESC) is proposed with support from the
                           Project Implementing Unit (PIU). The second phase of SESA would explore the feasibility and
                           appropriateness of establishing this Cell in the proposed Center of Excellence. Until the Cell is
                           established, one Senior Environment and Social Manager would be hired at the PIU, who may
                           move to the Cell whenever and wherever it is established. Adequate provisions for orientation,
                           sensitizing, and training the relevant stakeholders, including beneficiaries, implementing officers
                           etc on environmental and social concerns would be undertaken. This will be closely supervised
                           during implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholder Analysis resulted in identifying stakeholders at different levels and mapping the key
                           expectations, issues and concerns as related to each stakeholder and the sub-groups thereof. This
                           was based on stakeholder consultations at the Watershed level, PIA level, District level and State
                           level. The key stakeholders include inhabitants of the micro watersheds (in villages), the
                           institutions of local governance (PRI), block level officers and key line departments (for example,
                           forests, agriculture, rural development, MNREGA, etc.), State level institutions and Watershed


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           Development Departments, and the DoLR. The communities in the watersheds are quite diverse –
                           social (scheduled castes, others), economic (landless, small, marginal, and large farmers), ethnic
                           (scheduled tribe, others), gender (female headed households).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           As part of disclosure plan, DoLR has disclosed the draft SESA report on its website and invited
                           stakeholder comments/feedback before the report is finalized. An executive summary of SESA is
                           also prepared and translated in the local language and disclosed. Besides DoLR’s website, these
                           documents would be made available in the key stakeholder offices at the state level.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    27-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             27-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    27-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                           Pest Management Plan
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            00000000
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Yes. No separate PMP is prepared and the ones existing under several State level watershed projects
                         would be applied.
                          In country disclosure completed
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Grant Milne
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 07-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                         Date: 08-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
