                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC14762

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Liberia                          Project ID:      P149279
                            Project Name:       South Eastern Corridor Road Asset Managment Project (P149279)
                            Task Team           Kulwinder Singh Rao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           29-May-2017                      Estimated        28-Sep-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTI07                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    140.00                      Total Bank Financing:          40.00
                            Financing Gap:         100.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   40.00
                              Liberia Reconstruction Trust Fund                                              0.00
                              Total                                                                         40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.     The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to support the Recipient’s effort to reduce
                           transport costs along the South Eastern Ganta-Zwedru corridor and to improve institutional
                           arrangements and capacity in the road sector.
                           C. Project Description
                           Achievement of the Project Development Objectives is proposed to be measured by the following
                           key indicators (a) Roads (Rural) rehabilitated (km); (b) Roads in good and fair condition as a share of
                           total classified roads (percentage); (c) Share of rural population with access to an all-season road
                           (proportion); and (d) Reduced transport cost along the project area. The proposed secondary
                         indicators are: (e) improved youth and women employment (share of total employment generated);
                         (f) increased mobility of people (number of passengers/per day); (g) increased access to markets (no.
                         of trips per days); (h) establishment of a road information management system; and (i) efficiency and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effective implementation capacity measured in terms of reduced cost and schedule variances, etc.

                         The proposed project shall have three components: (a) Design Rehabilitation and Maintenance of
                         Ganta-Tappita Road; (b) Improvement of Passenger and Freight Services; and (c) Operating Costs
                         and Institutional Capacity Building.

                         Component 1: Design Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Ganta-Tappita Road (100km): This
                         component will finance a 10-year Output and Performance-based Road Contract (OPRC) based on
                         Design Build Maintain Operate and Transfer methodology for the improvement of the Ganta-Tappita
                         section of the Southeast corridor from Ganta to Harper including design, rehabilitation and
                         maintenance works, associated consultant services, and land acquisition (as necessary). This road
                         section is vital to the nation’s reconstruction effort and improving regional cross-border traffic.
                         Current surface condition of the road corridor varies by section but is overall poor. Due to large
                         resource requirements , the project team will explore partnership arrangements with other donors,
                         especially Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), which has shown interest in financing a
                         section of this road corridor.

                         Component 2: Improvement of Passenger and Freight Services: This component will finance
                         technical assistance to Ministry of Transport to strengthen the institutional and regulatory framework
                         for provisioning of passenger and freight services in the country. The outputs of this component
                         could underpin future donor interventions for replacement of existing fleet and capacity building of
                         passenger and freight transport operators.

                         Component 3: Operating Costs and Institutional Capacity Building: This component will finance the
                         needed technical assistance for the development of sector institutions through hiring of skilled staff
                         and firms, staff training programs, road information and management system, and the incremental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operating costs.

                         Preliminary Financing Scope: The preliminary estimated financial scope for the project by
                         component is:

                         a.      Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Ganta-Tappita Road: US$150 million
                         b.      Improvement of Passenger and Freight Services:          US$5 million
                         c.      Operation Costs and Institutional Capacity Building         US$10 million
                         Total     US$165 million
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project covers the rehabilitation and maintenance of roads in the Southeast of the country.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower's capacity to manage safeguards policies within the road remains weak, though the
                         Ministry of Public Works and the Environmental Protection Agency are both well versed in the
                         Bank's Safeguard Policies and have experience successfully delivering and reviewing similar IDA
                         financed rehabilitation projects. The Ministry will use the services of an environmental and social
                           specialist to assist with the delivery of the project and both the supervising engineer and contractors
                           will be required to comply with the prepared EMP and report accordingly.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Demba Balde (GSU01)
                           John Bryant Collier (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The project will finance the rehabilitation of existing
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       roads; therefore, no major negative environmental
                                                                            aspects are expected.

                                                                            The GoL has been consistently committed to
                                                                            addressing social and environmental issues in
                                                                            previous and on-going projects. Generally, project
                                                                            implementation has been satisfactory in regards to
                                                                            social and environmental safeguards. The proposed
                                                                            project safeguards arrangements will be similar to
                                                                            those used in previous projects, which allow proper
                                                                            checks and balances to address potential risks: the
                                                                            IIU has already prepared and applied an
                                                                            Environmental Management Plan for roads being
                                                                            rehabilitated under the Emergency Infrastructure
                                                                            Project. That document will be reviewed and
                                                                            updated for the proposed project and re-disclosed
                                                                            prior to the appraisal mission. Any required sight
                                                                            specific EMPs will be prepared at that time.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            The contracting entity will be contractually
                                                                            responsible for developing and implementing a
                                                                            project-specific Health, Environment, and Safety
                                                                            Plan that incorporates the updated EMP.
                                                                            Implementation will be closely monitored and
                                                                            regularly reported on by the supervising consultant in
                                                                            compliance with Liberian laws and regulations as
                                                                            well as the World Bank Safeguard Policies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             The proposed project involves only the rehabilitation
                                                                            of an existing road, and therefore there are no
                                                                            incremental impacts on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project does not involve forests or forestry.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project does not involve pest management.

                           Physical Cultural Resources       TBD            The proposed project involves only the rehabilitation
                           OP/BP 4.11                                       of an existing road. It is not expected to affect
                                                                                                                        Physical and Cultural Resources, but this will be
                                                                                                                        confirmed before appraisal.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The GoL has been consistently committed to
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                addressing social and environmental issues in
                                                                                                                        previous and on-going projects. Generally, project
                                                                                                                        implementation has been satisfactory in regards to
                                                                                                                        social and environmental safeguards. The proposed
                                                                                                                        project safeguards arrangements will be similar to
                                                                                                                        those used in previous projects, which allow proper
                                                                                                                        checks and balances to address potential risks: the
                                                                                                                        IIU has already prepared and applied a Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Policy Framework (RPF). That document will be
                                                                                                                        reviewed and updated for the proposed project.

                                                                                                                        The contracting entity will be responsible for
                                                                                                                        developing and implementing a project-specific
                                                                                                                        Health, Environment, and Safety Plan and any
                                                                                                                        additional sight specific RAPs that may be required,
                                                                                                                        which will be closely monitored by the supervising
                                                                                                                        consultant in compliance with Liberian laws and
                                                                                                                        regulations as well as the World Bank Safeguard
                                                                                                                        Policies.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International      No                                                      N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      N/A
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The documents will be finalized and disclosed prior to appraisal. The dates for appraisal have not
                                      yet been finalized due to the on-going Ebola crisis in Liberia, though it will likely be in late
                                      CY2015 or early CY2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kulwinder Singh Rao
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                                                                                    Date: 29-Nov-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 30-Nov-2016
                                 Manager:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
