                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8455

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                        Project ID:      P148591
                            Project Name:      ET: Second Phase Agricultural Growth Program (P148591)
                            Task Team          Andrew D. Goodland
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Dec-2014                     Estimated        26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA3                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (35%), Irrigation and drainage
                                               (25%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), Ag ro-industry, marketing,
                                               and trade (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (20%),
                                               Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%), Gender ( 10%), Nutrition
                                               and food security (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    500.00                     Total Bank Financing:       300.00
                            Financing Gap:         200.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 300.00
                              Total                                                                       300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO is sustainable and inclusive growth in smallholder agriculture productivity and
                           enhanced market access through linkages with value chains of selected livestock and crop products.
                         The principal aim of the project is to support the government's strategy for agricultural growth, as
                         articulated in its GTP and agricultural PIF. This requires both increases in productivity and
                         commercialization. The focus is on those areas within Ethiopia which have a highest growth
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential, based primarily on agro-ecological conditions and access to markets. The PDO also
                         emphasizes that growth should be inclusive and therefore would stress the participation of women
                         and youth. Sustainable growth requires that due attention is given to natural resource management
                         (land and water) and that institutional development emphasizes sustainable structures and incentives.
                         The main target beneficiaries of the project would be small and medium scale farmers, often resource
                         poor but with the potential to have or increase marketable surpluses from crop and livestock
                         activities.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project would be a follow-on from the current AGP. Specifically, the new project
                         would follow on from AGP in three ways: i) scale-up the achievements of the first phase into new
                         geographical areas; ii) consolidate the activities conducted in the existing AGP areas; and iii) and
                         refine and strengthen the approach to provide increased impact.

                         i)       Scale-up. The current phase of the program focusses on 96 of the high potential agricultural
                         (crop) woredas across the four regions of Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR and Tigray. The Government
                         classify 302 woredas countrywide as being “high potential”, ie having the best climatic and agro-
                         ecological conditions with good market access to support agricultural growth (largely in the crop
                         sector). The Government has ambitious plans to scale up the approach piloted under AGP to a larger
                         proportion of these woredas, though recognizes the constraints of both resources and, critically, the
                         capacity to implement and manage an expansion. The Ministry of Agriculture has proposed an
                         expansion under AGP2 to 50 percent of high potential woredas, an additional 55 woredas from the
                         96 already included under AGP. The selection of woredas would be guided by criteria to be
                         determined during project preparation. In addition to meeting criteria related to the potential for
                         agricultural production, greater consideration would be given to the strategic selection of woredas to
                         form more coherent "clusters" of project intervention sites. Criteria for clustering would include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consideration for watersheds, key commodity production zones, market access (for example along
                         transportation corridors) and administrative borders (at zonal level).

                         ii)      Consolidation: The proposed project would continue activities in the woredas already
                         included under AGP. This recognizes that i) AGP has not been able to meet many investment
                         demands within these woredas; and ii) that additional, often softer, investment and support is
                         necessary to increase the impact of activities completed under AGP. A good example of this are
                         investments in small scale irrigation, many of which will not be completed until the final year of the
                         current project, which will require additional support for the established Water Users' Associations
                         and extension services to enable good water management, maintenance of irrigation structures and a
                         shift to higher value crops.

                         iii) Strengthened design: The second phase would have a modified design based on the lessons from
                         AGP and also to reflect shifting priorities in the government's agricultural development strategy. A
                         number of the possible new areas for engagement have been identified to be further investigated
                         during the preparation process and include: i) a greater emphasis on nutrition-sensitive activities and
                         more explicit attention to nutrition; ii) greater engagement with rural financial services, and
                         specifically responding to and supporting the emerging government strategy for developing rural
                         financial services; and iii) plant protection.
                         At concept stage, the preliminary component structure is as for AGP, though this will be further
                         reviewed and revised if necessary during the preparation period.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A: Agricultural Services and Commercialization.
                         Strengthening key public services
                         i) Agricultural extension: Government has invested heavily in increasing the outreach of extension
                         services. The project would support the establishment (if required) and equipping of Farmer Training
                         Centers and provide training for development agents and local subject matter specialists.
                         ii) Animal health services: the project would help to expand and strengthen animal health services
                         through equipping posts and clinics and providing training for animal health workers.
                         iii) Plant protection: The project would support equipment and training for improved plant protection
                         services.

                         Scaling up new technologies and good practice: The identification of scalable technologies from
                         identified best practice and research institutions. Based on those technologies already identified from
                         on-going validation processes of good practice, plus linkages with research organizations, the project
                         would support the further validation and demonstration (at FTCs, model farmers, and farmer groups)
                         new technologies for increased productivity and commercialization (including crop and livestock
                         management, modern crop varieties and improved breeds, and improved inputs or use of inputs,
                         including blended fertilizers.

                         Input and output marketing: the project would support farmers and farmer groups (either organized
                         informally or as primary cooperatives) to improve their access to inputs and output markets. For
                         inputs, there are several options, to be explored further during preparation, for project support
                         including: i) seed, and specifically the scaling up of the government’s Direct Seed Marketing
                         initiative, currently being piloted in 34 woredas, to enhance farmer seed production and
                         dissemination; ii) fertilizer, specifically the possible scale up of production capacity and marketing of
                         blended fertilizers, developed to better address local soil nutrient deficiencies; and, iii)
                         mechanization: supporting the growth of markets for production equipment through demonstration
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and possible support for cooperative leasing models.
                         For outputs, a continuation of the existing USAID-parallel financed AMDe and Livestock Market
                         Development projects would be considered (and is under discussion with USAID), whoch has
                         supported improved market linkages and value addition for selected crop and livestock commodities.

                         B: Rural Infrastructure for Agricultural Production and Marketing

                         Irrigation Development and Management
                         The project would provide the following support:
                         i) Identification, design and construction of small scale irrigation schemes (up to 250 ha): the project
                         would support the rehabilitation or existing schemes and construction of new schemes. The
                         identification of schemes would be done according to recognized good practice emphasizing a
                         watershed management approach, sound economic analysis and community demand. Additional
                         technical support for local water bureaus would be considered if capacity is a constraint. Feeder
                         roads would also be considered as part of SSI development if required.
                         ii) Support to Water Users Associations: New and rehabilitated schemes are required to have WUAs
                         which would be provided technical support to manage schemes. Links between WUAs and
                         extension services will be enhanced to enable groups to move into higher value crops. Where
                         feasible, groups will supported to improve market linkages, possibly through formation of primary
                         cooperatives.
                         iii) Household / Micro-irrigation schemes: micro-irrigation schemes, including water harvesting
                         structures, gravity and pump diversions and shallow wells will be supported for farmer groups. This
                         would be consistent with the recently prepared Government Working Strategy Document: Realizing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the potential of household irrigation in Ethiopia, and use emerging tools for identification of
                         schemes, including the on-going groundwater mapping exercise under AGP. Groups would further
                         be supported to enable them to maximize the returns from the irrigabl e land, including moving to
                         more diversified and nutritious crops.

                         Market infrastructure and management
                         The project would support:
                         Feeder roads and footbridges: to connect high potential areas to market, especially those where there
                         is scope for expansion of irrigation (small scale and household). Feeder roads would be planned to
                         link with broader road network currently being planned and constructed under the EURAP (Ethiopia
                         Universal Rural Access Program).
                         Market centers: upgrading and construction of primary and district market facilities. Support to
                         market management committees to ensure operation and maintenance.
                         Storage facilities: based on on-going pilot to improve storage capacity and management a
                         cooperative unions and primary cooperative, there is potential to scale up to qualifying cooperatives,
                         on a cost sharing, matching grant basis. Support would be provided for management and operation
                         of storage facilities.

                         C. Project Management, Coordination, Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         The component would support project management at federal, regional, zonal and woreda level. In
                         addition to routine functions, emphasis would be placed on a number of critical cross-cutting issues:

                         Planning: AGP launched a community led planning process, which requires a fuller assessment.
                         Other support included to local linkage and partnerships bodies (ADPLACs) which have generally
                         failed to fulfill their mandates. In AGP2, greater emphasis will be provided on local level
                         agricultural planning to embed the project further in local agricultural plans, ensure the principle of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         community consultation is not lost, and take a more strategic approach to the allocation of project
                         funds, including greater alignment with natural resource availability, access to markets and selection
                         of commodities

                         Gender: As with the current AGP, the second phase will support the government’s policy to
                         mainstream the participation of women (both female headed households and women in male headed
                         households) and youth into the agricultural sector. This would include both targeted interventions
                         (including support to women groups for appropriate enterprises) and ensuring inclusion in all project
                         activities, backed up with an M&E system with disaggregated data.

                         Nutrition: although improved nutrition is not an explicit or measurable outcome of the proposed
                         project, there would be many activities that would support aspects of the National Nutrition Program,
                         notable increasing the nutrition value and diversity of available foodstuffs. For example, the support
                         to irrigation will be coupled with extension support to enable households to move to a greater variety
                         of crops including for fodder, fruits and vegetables.

                         Capacity building: The design of AGP2 would include capacity building for a range of organizations
                         and through a number of approaches, including training. Under AGP, the effectiveness of training
                         was found to be relatively weak. A more focused and structured approach to capacity building would
                         be developed for AGP2, drawing upon both good experience in Ethiopia (such as under the
                           Productive Safety Nets Program) and international experience. This would emphasis strengthening
                           core skills for delivering training and stronger processes for training needs assessment, continual
                           training where appropriate and adequate follow up.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Linkages and Coordination: AGP2 will be the primary government program to support investment to
                           achieve strategic goals for agricultural growth. However, it will not function in isolation and
                           coordination and complementarity with other initiatives will provide opportunities for increased
                           impact. AP has had mixed success in linking with other relevant programs – for example the Dutch
                           financed CASCAPE program was fairly successfully aligned with AGP, though expected linkages
                           with the IFAD financed Rural Financial Intermediation Program have not materialized so far.
                           Coordination mechanisms need to be strengthened with a number of other on-going and planned
                           programs, including the Productive Safety Net Program and the Sustainable Land Management
                           Program, both IDA financed.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project would be implemented in up to 150 woredas in high potential areas in the four regions on
                           Amhara, Oromia, SNNPR and Tigray, including the 96 woredas which are already included under
                           the first phase of AGP. The project woredas have in common that they have suitable agro-ecological
                           conditions and market access for increasing agricultural productivity and commercialization. This
                           includes the availability of surface water or shallow ground water which can be exploited for
                           irrigated agriculture. The woredas are mostly in the highlands of Ethiopia, which are the traditional
                           cereals production areas which receive relatively high levels of rainfall.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Implementation Agency for the project at the federal level would be the Ministry of Agriculture,
                           which is also the implementation agency for the on-going first phase of the program. As Ethiopia
                           has a decentralized government structure so the majority of project activities will be carried out at
                           regional level and below, including at the woreda level. There is considerable experience in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation of safeguard policies under the on-going AGP, and as the activities under AGP2 are
                           likely to be similar in nature to AGP, the capacity developed under AGP will be directly relevant.
                           Although capacity has improved under AGP, there are still gaps, which are especially apparent at the
                           local level where the enforcement of safeguard policies is variable.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                           Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is proposed as a Category B project,
                           BP 4.01                                             given that it would finance activities, especially
                                                                               those related to groundwater harvesting, small-
                                                                               scale irrigation schemes, establishment of
                                                                               product storage facilities and introduction of
                                                                               innovative productivity-enhancing approaches
                                                                               that may result in the increased use of
                                                                               agrochemicals such as inorganic fertilizers and
                                                                 pesticides. Since the scope and nature of the
                                                                 sub-projects and their site-specific locations are
                                                                 not known at this time of preparation, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 specific instrument proposed for analyzing
                                                                 potential environmental risks is an ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Project activities will not be undertaken in the
                                                                 natural habitats. The proposed ESMF would
                                                                 suggest screening criteria to be used when
                                                                 selecting sites so that natural habitats are
                                                                 completely avoided. The project will not finance
                                                                 any activities that would impact natural and
                                                                 sensitive habitats (including forests).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Project activities will not be undertaken in
                                                                 forests. The proposed ESMF would have
                                                                 screening criteria for screening sub-projects so
                                                                 that natural or plantation forests will not be
                                                                 affected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   Project funds may be be used to manufacture,
                                                                 purchase and distribute agrochemicals (such as
                                                                 blended fertilizers, but not pesticides), and it is
                                                                 likely that more generally support through AGP
                                                                 to agriculture would encourage farmers to use
                                                                 more inorganic fertilizers and pesticides. The
                                                                 ESMF will contain a section on PMP/IPMP that
                                                                 would elaborate on what actions need to be
                                                                 undertaken to minimize environmental, health
                                                                 and safety impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   As the program would support small-scale
                         BP 4.11                                 infrastructure development, the proposed social
                                                                 assessment during the preparation phase will
                                                                 confirm whether or not physical property will be
                                                                 affected. In the event that this is the case, the
                                                                 ESMF would screen and develop procedures
                                                                 and measures for "chance finds" to be
                                                                 undertaken in the event that culturally
                                                                 significant materials are discovered during land
                                                                 clearing and excavation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The issues relating to OP 4.10 will be defined in
                                                                 detail through Social Assessment and
                                                                 Consultation to reflect the policy requirements.
                                                                 The PAD will summarize the key findings of
                                                                 the social assessment including the process used
                                                                 to foster free, prior, and informed consultations
                                                                 and broad community support for the project,
                                                                 including the provision of grievance redress,
                                                                 and benefit sharing issues; and the identified
                                                                                                                                 mitigating measures will be incorporated in the
                                                                                                                                 design of AGP2.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The proposed project will not undertake any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            sub-projects that will displace people. However,
                                                                                                                                 it would support small-scale rural infrastructure
                                                                                                                                 that might affect land holdings of individual
                                                                                                                                 farmers. While individual sub-projects are not
                                                                                                                                 yet identified, there will be support for activities
                                                                                                                                 such as small scale infrastructure to improve
                                                                                                                                 productivity as well as other rural infrastructure
                                                                                                                                 such as feeder roads. Therefore, as
                                                                                                                                 precautionary measure, tThe project will prepare
                                                                                                                                 and disclose develop a resettlement policy
                                                                                                                                 framework (RFP) prior to appraisal to address
                                                                                                                                 any issues which might arise from economic
                                                                                                                                 displacement .and or restriction of access to
                                                                                                                                 communal natural resources under the Project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           The project would not finance any new
                                                                                                                                 establishment or rehabilitation of large-scale
                                                                                                                                 irrigation facilities and dams above 15 meters.
                                                                                                                                 However, the project might finance check dam
                                                                                                                                 or small dams for water storage and will finance
                                                                                                                                 activities that may rely on the performance of an
                                                                                                                                 existing dam. In the event that AGP2-financed
                                                                                                                                 activities may have to rely on existing dam, the
                                                                                                                                 Bank will review previous assessments of dam
                                                                                                                                 safety or recommendations and safety program
                                                                                                                                 already in operation for the particular dam prior
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 to commencement of activities. Generally, it is
                                                                                                                                 envisaged that no significant environmental and
                                                                                                                                 social risks may arise.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           AGP2 woredas are located in international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            water basins such as that of the Nile or Omo
                                                                                                                                 River. While the impact of individual sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects such as small-scale irrigation would be
                                                                                                                                 neglible and the cumulative abstractions be
                                                                                                                                 minor, Riparian countries will be informed in
                                                                                                                                 accordance with these policies.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The updating of the existing safeguards documents and preparation of new studies as required will
                             be conducted starting from the first preparation mission, which is scheduled for late May 2014.
                             The updated safeguard documents will include lessons learnt during the implementation of ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and RPF under AGP. All studies and safeguard instruments are expected to be completed in draft
                             prior to the Pre-Appraisal mission scheduled for October 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Andrew D. Goodland

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                      Date: 21-May-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                             Date: 21-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
