                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2691

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                          Project ID:       P131558
                            Project Name:      Transmission Efficiency Project (TEP) (P131558)
                            Task Team          Peter Johansen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Mar-2014                      Estimated         29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASVS                            Lending           Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (50%), Transmission and Distribution of
                                               Electricity (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (70%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    700.00                      Total Bank Financing:        500.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     200.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        500.00
                              Total                                                                        700.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) for TEP is to improve the technical and operational
                           performance of NPT in providing reliable and energy efficient electricity transmission services in
                           Vietnam.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project is in the pre-identification stage and adopts a two-phase approach. Phase I will consist of
                         subprojects appraised and ready for implementation upon Board approval (Summer 2014) – the
                         projects to be included in Phase I will be selected during pre-appraisal. Phase II subprojects should
Public Disclosure Copy




                         be ready for implementation by mid-term review or funds will be re-allocated. It is the target that
                         Phase 1 should comprise subprojects corresponding to at least 40% of the total investment.

                         The proposed project will comprise the following three components:

                         Component 1: Transmission Infrastructure. This component will finance transmission lines and
                         substations at voltage levels of 220kV and 500kV. The investments will target areas that are key to
                         the economic development of Vietnam, namely the Greater Hanoi Area, the Greater Ho Chi Minh
                         City Area and the Mekong Delta. The key parameters for identifying sub-components to be included
                         in TEP will be: (i) priority areas in the Power Development Master Plan 7 (PDMP7) and the match
                         with the Project’s PDO; (ii) technical and economic justification; and (iii) readiness for
                         implementation in terms of environmental issues and land acquisition. The subprojects will be
                         analyzed and vetted according to their status in the PDMP7 system interdependence verification of
                         subset priorities, final amount and prioritized following urgency/linkages.
                         All sub-components will be derived from the needs identified in the PDMP7 and are therefore at a
                         reasonably advanced stage of preparation from a technical perspective. Many sub-components
                         already have a basic detailed design, preliminary routes, site locations and in many cases a detailed
                         technical and economic justification. Investments at the 500kV level will help increase the transport
                         capacity of the main 500kV trunk system while increasing its reliability. Investments at the 220kV
                         level are aimed at increasing the capacity of the supply points to the distribution utilities and improve
                         the reliability of the network that serves these points.
                         Roughly 50 percent of the investments are expected to be retrofit subprojects with limited safeguards
                         implications. Such subprojects will entail upgrading of existing lines and substations using existing
                         Right-of-Ways and substation locations. Many of the retrofits will be implemented by NPT’s four
                         Regional Power Transmission Companies (PTCs) who already operate the existing facilities but have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         limited experience with World Bank safeguards procedures. The other roughly 50 percent of the
                         investments will include projects such as greenfield substations and transmission lines, which will be
                         implemented by the three Power Management Boards (PMBs), which have experienced staff that has
                         many years of working experience with the World Bank (most recently in the Transmission
                         Distribution Project Additional Financing) as well as other international donors.

                         Component 2: Smart Grid. This component will improve network reliability and launch new
                         technologies that will make it possible to use existing and future transmission infrastructure more
                         efficiently and make it ready to handle a transition to a higher penetration of renewable energy.
                         Among the smart-grid subprojects, the most relevant in terms of size is the modernization of
                         monitoring, control, and protection functions in the 500kV and 220kV substations.
                         The rationale for the substation modernization sub-projects based on international interoperability
                         standards is very sound overall. The main 500kV and 220kV substations have experienced
                         continuous additions of new transformers, bays, and circuits given the need to expand the system.
                         The monitoring, control and protection equipment that has been included with these additions used
                         technologies available at the time of construction. The variety of equipment and its different
                         functionalities and communication protocols make it difficult to ensure all protections function
                         properly and that the control center and NPT have a complete information monitoring system. The
                         lack of uniformity will sometimes require protections to be disconnected, leaving circuits that feed
                         major load centers highly vulnerable.
                           Technical assistance for the proposed project preparation could help NPT refine the smart grid
                           implementation strategy, especially on defining functional specifications, performance indicators,
                           and cost-benefit analyses. During project implementation, NPT could be supported to establish the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           testing and training centers to improve a company’s ability to absorb new technologies.

                           Component 3: Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening. This component will contribute to
                           the gradual development of NPT to become a fully-fledged independent transmission company with
                           revenues from the application of cost-of-service regulation in the transmission sector. The steps to be
                           supported in this operation include the definition of technical and financial performance indicators,
                           the introduction of enterprise management, asset management and maintenance systems. The
                           operation will also support NPT to produce its first proposal on cost-of-service tariff request to
                           Electricity Regulatory Authority of Vietnam (ERAV). In addition, the operation will strengthen
                           NPT’s regional subsidiaries to effectively undertake the role of project developer, owner and
                           operator of transmission assets. The component may also include support to ERAV to prepare
                           relevant transmission regulation to prepare for wholesale competition in 2015.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be focused on the greater Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City areas, the central region, and
                           the Mekong Delta. During project preparation, aligning transmission corridors and locating
                           substations will be carefully considered in order to avoid critical habitats and important physical
                           cultural resources and to limit land acquisition.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project will be implemented by NPT’s three regional project management boards (PMBs) and
                           four regional power transmission companies (PTCs). NPT and the three regional PMBs have
                           safeguard experiences in the preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments through their
                           work on projects financed by the World Bank and other international donors for many years.
                           However, the four PTCs that will be involved in upgrade activities with little footprint have no
Public Disclosure Copy




                           previous experience with Bank safeguards. Therefore, capacity building for the client and
                           implementing agencies as well as on-the-job training will be provided. Technical Assistance (TA) to
                           ensure adequate capacity for the review and implementation of safeguard issues will be considered.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Son Van Nguyen (EASVS)
                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             This policy is triggered because the Project
                           BP 4.01                                              involves the construction, rehabilitation, and
                                                                                operation of high-voltage substations and
                                                                                overhead transmission lines, requiring the
                                                                                identification, mitigation and monitoring of
                                                                                potential adverse environmental and social
                                                                                impacts.
                                                                                During project identification, 19 subprojects of
                                                                                Component 1, involving the construction and
                         upgrading of 500kV and 220kV transmission
                         lines and substations, have been screened. Most
                         of the activities under this component would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         involve the construction and installation of
                         transmission lines, and substations including
                         transformers, power towers, poles, and wiring.
                         Some subprojects under this component may
                         also include access roads, and clearance of right
                         of way (ROW).
                         7 smart grid subprojects under Component 2 for
                         the installation of smart grid systems at existing
                         500kV and 220kV substations have also been
                         screened. Activities under this component
                         would include the installation of new
                         computerized control systems in control houses;
                         replacement of the existing outdated relays;
                         installation of control protection panels in
                         outdoor bay housing; and the arrangement of
                         devices in the control houses and cable trench
                         systems in accordance with the new control
                         protection system. All these activities will be
                         carried out within the fenced perimeter of the
                         existing 500kV and 220kV substations.
                         The initial environmental screening of proposed
                         subprojects indicates that the Project would not
                         impact critical natural habitats and forests, or
                         important physical cultural resources. The
                         majority of the potential adverse impacts relate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to land acquisition and clearance, construction-
                         related impacts, and health and safety risks
                         associated with operation of high-voltage
                         substations and transmission lines of the
                         subprojects under Component 1. The impacts
                         associated with Component 2 subprojects are
                         anticipated to be small and mainly relate to
                         limited worker safety during the installation and
                         testing of the smart grid system. However, these
                         potential impacts are expected to be low to
                         moderate, temporary, site-specific and mostly
                         reversible and mitigation measures can readily
                         be designed in most cases. Therefore, the
                         project is proposed to be Environmental
                         Category B.
                         During project preparation, the client will
                         prepare a Regional Environmental Assessment
                         (REA) for the areas identified (Greater Hanoi,
                         Greater Ho Chi Minh City, Mekong region) if
                                                             deemed relevant depending on the location and
                                                             potential regional impacts of sub-projects. The
                                                             environmental assessment (EA) should also
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             include a cumulative impact assessment, if
                                                             relevant, and alternative analysis.
                                                             Since only about 30-40% of the subprojects will
                                                             be selected during project preparation, an
                                                             Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Framework (ESMF) will be developed by the
                                                             client to guide the environmental assessment
                                                             process and ensure compliance with the
                                                             government’s environmental management
                                                             regulation and the World Bank’s safeguards
                                                             requirements during the selection of the
                                                             remainder of the sub-projects. According to the
                                                             existing Vietnamese environmental legislation,
                                                             Decree No. 29/BTNMT dated 18/4/2011, all
                                                             subprojects under Component 1 identified to be
                                                             implemented during the first year would need to
                                                             prepare Environmental Impact Assessments
                                                             (EIAs) and Environmental Management Plans
                                                             (EMPs) that meet the Government’s and the
                                                             World Bank’s safeguards requirements. A
                                                             simple ECOP would be sufficient to address
                                                             potential impacts of the smart grid subprojects
                                                             under Component 2.
                                                             By the project appraisal stage, public
                                                             consultation and disclosure of the ESMF and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             safeguard instruments for the subprojects
                                                             identified for the first phase of implementation
                                                             will be completed.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   Given the framework approach and the fact that
                                                             all subprojects are not yet identified and could
                                                             still be included in the project, this policy is to
                                                             be determined (TBD) and will further screened
                                                             as part of EIA preparation process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Some sub-projects would involve the
                                                             acquisition of forest land and have the potential
                                                             to impact on the rights and welfare of local
                                                             people and their level of dependence upon low
                                                             quality natural forests and plantation forests.
                                                             Therefore, this policy is triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The Project will not involve any investment that
                                                             would result in procurement of pesticides or any
                                                             increase in the use of pesticides. Therefore, the
                                                             policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project may involve the relocation of graves
                         BP 4.11                                 or other Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs).
                                                                 Mitigation measures for the relocation of graves
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be included in the respective subproject
                                                                 Resettlement Plans (RPs) and EMPs, as
                                                                 appropriate. The impacts on other PCRs such as
                                                                 monuments, temples, churches, religious/
                                                                 spiritual and cultural sites and related mitigation
                                                                 measures will be addressed in the physical
                                                                 cultural resources management plan of related
                                                                 EIA/EMP. In any event, a chance finds
                                                                 procedure will be prepared and included in the
                                                                 ESMF, site-specific subproject EMPs, and
                                                                 bidding and contractual documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The Project will entail multiple subprojects
                                                                 mainly in West Hanoi, Central Region, Mekong
                                                                 Delta Region, and North-East HCMC. This
                                                                 represents a large geographical area where
                                                                 ethnic minority communities are likely to be
                                                                 present.
                                                                 The application of OP 4.10 at the subproject
                                                                 level will be identified on a case by case basis
                                                                 with support from early screening exercises.
                                                                 Once the policy application is confirmed, the
                                                                 Borrower will conduct social assessments (SA)
                                                                 to confirm if affected ethnic minorities (EMs)
                                                                 provide their broad support to the project,
                                                                 including by: (i) identifying potential benefits
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 and negative impacts of the project; (ii) defining
                                                                 the recommendations (including mitigation
                                                                 measures) to ensure free, prior and informed
                                                                 consultations with the EMs (especially, their
                                                                 participation in the project design and
                                                                 monitoring during the implementation phase);
                                                                 and (iii) defining the measures required to
                                                                 provide culturally appropriate benefits (e.g.
                                                                 tailored information disclosure, consultation,
                                                                 and community support activities). By appraisal,
                                                                 Ethnic Minority Development Plans (EMDP) of
                                                                 relevant subproject (s) will be prepared. In
                                                                 addition, the Borrower will also develop an
                                                                 Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF),
                                                                 guiding the preparation of individual EMDPs
                                                                 for subprojects identified during the project
                                                                 implementation.
                                                                 The EMDPs will include a summary of the SA,
                                                                 consultations, the scope of impacts and
                                                                mitigation measures, activities for the
                                                                enhancement of project implementing agencies
                                                                and estimated costs for the Plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The Project would have impacts involving the
                         4.12                                   temporary or permanent involuntary taking of
                                                                land (agricultural, orchard, garden or
                                                                residential) and the loss of structures and assets
                                                                (or access to assets) associated with land. The
                                                                Project’s potential impacts are due to the
                                                                construction of transmission lines (foundations,
                                                                right-of-way), substations, and access roads,
                                                                among others. Although the list of potential
                                                                investments to be financed under this proposed
                                                                project is initially identified, the subprojects for
                                                                Phase 1 implementation will be identified in
                                                                detail during project preparation. By appraisal,
                                                                the Borrower will prepare: (i) individual
                                                                Resettlement Plans (RPs) (Abbreviated or Full)
                                                                for subprojects in Phase 1; and (ii) a
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide
                                                                the preparation of RPs for investments
                                                                identified during project implementation. The
                                                                RPF and RPs will include the measures to
                                                                ensure that displaced people are: (i) informed
                                                                about the options regarding resettlement; (ii)
                                                                consulted and offered alternative resettlement
                                                                choices; and (iii) provided with effective
                                                                compensation and livelihood restoration. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                RPF and RPs will also include guidance on
                                                                screening and policy application implication for
                                                                potentially linked activities. The RPs will take
                                                                into account experiences in performing land
                                                                acquisition and compensation in other similar
                                                                Bank funded projects (e.g. the System
                                                                Efficiency Improvement, Equitization &
                                                                Renewables Project and the Transmission and
                                                                Distribution Project Phase 1 and 2).
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The Project involves no construction of dams
                                                                nor are the project activities vulnerable in any
                                                                way to any upstream dam. Therefore, the policy
                                                                is not triggered.
                         Projects on International        No    No Project activities are to be carried out on an
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   international waterway. Therefore, the policy is
                                                                not triggered.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    No part of the Project activities are in a disputed
                         7.60                                   area so the policy is not triggered.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      -     The RPF, EMPF, EMDPs, RPs, ESMF, EIAs, and EMPs of the subprojects to be
                                      implemented in the first year of project implementation will be completed by appraisal: February
                                      2014.
                                      -     Safeguards instruments for the second phase subprojects will be prepared during project
                                      implementation in accordance with the RPF, EMPF, and ESMF of the project.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Peter Johansen

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 22-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Jennifer J. Sara (SM)                                                                                                Date: 25-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
