                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA7236
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Madagascar                          Project ID:    P147514
                            Project Name:       Madagascar Emergency Food Security and Social Protection Project (P147514)
                            Task Team           Ziva Razafintsalama
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           17-Dec-2013                         Estimated   27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTA2                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (65%), Other social services
                                              (35%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Social safety nets (25%), Water
                                              resource management (15%), Land administration and manageme nt (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      65.00           Total Bank Financing:                      65.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                               0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                     65.00
                              Total                                                                                           65.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Project's development objective is to strengthen the Recipient’s immediate capacity to respond
                           effectively to the food security and locust crises, by: (i) increasing agricultural production capacity in
                           Project Areas, while enabling extremely poor households, in the Project Areas, to access cash



                                                                         Page 1 of 12
                         transfers and cash for work activities; and (ii) improving the Recipient’s capacity to respond
                         promptly and efficiently to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed IDA credit to the Republic of Madagascar is a multi-sector emergency project to
                         address urgent needs in agriculture, social protection and environment. The proposed Emergency
                         Food Security and Social Protection Project (P147514) for an equivalent amount of US$65 million
                         will be funded from the remaining IDA16 allocation for Madagascar. The proposed project would
                         complement the ongoing Human Development, Environment and Infrastructure emergency
                         operations. It has been developed by a multi-sector Task Team from the World Bank and seeks to
                         address the emergency needs created by the impacts of the: (i) looming food crisis as a result of the
                         ongoing locust infestation and drought; and (ii) loss of agricultural productivity capacity and
                         vulnerability to natural disasters. These crises have resulted in a dramatic increase in poverty levels,
                         all crops were damaged and farmers lost between 50 to 100% of the rice crops and the next rice cycle
                         is also compromised as rice nurseries are threatened. Discouragement is such that some people prefer
                         to rent out their fields whereas others sell. Antanambao lives mainly from rice cultivation and when
                         rice becomes scarce, the consequences are immediate. For example, 7 teachers paid with rice bags by
                         the association of students' parents left. The school is closed. Farmers are usually rice sellers, and
                         they now have become buyers, but the price has doubled compared to the same period last year. The
                         farmers, in an effort to find more money to buy food, are selling part of a capital accumulated for
                         years. Livestock is sometimes sold before it might be stolen because cattle theft and insecurity is
                         reaching alarming levels. Assaults and burglaries are on the increase.

                         About a third of the population in Madagascar is extremely poor and deprived on multiple
                         dimensions—they are the "have nots", lacking food consumption, literacy and education, basic
                         household assets, and electricity. The deprivation of this part of the population is such that most
                         activities and programs, whether related to agricultural production, education, or health and nutrition,
                         are finding it difficult to reach out to these vulnerable populations in a beneficial way, which calls for
                         a safety net program. Protecting the poorest families during the ongoing crisis through targeted safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                         net activities will be key for their survival, as well as their children's long- term human development.

                         The project design will be kept simple and build on existing activities currently being implemented
                         in ongoing projects that can be either continued or scaled-up. The proposed operation would
                         comprise the following four components:

                         Component A: Restoring and maintaining productive agricultural capacity (US$39 million)
                         Sub-component A.1. Rapid delivery of agricultural services and rehabilitation of essential irrigation
                         and market access infrastructure (US$29 million): In order to boost food productivity and production
                         and preserve rural incomes in the short term, this sub-component will finance (i) emergency
                         distribution of improved seed, fertilizer, tools and associated technical assistance to enable rapid
                         increases in food production, including the promotion of nutrition-enhancing crops; (ii) rehabilitation
                         and maintenance of small-scale agricultural infrastructure, both micro-irrigation systems and large
                         irrigation schemes, including capacity strengthening of producer organizations and water user
                         associations to sustainably manage irrigation infrastructure and take advantage of income generating
                         opportunities generated by the Project (including rehabilitation of small storage infrastructure); (iii)
                         support to the institutional capacity building component of the three year locust control program.
                         Sub-component A.2. Protecting infrastructure investments by improving watershed and land
                         management and climate resilience (US$10 million): This sub-component will include the following
                         activities in Project Area 1 to support erosion control efforts: (i) a "Cash for Trees" operation that


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         would provide incentives to smallholders to engage in the reforestation of their lands in the
                         watersheds surrounding the irrigated areas; and (ii) a cash for work operation to support erosion
                         control works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component will also include support to Communal Land Offices in project areas 1 and 2 to
                         facilitate rapid and low-cost transfer of legal land rights to farming households and support to the
                         independent Land Observatory that will cease to exist by August 2014 unless support is provided. To
                         enhance the climate resilience of agricultural investments this sub-component will also support
                         expansion of the national system of cyclone and flood early warning systems and development of
                         climate resilient basic agricultural infrastructure in project zones in both project areas 1 and 2. All
                         activities under Component A would be implemented by Projet National Bassins Versants and
                         Périmètres Irrigués - PN-BVPI.

                         Component B: Providing a Social Safety Net for the poor (US$ 17.2million)
                         This component would provide a basic safety net to the poorest families in selected project areas
                         through: Cash-for-Work activities that would be selected based on their potential synergies with the
                         productive activities under Component A, and cash transfers to particularly vulnerable groups linked
                         to health, nutrition and other locally available services The component would also include up to US
                         $5 million for project management, essential equipment and selected technical assistance to establish
                         a beneficiary registry, enhance payment modalities through electronic transfers, and to support third
                         party monitoring (e.g. through operational audits) and impact evaluation. UNICEF will support FID
                         with training on communications related to human development outcomes of beneficiaries, and
                         provide support in the implementation of the essential family services. All activities under
                         Component B would be implemented by Fonds d'Intervention pour le Developpement - FID.


                         Component C: Contingency Emergency Fund (US$ 0 million):
                         This component establishes a disaster recovery contingency fund that could be triggered in the event
                         of a natural disaster through formal declaration of a national or regional state of emergency, or upon
                         a formal request from the Government in the wake of a disaster. Upon triggering, reallocation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project funds from other project components could be undertaken to facilitate rapid financing of a
                         positive list of goods and services in the transport, agricultural and social protection sectors. Eligible
                         activities would include clearing and rehabilitation of road and irrigation infrastructure, rehabilitation
                         of schools and health centers, purchase of construction materials, agricultural inputs or materials for
                         schools or health centers. This component will be managed by either PN-BVPI or FID depending on
                         the nature of the disaster responses proposed to be implemented.

                         Component D: Project management (US$8.8 million):
                         Based on lessons learned from ongoing emergency operations, the project will develop a light and
                         simple organizational structure that focuses on the use of existing project implementation agencies:
                         BVPI and FID. The objective of this component is to manage and use resources in accordance with
                         the proposed Project’s objectives and procedures and to evaluate its results. The Ministry of
                         Agriculture will oversee the implementation of project activities. Annex 3 illustrates details of the
                         implementation arrangements. The project management component will finance the following
                         activities:
                         Project Management cost of BVPI (US$ 5.5 million) to carry out Project planning and
                         implementation of Component A: PN-BVPI will carry out the overall Project planning, quality
                         oversight, implementation, procurement, financial management, and monitoring of proposed Project
                         activities in Component A, including through the provision of TA, training, and equipment. BVPI
                         will also be responsible for the management of information systems and the preparation of

                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         procedures for data collection and reporting to carry out: (a) regular project monitoring and
                         completion evaluations of Project output and impact indicators; and (b) surveys and participatory
                         assessments, including those on regular user satisfaction for Component A.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Management cost of FID (US$ 2.8 million) to carry out Project planning and implementation
                         of Component B: FID will carry out the overall Project planning, implementation, procurement,
                         financial management, and monitoring of proposed Project activities in Component B. FID will also
                         be responsible for the management of information systems and the preparation of procedures for
                         data collection and reporting to carry out: (a) regular project monitoring and completion evaluations
                         of Project output and impact indicators; and (b) surveys and participatory assessments, including
                         those on regular user satisfaction for Component B.
                         Provision of Technical Assistance on staple food trade and markets (US$0.5 million). This activity,
                         managed by BVPI, will provide technical assistance to the Ministry of Agriculture to develop a clear
                         policy and strategy on food trade, both domestic and international. This will assist in the planning of
                         government and private sector food imports in times of crisis, and guide the development of the
                         agricultural sector more generally.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The targeted areas of the proposed emergency project are:
                          Area 1: regions of food producing that have already been affected by locusts and drought and where
                         agricultural productive capacity needs to be restored (regions of in Itasy, Bongolava, Menabe, West
                         Vakinankaratra, West Amorono'I Mania, Haute Matsiatra, and specific areas in Ihorombe) and
                          Area 2: regions with highly productive rice on irrigated schemes which are schemes in the
                         Northwest (Marovoay in Boeny region), Central East (Alaotra) and North (Andapa) of the country.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                         Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Environmental Assessment: This policy is
                          BP 4.01                                             triggered as most of the proposed subprojects will
                                                                              focus on: (i) emergency distribution of improved
                                                                              seed, fertilizer, tools and associated technical
                                                                              assistance to enable rapid increases in food
                                                                              production, including the promotion of nutrition-
                                                                              enhancing crops; (ii) rehabilitation and
                                                                              maintenance of small-scale agricultural
                                                                              infrastructure, both micro-irrigation systems and
                                                                              large irrigation schemes, including capacity
                                                                              strengthening of producer organizations and water
                                                                              user associations to sustainably manage irrigation
                                                                              infrastructure and take advantage of income
                                                                              generating opportunities generated by the Project
                                                                              (including rehabilitation of small storage
                                                                              infrastructure) (iii) the watershed protection
                                                                              activities to preserve the agricultural
                                                                              infrastructure through the stabilization of soil



                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                                 erosion and slopes and the planting of cover crops
                                 and trees. All of these activities may have
                                 environmental and social impacts that need to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 managed appropriately. The Project will also
                                 support activities that will have a positive impact
                                 on the environment and social sector. The
                                 executing agencies will undertake a thorough
                                 social and environmental screening of all
                                 subprojects to properly determine whether or not
                                 they trigger any additional World Bank
                                 safeguards policies and/or safeguards instrument.
                                 While the ESSAF guides the preparation of
                                 safeguards instruments during project preparation,
                                 some of the sub-projects have prepared, consulted
                                 upon, and disclosed safeguards instruments
                                 acceptable to the Bank, notably Environmental
                                 and Social Management Frameworks (ESMFs)
                                 and Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs).
                                 Therefore, for the preparation of the proposed
                                 emergency Project, each executing agency will
                                 rely upon its applicable safeguards framework
                                 (ESMF and/or RPF) to prepare the required
                                 additional safeguards documents, such as ESIAs/
                                 ESMPs and/or RAPs. The ESSAF contains
                                 sample TORs for ESIAs that may be needed for
                                 Project-supported activities, as well as
                                 environmental and social screening guidelines to
                                 be used by contractors hired to implement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Project-supported works (e.g.: rehabilitation of
                                 feeder roads, rehabilitation/reconstruction of
                                 small scale agriculture infrastructures, etc.).
                                 Based on the outcomes of the screening process,
                                 site specific ESIAs and/or ESMPs will be carried
                                 out as necessary. The proposed operation will not
                                 finance any new construction or rehabilitation of
                                 dams above 15 meters. However, it will finance
                                 the rehabilitation of small irrigation
                                 infrastructure, small check-dams to treat lavakas
                                 (gully erosion) and replacement of old hydraulic
                                 equipment/material. As these structures do not
                                 pose dam safety issues OP/BP 4.37 is not
                                 triggered. However, the recipient will use the
                                 available Dams Safety Manual (DSM) that is
                                 currently operational in the agriculture sector with
                                 the ongoing IDA project (BVPI). The current
                                 Dam Safety Manual (DSM) has been prepared by
                                 the Recipient to harmonize and improve Project



                         Page 5 of 12
                                                                     operations in the existing irrigation perimeters
                                                                     currently funded through the agriculture sector.
                                                                     The DSM provides basic characteristics on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     types of dams, irrigation equipment and hydraulic
                                                                     materials as well as the forms of management of
                                                                     irrigation schemes, the institutional arrangement
                                                                     and the social and environmental clauses to be
                                                                     respected by construction companies during
                                                                     rehabilitation and exploitation of the existing
                                                                     irrigation perimeters. This DSM has been cleared
                                                                     by the Bank and publicly disclosed both in
                                                                     Country on May 25, 2012, and at the InfoShop on
                                                                     May 25, 2012.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           OP 4.09 - Pest Management: Although the project
                                                                     funds will not be used to purchase and distribute
                                                                     agrochemicals, the agricultural subcomponent
                                                                     (emergency distribution of improved seed,
                                                                     fertilizer, tools and associated technical assistance
                                                                     to enable rapid increases in food production) will
                                                                     encourage farmer groups to use more inorganic
                                                                     fertilizers and pesticides. Therefore, this policy is
                                                                     triggered because the Project will support scaling
                                                                     up and/or intensification of agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     production activities. Project beneficiaries are
                                                                     likely to adopt integrated pest management
                                                                     practices that may involve increased use of
                                                                     chemical pesticides, which could have negative
                                                                     environmental, health and social impacts
                                                                     (especially since river and lake waters are used
                                                                     for drinking and cooking purposes throughout the
                                                                     project intervention areas). The Recipient will
                                                                     address OP 4.09 requirements by using the
                                                                     existing Pests and Pesticides Management Plan
                                                                     (PPMP) developed for the ongoing IDA funded
                                                                     agriculture project (BVPI- P128831 Madagascar-
                                                                     Irrigation and Watershed Management Project).
                                                                     The PPMP includes a number of relevant actions
                                                                     to reduce the exposure of farmer groups to
                                                                     pesticides used in agricultural production
                                                                     systems. It also includes guidelines to be adopted
                                                                     on the possibility of agrochemical application and
                                                                     disposal. Training kits to strengthen capacity
                                                                     building of different actors (farmers, local


                                                             Page 6 of 12
                                                                            vendors, regional agricultural agents, etc.) on the
                                                                            safe use, storage and disposal of agrochemical
                                                                            products are also available. This PPMP has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            approved by the Bank and ultimately disclosed
                                                                            both in-country and at Infoshop on May 25, 2012,
                                                                            by the Bank's ongoing agriculture project.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: No land
                            4.12                                            acquisition that results in the physical
                                                                            resettlement of peoples or loss of assets and/or
                                                                            sources of livelihoods is expected in any of the
                                                                            proposed sub projects under this emergency
                                                                            Project. The need for involuntary resettlement
                                                                            resulting from land acquisition in specific
                                                                            subproject areas will only be known during
                                                                            project implementation when footprints of site-
                                                                            specific plans are made available. Therefore, sub
                                                                            projects will be screened for application of the
                                                                            resettlement policy and any subprojects involving
                                                                            involuntary resettlement or land acquisition will
                                                                            only be approved after preparation, consultation
                                                                            of, and disclosure of a resettlement action plan
                                                                            acceptable to the Bank. Several issues will
                                                                            increase the complexity of land acquisition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            including the lack of reliable land record systems
                                                                            and the inability of people losing land to either
                                                                            document ownership or be physically present to
                                                                            make eligibility claims. Drawing on the existing
                                                                            RPF for BVPI, the safeguards framework will
                                                                            thus include procedures for identifying eligible
                                                                            project-affected individuals, calculating and
                                                                            delivering compensation cost, and determining
                                                                            mechanisms for land dispute grievance redress, as
                                                                            well as mechanism for adequately monitoring and
                                                                            evaluating the level of safeguards compliance.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                    Page 7 of 12
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Parts of the activities described above will focus on capacity building, material and equipment
                           procurements, and institutional support where no environmental and social safeguard aspect would
                           be expected. The remainder of the proposed subprojects will focus on: (i) the rehabilitation and
                           asset preservation of irrigation infrastructures (ii) the restoration of access to social and economic
                           services through the rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing feeder roads; (iii) the rehabilitation
                           of small-scale agricultural infrastructure, primarily micro-irrigation systems and grain processing
                           and storage facilities; and (iv) the watershed protection activities to preserve the agricultural
                           infrastructure through the stabilization of soil erosion and slopes and the planting of cover crops
                           and trees. Project activities might have direct impacts on soil, vegetation and the human
                           population in the project areas. Potential negative impacts of the Project include the following: (i)
                           depletion and deterioration of water supply; (ii) deterioration of soil quality; (iii) surface water and
                           groundwater pollution risks due to increased use of pesticides; (iv) loss of vegetation following the
                           installation of infrastructure (irrigations schemes, feeder roads...etc.); risks of HIV/AIDS
                           proliferation and (v) risks of land acquisitions. Considering the nature and magnitude of potential
                           environmental and social impacts from relatively limited scale of rehabilitation and improvement
                           works, the Emergency Food Security and Social Protection Project is classified as a Category "B".
                           The Activities supported by the proposed operation are expected to have certain site-specific
                           adverse environmental and social impacts; therefore, the three following Safeguards policies are
                           triggered: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment); OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP/BP 4.12
                           (Involuntary Resettlement).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site-specific, thus
                           easily remediable and reversible. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation. The ESSAF includes guidance for addressing environmental and social impacts.
                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs)/Environmental and Social Management
                           Plans (ESMPs) and/or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared during project
                           implementation. The Pests and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP) for the Irrigation and
                           Watershed Management project (BVPI) will be used for this operation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not relevant
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental and Social Safeguards Assistance Framework (ESSAF) has been developed by
                           the Task Team for the proposed emergency operations to ensure due diligence, avoid causing
                           harm, and to ensure consistent treatment of social and environmental issues by theGovernment of
                           Madagascar. The purpose of this Framework is also to further assist the existing two Project
                           Implementing Units (PIU) in ongoing Bank funded operations (BVPI and the Investment
                           Development Fund (FID)) in the screening of all subprojects for their likely social and
                           environmental impacts; sub-categorization and appropriate additional safeguards documents, and
                           ultimately prioritizing the investments.



                                                                       Page 8 of 12
                           The two existing PIUs (BVPI and FID) of this proposed emergency operations have their
                           safeguard documents and each has a social and environmental focal point (SEFP) responsible for
                           following up on safeguard concerns and to ensure that all subprojects identified for operation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financing have included consistent and coherent environmental and social measures and are
                           responsible for applying the safeguard screening and mitigation requirements to each subproject.
                           Each of the components (feeder roads, agriculture infrastructures and safety net) will be
                           appropriately coordinated and supervised by an existing project implementing units (PIU),
                           specifically Programme National Bassins Versants et des Périmètre Irrigués (PN-BVPI) and Fonds
                           d'Investissement pour le Développement (FID). The PIUs will be responsible for the day-to-day
                           project management and implementation, including fiduciary management. Established for some
                           time now, each project executing agency has relatively good and proven experience in
                           implementing World Bank projects. For example, in the agriculture and social protection sectors,
                           various safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, RAP, ESIA, ESMP, PPMP, Dams Safety
                           Guideline…etc.) have been prepared, consulted upon, disclosed, and satisfactorily implemented in
                           the country under the ongoing IDA-funded projects. The Project will thus be able to draw upon
                           successful previous experiences from ongoing Bank's operations in addition to the available teams
                           from both PIUs which are fully operational.

                            The ESSAF has been disclosed in-country in the Magazine paper "Xpress de Madagascar" pf
                           December 18, 2013.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           IDA funding will support a number of Category B sub-projects. During implementation of the
                           proposed multi-sector IDA-funded operations in these selected sectors, the Environmental and
                           Social Safeguards instruments (ESIA/ESMP, RAP ...etc.) will be prepared, consulted upon, and
                           disclosed, building upon existing safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF, PMP, DSM, etc.) through a
                           consultative and participatory process involving all stakeholders at the regional and national levels
                           as well as within local communities and among beneficiaries of the sub-projects. In particular, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Executing Agency will consult project-affected groups and local non-governmental organizations
                           on all environmental and social aspects of the project and take their views into account
                           accordingly. The implementing agency will initiate these public consultations as early as possible
                           and provide all relevant material in a form and languages (Malagasy and French) that are
                           understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted in a timely manner prior to
                           consultation. The ESSAF will be shared with the Government of Madagascar, concerned non-
                           governmental organizations and other development partners, and will be disclosed in-country and
                           at the World Bank's InfoShop during project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          12-Dec-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       06-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Madagascar                                                          18-Dec-2013
                           Comments: Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with Bank's
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Operational Policy for Emergency operations, the completion and disclosure of the
                                         environmental and social instruments were not required as a condition for project
                                         appraisal. An Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
                                         (ESSAF) has been prepared by the project team. The ESSAF was dislosed in country
                                         on December 18, 2013 and will soon be disclosed at the Infoshop. Safeguards
                                         instruments such as the site specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs/ARAPs will be
                                         prepared at the subproject level depending on the findings of the preliminary
                                         technical studies and the screening checklist of the ESSAF. All documents will need
                                         to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during implementation and prior
                                         to the ground-breaking of any civil works.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         12-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      14-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Madagascar                                                          14-Jan-2016
                           Comments: Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with Bank's
                                         Operational Policy for Emergency operations, the completion and disclosure of the
                                         environmental and social instruments were not required as a condition for project
                                         appraisal. An Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
                                         (ESSAF) has been prepared by the project team. The ESSAF was dislosed in country
                                         on December 18, 2013 and will soon be disclosed at the Infoshop. Safeguards
                                         instruments such as the site specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs/ARAPs will be
                                         prepared at the subproject level depending on the findings of the preliminary
                                         technical studies and the screening checklist of the ESSAF. All documents will need
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during implementation and prior
                                         to the ground-breaking of any civil works.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with Bank's Operational Policy for
                         Emergency operations, the completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments
                         were not required as a condition for project appraisal. An Environmental and Social Screening and
                         Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared by the project team. The ESSAF was dislosed


                                                                   Page 10 of 12
                            in country on December 18, 2013 and will soon be disclosed at the Infoshop. Safeguards instruments
                            such as the site specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs/ARAPs will be prepared at the subproject level
                            depending on the findings of the preliminary technical studies and the screening checklist of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                            ESSAF. All documents will need to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during
                            implementation and prior to the ground-breaking of any civil works.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Ziva Razafintsalama
                            Approved By


                                                                       Page 11 of 12
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)    Date: 03-Feb-2014
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)   Date: 03-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 12 of 12
