                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6808
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Sep-2013, 28-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Vietnam                            Project ID:    P128072
                            Project Name:     VN - Central Highlands Poverty Reduction Project (CHPov) (P128072)
                            Task Team         Sean Bradley
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         17-Sep-2013                        Estimated   27-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASVS                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Other social services
                                              (30%), Sub-national government administration (20%), P ublic administration-
                                              Other social services (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Other human development (30%),
                                              Participation and civic engagement (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     159.40           Total Bank Financing:                150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       9.40
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            150.00
                              Total                                                                                  159.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective of the Central Highlands Poverty Reduction project is
                           to: enhance living standards by improving livelihood opportunities in Project Communes of upland
                           Districts of the central highlands of Vietnam.

                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will target the 26 poorest districts in six provinces of the Central and Central Highlands
                         regions, namely: Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Kon Tum, Gia Lai, Quang Nam and Quang Ngai. Current
Public Disclosure Copy




                         targeting strategies propose to reach approximately 119,492 households in the poorest 130
                         communes in this area. A majority of these beneficiaries would be members of the various ethnic
                         minority groups from these areas.

                         The project will have four components: village and commune infrastructure development, sustainable
                         livelihoods development, connective infrastructure development and strengthening of linkages, and
                         project management.

                         Component 1: Village and Commune infrastructure development (consisting of two sub-components
                         and estimated to cost US$ 54.8 million, of which US$ 52.4 million would be financed by IDA). Sub-
                         component 1.1 would support the design, construction or repair of small-scale village and commune-
                         level infrastructure (such as simple access roads, terracing; irrigation/water supply, basic social
                         infrastructure, etc.). Building upon recently completed New Rural Areas communal plans, sub-
                         projects would be prioritized through a participatory planning process and managed by commune and
                         village authorities with the help of community facilitators. Depending on the size and complexity of
                         the identified sub-project investments, community groups would take direct responsibility for
                         managing construction of infrastructure (for sub-projects valued at less than VND 300 million, or US
                         $ 15,000).) This participatory process is modeled on community-driven development (CDD)
                         approaches used effectively throughout the world and successfully adapted under local projects such
                         as the Northern Mountains Poverty Reduction Project (1 and 2) and the Program 135, both of which
                         have received support from the World Bank. Sub-component 1.2 would finance sub-projects for the
                         operation and maintenance (O&M) of communal infrastructure. Such sub-projects could include
                         routine maintenance and small repair activities for both existing and new investments (which have
                         been financed by the project). The O&M would contribute to the sustainable use of invested
                         infrastructure and ensure lasting impacts on improving access and connectivity in the project areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Sustainable Livelihoods Development (consisting of two subcomponents and
                         estimated to cost US$ 35.2 million, of which US$ 35.2 million would be financed by IDA).
                         Component 2 would support EMs and other households in the targeted areas to enhance their food
                         security and nutrition, their productive capacities for more diversified income sources, and their
                         linkages to selected agricultural markets. Sub-component 2.1 (“Self-reliance and Income
                         Generation”) would target chronically poor and at risk households and include activities to: (a)
                         strengthen household and community food security and nutrition (via improved practices for staple
                         food crops and small livestock-raising, soil management on sloped land, home garden development,
                         nutrition awareness etc.); and (b) sustain/diversify income sources by enhancing the productive
                         capacities of beneficiaries. Sub-component 2.2 (“Market Linkage Initiatives”) will aim to develop
                         productive partnerships (PP) between farmer groups and agribusinesses (ABs) operating in the
                         targeted areas for proven commercially viable agriculture/agro-forestry endeavors. The Department
                         of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD), the National Targeted Program for Nutrition (NTP-
                         NU) and the Women’s Union (WU) would play key roles in advising on and supporting
                         implementation of sub-component 2.1, and DARD and the private and commercial sector would be
                         engaged as appropriate under sub-component 2.2. Support and assistance would be provided through
                         “livelihoods enhancement groups” (LEGs) that would be registered legal entities and would consist
                         of 10-20 member households, depending on the nature of the livelihood activity. The component
                         would include the financing of a specialized technical assistance team to support, in particular, sub-


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         component 2.2.

                         Component 3: Connective infrastructure development, capacity building and communications
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (consisting of three sub-components and estimated to cost US$ 53.0 million, of which US$ 51.4
                         million is financed by IDA). Sub-component 3.1 would finance selective intra- and inter-commune
                         level infrastructure that would strengthen physical connectivity seek within and between local
                         economic zones (such as roads, bridges, irrigation systems, etc.). Due to the likely size and costs of
                         these investments, District-level entities would manage their implementation. However, their
                         identification and prioritization would happen as a result of the commune-level analysis and sub-
                         project planning process. The component would prioritize investments that enhance synergies with
                         Component 1 and/or 2 investments. While initially emphasizing productive connectivity, investments
                         in other infrastructure (or services) deemed to be critical to expanding the networks or linkages EMs
                         may have with areas outside their communes (such as secondary school residential facilities) could
                         be considered.

                         Sub-component 3.2 would support training and capacity building at all project levels for all aspects
                         of project management (planning, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation,
                         etc.). The sub-component would include the financing of a technical assistance team (TAT)
                         consisting of international and national specialists in project management, livelihoods and
                         agricultural market linkages, capacity building, M&E, etc. A summary description of the TAT is
                         presented in Annex 3. Sub-component 3.3 would support communications activities to ensure
                         beneficiaries, project staff, key stakeholders and the public at large were aware of the project
                         objectives and operational principles. These activities would pay special attention to communication
                         and outreach activities to EM beneficiaries where it will be important to adapt the form and language
                         of messages to local contexts and abilities.. An estimated one-third of the total budget under
                         component 3 would be dedicated to sub-components 3.2 and 3.3.

                         Component 4: Project management (estimated US$ 16.5 million, of which US$ 11.0 million would
                         be financed by IDA). Sub-component 4.1, project coordination and implementation, would include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the set-up and operation of coordination structures at national level and implementation units/teams
                         at provincial, district and commune levels, and operational costs associated with project
                         management. At commune level existing structures would be strengthened to support project
                         implementation. Sub-component 4.2, monitoring and evaluation, would include the design and
                         implementation of a simple management information system (MIS) for project monitoring, the
                         design and contracting of a rigorous impact evaluation, the recruitment of key personnel at central,
                         provincial and district level to support M&E activities, and would support various knowledge
                         exchange and learning activities between participating provinces, with other similar projects in
                         Vietnam and within the region. This would also include the set-up and maintenance of a project
                         website to disseminate key project documents and reports, and to provide regular updates on project
                         activities and progress.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project covers 6 project provinces of Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Gia Lai, Kon Tum, Quang Ngai and
                         Quang Nam. Quang Ngai and Quang Nam are coastal provinces but project districts are located in
                         mountainous areas. The Project area consists of several adjacent highlands, up to 500-1500m above
                         the sea level, such as Kon Tum, Kon Plong, Kon Ha Nung, Pleiku, M’Drak, Buon Ma Thuot, Mo
                         Long, Lam Vien and Di Linh. All of these highlands are adjacent to the Nam Truong Son mountain
                         range to the east. Located in the tropical savannah, the climate in the Central Highlands is divided


                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                         into two seasons: the rainy season from May to October and the dry season from November to April,
                         in which March and April are the hottest and driest months of the year. The climate characteristics
                         play an important role in the selection of livelihood in the Project area. Notably, while the Central
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Highlands is famous for its potential of high-value industrial crops (such as coffee, pepper, rubber
                         and cashew), the Project districts basically are not located in the area of favorable weather condition
                         and land for such potential development, compared with other districts.

                         Quang Nam and Quang Ngai provinces are coastal provinces and on the northern side of the project
                         area (and not formally part of the Central Highlands region). Quang Nam belongs to the key
                         economic development zone of Central Vietnam and has a relatively complex terrain, with
                         mountainous area accounting for 72% of the total natural area. However, the three project districts
                         (Nam Giang, Phuoc Son and Nam Tra My) are amongst the poorest in the provinces (as well as in the
                         country).Quang Ngai Province borders the east of Central Highlands with a relatively complex
                         terrain. The total natural area is 5,152.7 km2 with the coast spanning 129 km. Similar to the Central
                         Highlands, the climate in Quang Nam and Quang Ngai consists of two distinct seasons, rainy and
                         dry. However, the provinces are also under the influence of the North’s cold winter season. Rainfall
                         is heavier in the mountains than in the plains and 80% of the annual rainfall falls from September to
                         December. As the rainy season coincides with the typhoon season, heavy rains in the Central
                         Vietnam usually cause landslides and flash floods in midland districts and flooding in the riverside
                         areas.

                         The majority of land in the Project area for all 6 provinces is forested. The Project districts of Dak
                         Nong have the lowest proportion of the forest land at only 50% of total, while the highest proportion
                         is 77% in Kon Tum. However, most of the forest land belongs to the protection forest area, special-
                         purpose forest and nature reserve area. Productive forest land only accounts for a small proportion
                         (approximately 18% of the total forest land) and belongs to many state-owned companies. The fact
                         that parts of the forest land is rocky soil and emaciated soil also make it difficult to cultivate. Thus,
                         the proportion of productive forest land that is in possession of individual households is quite low (no
                         official data available). Total area of agricultural land fluctuates heavily among the provinces; in Dak
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nong it accounts for 42% while in Quang Nam only 4%.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)
                         Khang Van Pham (EASVS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes               The CHPRP will finance small scale and widely
                         BP 4.01                                              dispersed productive and social infrastructure
                                                                              (commune-to-village roads, bridges, local
                                                                              irrigation, water supply, schools, markets, etc).
                                                                              The most likely impacts would be during the
                                                                              construction phase, with some possible impacts
                                                                              during operation, both at marginal levels though
                                                                              (e.g. air pollution, waste water and solid waste
                                                                              management).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No                The project is not expected to significantly
                                                                              impact natural habitats given the nature and scale



                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                                                                         of subprojects. Nevertheless as a precautionary
                                                                         measure, the ESMF includes provision for
                                                                         screening impacts on natural habitats. Subprojects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         that significantly degrade or convert natural
                                                                         habitats will be avoided.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Approximately 50 percent of the project area is
                                                                         forests or forest lands and analysis of rural
                                                                         livelihoods in the project area indicates that
                                                                         access to forest resources (including non-timber
                                                                         forest products) is an important strategy for poor
                                                                         ethnic minority households. Potential livelihood
                                                                         activities (under component 2) that would require
                                                                         consideration of this policy include tree crops
                                                                         (acacia, litsea or cacao) or other agriculture
                                                                         activities to be undertaken on production forest
                                                                         lands.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             OP 4.09 on Pest Management has been triggered
                                                                         since potential investments in irrigation
                                                                         infrastructure under components 1 and 3, and
                                                                         proposed agricultural livelihood models under
                                                                         component 2, may directly involve (or indirectly
                                                                         lead to) an increased use of fertilizers and
                                                                         pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project would not involve significant
                         BP 4.11                                         excavations, demolition, movement of earth,
                                                                         flooding, or other environmental changes. It
                                                                         would not be located in, or in the vicinity of,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         physical cultural resources site recognized by the
                                                                         borrower. Nevertheless the ESMF includes
                                                                         Chance Find Procedures in case PCRs are
                                                                         discovered during subproject implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The project area includes more than 41 different
                                                                         EM groups, including groups indigenous to the
                                                                         region and groups from other areas of the
                                                                         country. A significant majority (more than 72
                                                                         percent) of project beneficiaries will be members
                                                                         of these groups.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Small scale village, commune and district
                         4.12                                            infrastructure may require the acquisition of
                                                                         residential or productive land, or compensation
                                                                         for lost (principally agricultural) assets, at
                                                                         marginal levels though. Given the demand-driven
                                                                         nature of the project's activities, voluntary land
                                                                         donation may also be used for sub-projects.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              The Project involves no construction of dams
                                                                         nor are the project activities dependent vulnerable



                                                                 Page 5 of 12
                                                                                 in any way to any existing upstream dam or dam
                                                                                 under construction.
                            Projects on International        No                   No Project activities are to be carried out on an
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 international waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   No part of the Project activities are in a disputed
                            7.60                                                 area so the policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The potential impact of any sub-project will depend on the nature, location and specific
                              characteristics of the sub-project investment. Based on experiences with similar projects in
                              Vietnam, in most cases the environmental impacts of such sub-projects are expected to be minor,
                              temporary, site-specific and reversible, and limited to the construction phase. The negative impacts
                              during construction include increased noise, dust, waste, or run-off; damage/loss of vegetation;
                              and safety or health risks relating to construction activities. During operation, an increase in
                              irrigated land may lead to an increase in the use of fertilizers and pesticides that may cause
                              pollution to soil, water and air. In addition, works to irrigation and drainage systems may lead to
                              agricultural production interruption due to cutting off of water flow for repair. Investments under
                              component 2, livelihoods support, may also involve the expanded use of pesticides and fertilizers
                              and resulting impacts of pollution to soil, water or air, or negative health impacts associated with
                              the handling of these agro-chemicals. Forest related activities (on production forest land or relating
                              to tree-crops) will generally have a neutral or positive effect (except in relation to increased use of
                              agro-chemicals already mentioned) due to the likely minimal and dispersed nature of the activities
                              and the potential reforestation benefits of tree-crops.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The region is generally characterized by a diverse ethnic population. Overall, in the 26 project
                              districts there are 41 ethnic groups, with ethnic minorities (EMs) accounting for 60.4% of the
                              population, and Kinh group 39.6%. In the 120 project communes, EMs constitute 72.2% of total
                              population, some of whom have immigrated to the Central Highlands region from other areas of
                              the country (primarily the north). Generally, the SA found low rates of participation of community
                              members, especially vulnerable groups (e.g. ethnic minority, women), in the planning,
                              implementation and monitoring of local socio-economic development. Besides low education level
                              and a generally passive attitude toward Government development efforts, limited understanding of
                              Vietnamese will constitute important barriers to ensure full participation and equitable access to
                              project benefits.

                              Based on initial assessments of preliminarily proposed subproject activities, some land acquisition
                              and/or compensation for other assets may be required for commune and village infrastructure in
                              component 1 and 3. The extent of such compensation is expected to be minor, however, as all
                              investments identified to date (for the first 18 months of project implementation) are for the repair
                              or upgrading of existing infrastructure. Provinces are currently surveying the preliminary
                              subproject lists and will confirm to MPI and the World Bank if any land acquisition would be
                              required and how this would be addressed (either thru compensation or identification of an
                              alternative investment).



                                                                         Page 6 of 12
                           The project is not expected to have any large-scale or irreversible impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           Given the nature and small-scale size of the project investment activities, combined with the
                           application of the safeguard measures discussed below, the long-term direct and indirect
                           environmental and social impacts are generally considered to be positive or neutral. In the case of
                           irrigation investments, however, there some concern of future negative impacts relating to possible
                           increased use of pesticides and fertilizers. While these investments are likely to be relatively small
                           and dispersed, the project will seek to further minimize the use and impacts of such agricultural
                           inputs. In addition to technical training in the use and handling of agro-chemicals, households
                           benefiting from irrigation will also be trained in integrated pest management techniques.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Given that project impacts are felt to be overwhelmingly positive, and when negative are generally
                           minimal, dispersed and temporary in nature, alternatives considered (such as not allowing tree-
                           crops or agricultural activities on production forest lands, investing only in upgrading existing
                           infrastructure to avoid issues of land acquisition) were rejected given (i) the importance of certain
                           activities to the livelihoods of the beneficiary groups, and (ii) the allocative efficiencies of
                           ensuring the full demand driven nature of the project. In addition, as per CDD project modalities,
                           the Project Implementation Manual will include a "negative list" of sub-project activities and
                           expenses that will not be eligible for financing under the project based upon compliance with Bank
                           safeguard policies and other project-specific criteria.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Based on the Bank’s review through to appraisal, the Project is classified as Category B and
                           triggers three environmental safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (OP/BP 4.36) and Pest Management (OP 4.09), and two social safeguard policies: Indigenous
                           Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12).

                           Given the demand-driven nature of most of the project’s investments, the requirement for
                           Environmental Assessment will be addressed through the use of an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) document. This document has been prepared in draft, reviewed
                           and commented on by the Bank, and disclosed by Government. Based on a review of preliminary
                           subproject investments identified in the Government’s feasibility studies, the potential
                           environmental impacts of project investments are felt to be minor, temporary, site-specific and
                           reversible, and generally limited to the construction phase of the sub-projects. As such, these
                           impacts would be addressed through the application of basic Environmental Codes of Practice
                           (ECOPs), technical guidance on appropriate construction designs and practices, and a negative list
                           of ineligible sub-project types and expenditure items. These ECOPs are included in the ESMF
                           (which also include guidelines for chance find procedures in the event that project activities
                           accidently encounter artifacts or sites of cultural value). In accordance with the Bank safeguards
                           policies and Government’s environmental protection commitments procedures, investment owners
                           (districts or communes) would be responsible for preparing a short Environmental Management
                           Plan for any subproject for which impacts could not be adequately addressed through the
                           application of the ECOPs.



                                                                      Page 7 of 12
                         OP 4.36 on Forests has also been triggered given the fact that approximately 50 percent of the
                         project area is forests or forest lands. Analysis of rural livelihoods in the project area indicates that
                         access to forest resources (including non-timber forest products) is an important strategy for poor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ethnic minority households. Potential livelihood activities (under component 2) that would require
                         consideration of this policy include tree crops (acacia, litsea or cacao) or other agriculture
                         activities to be undertaken on production forest lands. For these purposes, the EMSF will require
                         that community groups (LEGs) prepare a community forest management plan (CFMP) that would
                         be reviewed by local authorities (forest extension services) at district level to ensure that proposed
                         activities comply with pertinent national laws on the use of these lands. The CFMP aims to assist
                         communities to (a) sustainably manage forests and forest lands, (b) stabilize forests and protect
                         water sources, and (c) steadily improve livelihoods by ensuring a stable supply of forest products.
                         The CFMP includes socio-economic information of the project area and a brief assessment of the
                         land use allocations for the management, conservation, and sustainable development of forests.
                         The socio-economic assessment reviews (a) the extent to which the livelihoods of local
                         communities depend on and use trees, (b) the institutional, policy, and conflict management issues
                         involved in improving the participation of ethnic minorities and poor people in the management of
                         the trees and forests; and (c) forest product and forest service issues relevant to ethnic minority
                         people and poor people, as well as opportunities for promoting the involvement of women. The
                         CFMP is developed using the participatory planning approach and with the support of the project
                         community facilitator. Guidelines for the CFMP are included in the PIM.

                         The Government has also prepared a draft Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) which, in
                         accordance with OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, addresses issues relating to land acquisition
                         under the project. A draft RPF has also been prepared by Government, reviewed by the Bank and
                         disclosed. The final RPF will be approved by the Prime Minister’s office prior to project
                         negotiations. The RPF presents the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of displaced
                         persons, modes of compensation and rehabilitation, participation features and grievance
                         procedures that will guide the compensation and potential resettlement of affected persons.
                         Voluntary land donation would be allowed under very specific guidelines/limitations, to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         outlined in the PIM, and would be monitored closely. At appraisal, although a list of potential
                         investments in the first 18 months has been developed, the precise level of impacts associated with
                         these subprojects is unknown as designs are not yet finalized. Prior to final approval by
                         Government of the annual subproject investment plans, provinces will review subproject designs
                         and prepare an annual resettlement plan based on guidance stipulated in RPF. The Project
                         Implementation Manual would include due diligent procedures concerning project activities
                         involving voluntary land donations to ensure that (i) there are no legacy issues; (ii) such donations
                         meet the Bank's criteria for voluntary land donations; i.e. that they indeed are voluntary, made
                         without coercion and with a choice to say no; and (iii) that in cases where land donations do not
                         meet the Bank's criteria measures are in place to fill such gaps.

                         Ethnic Minorities are the overwhelming majority among the project targeted beneficiaries.
                         Therefore that no separate IPP was developed as all the relevant elements of OP 4.10 have been
                         directly integrated into the design of the project, project documents and Project Implementation
                         Manual and are described in details in Annex 6 of the PAD. As such, the CHPov was designed as
                         an EM project in compliance with OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples and therefore meets all
                         requirements of an Ethnic Minority/Indigenous Peoples Plan. In compliance with the mentioned
                         policy, a social assessment (SA) has been undertaken and disclosed prior to appraisal, and the
                         findings of the SA have been used to inform the project’s design. These design features include a
                         communications strategy and materials that apply different and literacy appropriate media forms,

                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           preferred recruitment of key field staff (community facilitators) from local communities, the use of
                           indigenous languages in communications at village level when facilitating local decision making,
                           inclusion of elders and traditional leaders as part of village level planning, minimum requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for EM participation in decision meetings and livelihoods groups (which will be monitored),
                           technical support and capacity building (including for village groups) around participatory
                           processes, etc. The project will also specifically monitor results and evaluate impacts by ethnic
                           groups.

                           The SA included a gender analysis and assessment and the project will include the following
                           gender informed design elements: minimum requirements for female participation in planning and
                           decision making meetings at village level, a designated female position (of Vice-Chair) for the
                           commune-level decision making board, specifically targeted/ear-marked support for women’s
                           livelihoods activities under one of the project’s sub-components, and monitoring and evaluation
                           data will be gender disaggregated.

                           A broad consultation process was undertaken as part of the project preparation that included the
                           application of participatory processes at village and commune levels to identify or confirm the list
                           of the first 18-month investments. Preparation teams also communicating design options and
                           strategies with implementation partners (government counterpart agencies) and took into
                           consideration opinions of stakeholders at all levels of project implementation and from a
                           significant number of project sites (see following section). Moreover, as a participatory demand-
                           driven project, free, prior and informed consultation that would result in broad community support
                           for project investments will be undertaken before any subproject is approved. This participatory
                           process that explicitly engages with local communities and EM groups would help to ensure that
                           project benefits are culturally appropriate. The process is being elaborated in detail by the
                           Government and will be presented in the PIM. Training in facilitation and participatory processes
                           that would target commune officials and community facilitators will begin in late 2013 in time for
                           projected project effectiveness in early 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The implementing agency for the project, the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), has
                           experience with Bank-financed projects and is familiar with Bank safeguards policies. At central
                           level, MPI will hire qualified consultants to assist in training provincial, district and commune
                           level staff (who would be designated by the relevant authorities) to oversee and ensure the
                           application of the ESMF and the RPF for the subprojects. These same consultants will be hired to
                           periodically monitorthe application of the safeguard frameworks and to provide annual refresher
                           training to the relevant, designated, staff. Project staff and beneficiaries at provincial, district and
                           commune level will be provided training on the relevant World Bank safeguards policies,
                           safeguards coordinators will be designated at district level among the project staff, and safeguards
                           champions will be trained and given responsibility at commune and village level to ensure that
                           relevant mitigating measures for individual sub-projects are implemented.

                           A grievance redress mechanism that would cover all aspects of project management and
                           implementation, including the application of relevant social and environmental safeguards and
                           mitigation measures, would also be included in the project and described in the PIM.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project’s key stakeholders include (i) community members in the target communes and
                           villages that are the primary beneficiaries and active participants in the project, (ii) government


                                                                       Page 9 of 12
                           officials and civil society groups (women’s union, farmers assoc., etc.) at commune level who
                           would manage and oversee investments at this level, (iii) district and provincial government staff
                           who are responsible for project implementation, and other collaborating departments such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agriculture and rural development, health/nutrition, and the Committee on Ethnic Minorities, etc.,
                           (iv) private sector enterprises (construction firms, agro-businesses, input suppliers, etc.) that would
                           be engaged and/or interested in the project’s commercial aspects; and (v) national government
                           agencies particularly MPI. Formal public consultations were carried out during June 2013 in all 6
                           project provinces with the participation of key government and civil society stakeholders.
                           Representatives of provincial Departments of Planning and Investment, district peoples’
                           committee members, and local civil society organizations (e.g. women union, farmer association,
                           and fatherland front) attended the public consultation meetings. Documentation of these
                           consultations (and suggestions received) are presented in the the ESMF. Several consultative
                           workshops were held with participating provinces and districts on project design and
                           implementation in Quang Ngai (April 2013), Sa Pa (June 2013) and Nha Trang (August 2013).
                           Additional consultations with local authorities and community members were also conducted
                           during the social assessment process (started in July 2012), the findings of which are properly
                           included in the project design. Finally, the Government’s project preparation team and the World
                           Bank preparation team have visited all provinces, most districts and approximately 50% of all
                           project communes from January 2012 to August 2013 to discuss the project’s objectives, strategies
                           and activities to solicit inputs from all stakeholders including representatives of the private
                           commercial sectors. These comments and feedback from the project’s ultimate beneficiaries,
                           implementing partners and key stakeholders have been incorporated into the final project design.

                           Prior to project appraisal, all safeguard documents (ESMF, RPF and SA) have been disclosed
                           locally in Vietnamese at the project sites and at the Vietnam Development Information Center.
                           They have also been disclosed in English at the Bank’s InfoShop in Washington DC in accordance
                           with Bank procedures.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       12-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                              12-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       12-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                              12-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-Aug-2013


                                                                      Page 10 of 12
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        12-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                               12-Aug-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The overall project design complies with the Bank’s policy on Indigenous Peoples
                                         given that the majority of the project’s beneficiaries (over 72 percent) are members
                                         of EM groups, that the project specifically targets these groups to benefit from the
                                         project, and that the main project strategy is based on participatory development
                                         approaches that specifically engage these groups in consultative processes. In
                                         compliance with OP 4.10, the Government carried out an SA which informed project
                                         design, including elements aimed at enhancing participation and inclusion of EMs.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                        Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           09-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        12-Aug-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                               12-Aug-2013
                           Comments: In response to OP 4.09, pest management is handled through the use of an
                                         Environmental Code of Practice that includes a set of guidelines on sustainable use
                                         of pesticides and fertilizers, included in the ESMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples




                                                                    Page 11 of 12
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Sean Bradley
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Jennifer J. Sara (SM)                         Date: 28-Nov-2013




                                                                       Page 12 of 12
