                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC1043

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kazakhstan                       Project ID:      P152230
                            Project Name:       Kazakhstan: Southeast Europe and Central Asia Catastrophe Risk Insurance
                                                Facility (P152230)
                            Task Team           Eugene N. Gurenko
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated        06-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFMDR                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Climate change

                            Sector(s):        Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (80%), SME Finance (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Financial Sector Development (60%), Climate change (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         5.48               Total Bank Financing:        0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                              5.48
                              Total                                                                          5.48
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           11.     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Kazakhstan with developing modern
                           catastrophe insurance market infrastructure that will support the launch of innovative catastrophe
                           insurance products covering the risks of extreme weather variability.

                           12.      By facilitating and increasing access to financial protection, the Global Environmental
                         Objective (GEO) will have been achieved, namely the reduction of economic vulnerability for
                         homeowners, the enterprise sector, and government agencies to the adverse impact of natural
                         disasters and climate change. The proposed project activities support GEF’s focus on climate change
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and more specifically, GEF’s objectives on climate change adaptation. By increasing access to sound
                         catastrophe and weather risk insurance products, SEECA CRIF is also in line with the GEF strategy
                         on adaptation. By supporting proper catastrophe risk management and risk transfer, SEECA CRIF
                         reduces economic losses at both local and national level from extreme weather related events,
                         thereby reducing economic vulnerability and creating a more climate resilient country.

                         13.      SEECA CRIF activities are also cross-cutting and collaborative, ensuring the engagement of
                         major stakeholders in Kazakhstan, including several ministries, the National Bank, insurance sector
                         and agriculture. Moreover, because much of the technical work will be focused on establishing
                         complex catastrophe insurance infrastructure and systems, stakeholders will gain the requisite skills
                         and knowledge to better understand catastrophe risk and effectively adapt to such risks and climate
                         change. Furthermore, public awareness of climate change and the benefits of catastrophe and weather
                         risk insurance will be raised through information campaigns and the new law on compulsory Disaster
                         Insurance and supporting its regulations, resulting in increased demand for catastrophe and weather
                         risk insurance products.

                         14.      Although the project has been designed specifically for Kazakhstan, it can be easily
                         replicated in other countries adversely affected by climate change through the extension of existing
                         market infrastructure and insurance services to be developed for Kazakhstan to other country
                         markets.
                         C. Project Description
                         16.     SEECA CRIF is a catastrophe and weather-risk insurance program established to address the
                         problem of low catastrophe and weather insurance penetration in participating countries. The main
                         rationale of the project is to promote the development of sound catastrophe and weather risk
                         insurance for millions of homeowners, farmers, enterprises and government organizations against
Public Disclosure Copy




                         geo and weather-related risks exacerbated by climate change and reduce government fiscal risk
                         exposure to natural disasters.

                         17.      The main design features of SEECA CRIF closely follow the previous prototypes of national
                         and regional catastrophe and weather-risk programs developed with direct technical and capital
                         assistance from the Bank – the Turkish Catastrophe Insurance Pool, the Romanian Catastrophe
                         Insurance Pool and the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility. However, the program
                         contains several innovations. These include (i) the development of innovative catastrophe insurance
                         products which combine traditional indemnity coverage with parametric index-based elements; (ii)
                         establishment of prudent risk management and market conduct requirements embedded in highly
                         automated systems, (iii) development of innovative image-based claims management systems
                         ensuring a swift return to normal life or continuation of business activities in the aftermath of a
                         natural disaster; (iv) introduction of risk based supervision of catastrophe insurance in line with best
                         international practices, (v) development of innovative public awareness and educational mechanisms,
                         including highly interactive IT applications and (vi) ensuring proper financial capacity through
                         dedicated reinsurance capacity.

                         18.     SEECA CRIF program benefits from extensive hands-on experience learned through the
                         implementation of the SEEC CRIF program in the countries of Southeast Europe. There are three
                         main lessons learned from this program. The first lesson is that acquisition of new customized
                         insurance technologies and supporting those IT systems is fraught with potential delays and shortfalls
                         in the expected quality of implementation. The second lesson is the importance of the government in
                         creating the demand for catastrophe insurance products. The third lesson has to do with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         affordability of catastrophe insurance products, which must be designed to fit the budget of most
                         homeowners and SME owners. These lessons have been addressed in the project design. To address
                         the problem of potential delays and quality of technical deliverables by external vendors, the project
                         will be implemented by Europa Re, which accumulated valuable extensive expertise in retaining and
                         successfully managing specialized providers of insurance services. The second lesson is addressed by
                         linking the project to the government program of compulsory catastrophe insurance which would
                         ensure adequate demand for catastrophe insurance products in Kazakhstan. To address the
                         affordability concern, the project envisages that the pricing of compulsory catastrophe risk products
                         can be made affordable by the introduction of innovative automated pricing and underwriting
                         technologies, the extensive national customer base that allows to broadly distribute the fixed
                         administrative costs among millions of policyholders, and through introduction of government
                         financed insurance vouchers that can be used by the economically vulnerable segments of population
                         to pay for compulsory catastrophe insurance.

                         19.     Europa Reinsurance Facility Ltd. (Europa Re), a government-owned catastrophe reinsurance
                         company incorporated under Swiss Law in Zug, Switzerland, will act as the SEECA CRIF project
                         implementation agency. Over the last 3 years, in the course of implementing the GEF and SECO
                         grants under the SEEC CRIF program in Albania, FYR of Macedonia and Serbia, Europa Re
                         developed in-depth expertise in procuring insurance services and systems in accordance with the
                         World Bank procurement and financial management guidelines. In the case of SEE, the GEF and
                         SECO grants in the amount of $10 million were used to develop innovative catastrophe insurance
                         products and underlying them hazard risk models, procure web-based automated pricing,
                         underwriting and policy origination platform, claim management systems and provide regulatory
                         support to local insurance regulators. Given the importance of providing reinsurance capacity to local
                         insurance companies involved in sales of catastrophe insurance products developed under the
                         SEECA CRIF program, Europa Re also will stand ready to provide, if required, reinsurance support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to the Kazakh insurance companies that will be participating in the national catastrophe insurance
                         program and, if requested, directly to the Kazakhstan Catastrophe Insurance Pool (KCIP).

                         20.      In the case of SEECA CRIF program for Kazakhstan, the proposed project funding of US
                         $5.0 million will be used for procuring insurance services and systems that will (i) pave the way for
                         the successful launch of the KCIP’s operations upon enactment of the Disaster Insurance Law and
                         (ii) support the development of a sustainable insurance framework for the agricultural sector through
                         innovative insurance solutions and modern technologies. Inter alia, the activities include procurement
                         of web-based insurance sales platform with automated pricing and risk underwriting capabilities, a
                         modern claims management system, high-resolution weather risk data, development of customized
                         weather insurance products for real property and agriculture, public information campaigns,
                         interactive web-based consumer education tools, and insurance regulatory assistance.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The project does not require safeguard related studies.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Eugene N. Gurenko

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 16-Sep-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Aurora Ferrari (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 17-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
