                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC2951

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                           Project ID:      P144726
                            Project Name:      National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project-II (P144726)
                            Task Team          Saurabh Suresh Dani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Feb-2014                     Estimated        29-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDC                           Lending          Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Flood protection (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%),
                                               Telecommunications (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (50%), Climate change (20%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (20%), Vulnerability assessment and monit oring (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    320.00                    Total Bank Financing:        250.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           70.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 250.00
                              Total                                                                       320.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective of the National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (II) (NCRMP-
                           II) is to reduce vulnerability of coastal communities in project states to cyclone and other hydro
                           meteorological hazards.
                           C. Project Description
                         Coastal regions typically possess rich human and natural resources and are important economic,
                         social, and developmental drivers of the region. However, the coastal population and economic assets
                         are prone to multiple hazards such as high frequency and intensity of cyclones, storm surges, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coastal floods.

                         The Govt. of India has initiated the National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project (NCRMP) with World
                         Bank assistance with a view to address the cyclone risks in the country. The project identified 13
                         cyclone prone states and Union Territories (UTs) with varying levels of vulnerability. These coastal
                         States/UTs have further been divided into two categories based on their vulnerability to cyclone
                         risks:

                         a.     Category I: High vulnerability coastal States/UTs i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Odisha,
                         Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.

                         b.    Category II: Low vulnerability coastal States/UTs i.e. Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra,
                         Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Daman & Diu, Lakshadweep and Pondicherry.

                         The project (NCRMP) was designed as a horizontal Adaptable Program Loan (APL) in three phases.
                         Phase I (called NCRMP-I) is currently under implementation in the states of Odisha and Andhra
                         Pradesh. This phase of the project (NCRMP II) is proposed to include states of Gujarat, Maharashtra
                         and Kerala on the west coast, and West Bengal on the east coast. Remaining coastal states would be
                         covered under the third phase III (NCRMP III).

                         The NCRMP-II is multi-state and multi-sectoral and is spread over a wide geography and has a large
                         number of direct beneficiaries. The project will be developed under a multi-sector framework with
                         investment activities aimed at reducing risk and enhancing mitigation along coastal Gujarat,
                         Maharashtra, Kerala and West Bengal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will have five key components: A) Early Warning Dissemination System (EWDS) and
                         Capacity building for coastal communities; B) Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure; C) Technical
                         Assistance for Strengthening Capacity towards disaster risk mitigation; D) Project Management and
                         Implementation Support; and (E) Emergency Contingent Financing. A short description of objectives
                         and activities in each of the components is given below:

                         Component A: Early Warning Dissemination System and Capacity building for Coastal
                         Communities (US$ 15 million): The over-all objective of this component is to reduce the
                         vulnerability of coastal communities by addressing the existing gap in dissemination of warning to
                         the communities. The component will support: A.1) Installation and operation of EWDS allowing the
                         state and/or district/sub-district level control center to send communication directly to the villages
                         using Global System for Mobile Communications (GSM)/Code Division Multiple Access (CDMA)
                         based technology including strengthening emergency operation centers to channelize the warning
                         through different communication modes. The component also includes providing satellite phones to
                         key officials to fail proof the EWDS and also pilot new radio based wireless communication
                         technology in one block in each state; and A.2) Strengthening capacity: (i) in operating, maintaining
                         and regular use of the EWDS equipment by officials and village representatives, and (ii) of
                         communities in disaster preparedness and response through disaster management plans, arranging
                         mock drills etc.
                         The experiences gained in its implementation in Phase I will be integrated, improved and carried
                         forward for the states of Kerala, Maharashtra, Gujarat and West Bengal as well as ensure uniformity
                         in the EWDS. NDMA is in the process of hiring a consultant to help design and support procurement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and installation of EWDS equipment for phase I which will also be used for Phase II.

                         Component B: Cyclone Risk Mitigation Infrastructure (US$ 278 million): The objective of this
                         component is to improve the access to emergency shelter, evacuation and protection against cyclone
                         and other hydro meteorological hazards such as wind storms, flooding and storm surge in high risk
                         areas. Each of the states reviewed the existing system and gaps and developed risk mitigation
                         infrastructure portfolio. For emergency shelters, identification mechanism included assessment of
                         total requirement, available shelters including other government and private buildings and the gap.
                         The portfolio includes a broad set of measures such as investments in multi-purpose emergency
                         shelters, up-grading of existing roads and providing bridges suitable for evacuation, drainage
                         improvement measures and repair and up-grading of existing embankments, and creation of corpus
                         funds for operation and maintenance of emergency shelters.

                         In addition of use of such infrastructure for emergency purposes, improved road and bridge network
                         will also increase access of local communities to health care, education and markets. Also,
                         evacuation shelters will function as community halls, school classrooms, or vocational training
                         centers assuring all round development of the community and will bring about a sense of ownership
                         to ensure long term sustainability of the infrastructure created under the project.

                         Component C: Technical Assistance for Risk and Vulnerability Modeling and Capacity Building on
                         Disaster Risk Management (US$ 10 million): The objective of this component is to help understand
                         risk and vulnerabilities better, and prepare the key institutions for addressing them effectively across
                         all coastal states and UTs. Under the on-going Phase I of the project, National Disaster Management
                         Authority (NDMA) is undertaking a hazard and risk assessment of coastal India. The understanding
                         of risk and vulnerabilities from Phase I will be carried forward through improved probabilistic risk
                         modeling allowing for modeling of multi-hazard and cascading impacts of disasters along coastal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         India. In addition, the project under Phase II will also implement on pilot basis key findings from the
                         Capacity Building study (at national, state and local level) being undertaken by National Institute of
                         Disaster Management (NIDM) in Phase I.

                         In order to utilize the special skills required for implementation of the sub-component of Capacity
                         Building under Component C, it is proposed to use NIDM as the implementing agency, which was
                         set up under MHA through the Disaster Management Act-2005 of India. NIDM functions within the
                         broad policies and guidelines laid down by the NDMA, and is responsible for planning and
                         promoting training and research and information management in the area of disaster management.
                         NDMA will be in charge of the risk modeling sub-component under Component C.

                         Component D: Project Management and Implementation Support (US$ 17million): This component
                         provides support for project management by financing incremental operating costs for PMU, PIUs,
                         nodal units in line departments and National Institute of Disaster Management (NIDM), office
                         equipment, training and exposure visits and consulting services for specialist activities.

                         Component E: Contingent Emergency Financing (US$ 0 million) (all four states): Following an
                         adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the respective governments may request
                         the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component would
                         draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the government of Tamil
                         Nadu and/or Puducherry to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other
                         project components to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could
                         also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of the emergency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Disbursements would be made against a positive list of critical goods or the procurement of works,
                         and consultant services required to support the immediate response and recovery needs. All
                         expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, will be in accordance with BP/OP 8.0 and
                         will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the Bank before any disbursement is made.
                         In accordance with BP/OP 8.00, this component would provide immediate, quick-disbursing support
                         to finance goods (positive list agreed with the Governments), works, and services needed for
                         response, mitigation, and recovery and reconstruction activities. Operating costs eligible for
                         financing would include the incremental expenses incurred for early recovery efforts arising as a
                         result of the impact of major natural disasters.

                         On the whole, the project is a strong example of integrating disaster risk management with objectives
                         of climate change adaptation in building resilience of communities in dealing with impacts of
                         hazards.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project involves four states, namely Gujarat, Kerala, Maharashtra and West Bengal.

                         Gujarat: The state of Gujarat has a large number of key ports and coastal settlements along its 1,600
                         km coastline. It serves as gateway for importing petroleum, gas and other bulk goods to North India.
                         Gujarat has the largest share (at 23%) of the total Indian coastline. The width of its coastal tract
                         varies from 7 to 15 km. The Gujarat coast has a high diversity of terrain, shelf depths and hydrology.
                         Some parts of the coast are extremely flat and low lying .The highest tidal ranges in the Indian coast
                         are witnessed in the Gulf of Khambat (up to 8 m). These characteristics can amplify storm surges and
                         impact wide stretches unlike many other coastal regions of India. Two cyclone seasons are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         experienced in Gujarat: March to July (advancing southwestern monsoon) and September to
                         November (retreating monsoon).

                         Maximum wind speed class of >200km/h (100 year return period) have been observed along the
                         Saurashtra coast, specifically in Porbandar, Jamnagar and Junagadh districts which are exposed to
                         the highest intensity of cyclonic and storm impact. The 182-200 km/h sub-class extends further
                         inland to cover much of Jamnagar, part of Rajkot, Junagadh and Kachchh districts. About 90,000
                         houses mostly in Biomass spread over 1300 settlements are vulnerable to severe damages due to 100
                         year return period cyclones. A simulation of storm surge along the Gujarat coast substantiated by
                         field work and observations indicate an estimated 291 settlements are prone to storm surges of
                         various intensities along the Gujarat coast.

                         Maharashtra

                         Maharashtra, located in the north centre of India along the west coast, is the second largest state in
                         terms of population and the third largest in terms of area and is spread over 307,713 square km.
                         Maharashtra has the country's second largest urban population, and is about 43% urbanized. Mumbai,
                         Maharashtra’s capital city is the principal financial center and a major commercial hub of the
                         country. The Sahyadri mountain range (Western Ghat) rises to an average elevation of 1000m. It falls
                         in steep cliffs, to the Konkan on the west. Owing to this mountain range and its topography, the
                         coastal part of the state, west of the Sahyadri is prone to heavy rainfall while the eastern part is dry.

                         Maharashtra is prone to a host of hazards. It is at moderate risk to Cyclones and storms. During the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         period from 1890 to 1995, 210 cyclonic depressions were recorded in the Arabian Sea. Out of these
                         19 (including 6 major ones) affected the Maharashtra-Goa coast. The Konkan region lies in the
                         cyclone moderate to low damage risk zone since wind speeds rarely exceed 155km/h. Heavy
                         urbanization has also increased vulnerability to hazards like urban flooding.

                         Kerala

                         Kerala has a geographical area of 38,863 square km. It lies between the Arabian Sea on the west and
                         the Western Ghats on the east. Kerala’s coast runs 580 km in length, while the state itself varies
                         between 35 –120 km in width. Kerala receives an average annual rainfall of 3,100 mm mostly
                         through seasonal monsoons and averages 120–140 rainy days per year. The excessive rainfall that the
                         state receives every season, including from tropical cyclones, makes Kerala prone to severe
                         landslides, flooding and coastal erosion.

                         The density of coastal urban population is 4,228 persons per square km, nearly twice the average
                         urban density in the state. This puts a huge number of coastal communities at risk, exposing them to
                         multiple natural hazards. Continuous occurrence of high intensity rainfall for a few days is the
                         primary factor contributing to extreme floods in the State. Kerala has a unique need that of providing
                         shelter to families affected by storms and flooding for up to 4 weeks duration during the monsoon
                         season i.e. until flood waters recede. The shelters, therefore, need to be designed considering the
                         need for longer periods of stay in terms of space, functional aspects and amenities.

                         Between1891 to 2007, 31 Cyclonic Storms / Severe Cyclonic Storms have affected the Kerala coast.
                         During the past 35 years, Kerala has seen a total of severe Cyclonic Storms that originated over Bay
                         of Bengal, crossed the eastern coast of India and reemerged into the Arabian Sea as a depression.
                         Cyclones are usually accompanied by tidal waves which, on occasion, enter land up to a distance of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         10 km, along with heavy rains and winds with speeds exceeding 50 km/h. People residing in
                         habitations within a distance of 5 km from the sea coast are generally the worst affected with the
                         inundation (varying between approximately 2.5 to 5 m) lasting for over 5-6 days. The Kerala coast
                         was significantly affected by the 2004 Indian Ocean tsunami with maximum damages reported in the
                         low coastal land of Kollam, Alleppey and Ernakulam districts.

                         West Bengal

                         West Bengal (WB) is a relatively small state in India’s east but with a population of more than 90
                         million it is amongst the highest density states in the country. West Bengal has suffered from
                         cyclones, floods, droughts and earthquakes. The coastal stretch of WB is highly vulnerable to
                         cyclones and the frequency of storms crossing this belt is high. The most destructive element
                         associated with an intense cyclone is storm surge which leads to inundations and coastline washout/
                         erosion. High storm surge in coastal WB is due to its peculiar bathymetry and the nature of the
                         coastal belt. The northern part of the Bay of Bengal is very shallow. The coast is also landlocked on
                         three sides. As a result, when a very severe cyclonic storm or cyclone approaches the coast, the
                         enormous storm surge generated by the wind pressure submerges the coastal belt. Another peculiar
                         characteristic of this coast are the innumerable rivers and rivulets criss-crossing islands that have
                         elevations of 4 to 5 m above sea level. This makes these islands and the populations inhabiting them
                         highly vulnerable.
                         On May 25th 2009, a severe cyclone, “AILA” lashed the WB coast causing destruction not only in
                         the coastal blocks but also far inland. Coastal communities in WB are usually poor and often live in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         houses made of mud walls and thatched roofs, making them highly vulnerable to cyclones, high
                         speed winds, precipitation and inundation.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project proposes to use the institutional arrangements (both at the central and state levels) and a
                         safeguards framework similar to that followed for NCRMP-I. This approach would help in
                         strengthening aspects/elements that have worked in the first project and facilitate in refining/focusing
                         on issues that require some improvement.

                         Institutional Arrangements: The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), on behalf of
                         Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), will manage the project and will have over-all responsibility for
                         implementation. NDMA is currently providing guidance to the four proposed States under NCRMP-
                         II and all four states have developed the required investment proposals. Model DPRs have been
                         created and first-year investments have been/are being identified in each of these four states.

                         The NDMA, which will be the central co-ordinating agency for this project, is familiar with the
                         Bank’s safeguard requirements, through its involvement in NCRMP-I. On the environment and
                         social management aspects, the Authority has gained basic familiarity with regard to the Bank’s
                         safeguard requirements through the said on-going project. The state governments too, particularly
                         those of Gujarat, Maharashtra and Kerala are generally aware of environmental issues and
                         management requirements of the Bank on account of their involvement in Bank projects. NDMA
                         will strengthen their existing PMU, headed by a Project Director and supported by technical experts
                         and management staff. The current PMU set-up has one specialist each to handle environment and
                         social aspects.

                         As in NCRMP-I, the NDMA will provide technical and monitoring support and will coordinate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         over-all program. Implementation of the ESMF (including sub-project specific EMPs and RAPs in
                         cases) will be the responsibility of the State PIUs.

                         At state level, the existing nodal agency for disaster management (e.g., State Disaster Management
                         Authorities or Revenue/Relief Departments) would be responsible for managing the project. Within
                         this department/agency, a State Project Implementation Units (SPIU) will be created to play the
                         coordination/project management role. The proposed set-up is similar to the one that has been
                         adopted for NCRMP-I states.

                         Safeguard Instruments: To understand, assess and mitigate issues related to environment
                         management, land requirement, displacement and resettlement, the National Disaster Management
                         Authority (NDMA) had conducted a study in participating states through consultants for NCRMP I.
                         An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed for avoiding,
                         minimizing, mitigating and managing the identified environmental and social issues, which are likely
                         to arise due to the implementation of sub-project level activities. This approach helped in effective
                         environmental and social management in a scenario where multiple sub-projects were located in
                         different parts of the coastal region across two states and their specific location was not known at the
                         time of the over-all project design.

                         The ESMF required that each sub-project investment to undergo a systematic environmental and
                           social screening to identify the likely impacts. In case significant impacts were identified, detailed
                           impact assessment studies were required be carried out and sub-project specific environmental
                           management plans (EMPs) and resettlement action plans (RAPs) were to be prepared. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management of environmental and social issues specifically with regard to the approach used for
                           screening of proposed sub-projects was based on a robust and scientific methodology and has been
                           successfully used in NCRMP-I.

                           The ESMF approach and the safeguards requirements set forth within it remain relevant in the
                           context of NCRMP-II as well. In terms of the safeguard instrument/s for the proposed project, the
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework will be updated by the Borrower to include
                           baseline and other assessments from the four new states in accordance with the Bank’s O.P. 4.01, and
                           will be submitted to the Bank for review and clearance prior to appraisal.

                           The updated/revised framework will include: (i) overall outcomes that the ESMF would aim/seek,
                           including minimization of social and environmental risks; (ii) the baseline data/information of the
                           four new states; (iii) the process of applying screening and assessment requirements to the various
                           categories of sub-projects; (iv) regulatory/legal requirements; (v) generic mitigation/management
                           plans for the interventions proposed under the project; and (vi) findings from consultations with
                           stakeholders and; (vii) capacity building strategy/plan for the NDMA, state governments, other
                           Government departments/organizations, NGOs and other concerned stakeholders.

                           Capacity Building Requirements: Experience from NCRMP-I has re-emphasized the need for
                           adequate training and capacity building arrangements on environment and social management at
                           various levels covering all levels of concerned organizations/agencies (PIU, implementing agencies,
                           consultants and contractors). Since the borrower capacity at the Central Level (NDMA) with regard
                           to environment and social management is still in the process of being strengthened, adequate
                           implementation and support mechanisms would be required for the project. The capacities also vary
                           from state to state – for example - West Bengal may require more support compared to other states.
                           The proposed project would require regular/periodic training programmes on the safeguard aspects to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ensure that the comprehensive safeguard instruments developed for the project are effectively and
                           uniformly used in the field. Specific capacity strengthening support will be necessary, as assessed
                           during the updating of the ESMF.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Venkata Rao Bayana (SASDS)
                           Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                           Khabilongtshup Khumujam (SASDI)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Creation of cyclone risk mitigation
                           BP 4.01                                               infrastructure (Component B) such as
                                                                                 improvement of roads, bridges, repair/up-grade
                                                                                 of coastal embankments and creation of cyclone
                                                                                 shelters may have some potential adverse
                                                                                 environmental and social impacts. Planning and
                                                                                 construction of these investments would require
                                                             avoidance/mitigation measures to ensure that
                                                             adverse environmental impacts are minimized
                                                             and properly managed. Impacts resulting from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             poor sub-project location and/or design; work
                                                             site safety management, including occupational
                                                             health and safety of construction workers;
                                                             drainage; impact on local flora and fauna and;
                                                             construction materials management, including
                                                             source handling and transportation would
                                                             require attention. More precise information
                                                             about nature, scale and magnitude of
                                                             environmental impacts from such activities/
                                                             interventions will emerge once the environment
                                                             and social screening exercises are completed.

                                                             OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that all
                                                             infrastructure investments are planned and
                                                             designed to be environmentally sound by
                                                             integrating appropriate principles and
                                                             approaches into the overall decision making
                                                             process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   While the proposed project interventions are not
                                                             likely to cause significant conversion or damage
                                                             to natural habitats, OP 4.04 is being triggered as
                                                             some of the sub-projects are likely to fall
                                                             within/very close a critical natural habitat
                                                             (owing to the fact that the coast line is dotted
                                                             with several ecologically sensitive areas) as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             defined under Bank’s policy. Management
                                                             measures, particularly diligence in appropriate
                                                             site selection would also be required for
                                                             avoiding/minimizing disturbances, particularly
                                                             during the construction stage.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD   To ensure that the health and quality of the
                                                             forest is not adversely impacted by the proposed
                                                             works, measures may be needed during the
                                                             planning/design and implementation stages of
                                                             the project. However, at this stage, the nature
                                                             and quantum of impacts, if any is not known
                                                             and therefore this information will be updated in
                                                             the Appraisal stage ISDS.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    OP 4.09 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                             biological/environmental control methods or
                                                             reliance on synthetic chemical pesticides is not
                                                             envisaged.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           Since some civil works are involved, ‘chance
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         finds’ at work sites is a likely impact that would
                                                                                                                                 have to be managed. Adverse impacts on any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 locally important cultural property would be
                                                                                                                                 examined, if any, for appropriate mitigation
                                                                                                                                 during planning and implementation stages.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           At this stage, the nature and quantum of
                                                                                                                                 impacts, if any is not known and therefore this
                                                                                                                                 information will be updated in the Appraisal
                                                                                                                                 stage ISDS.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Some investments proposed under Component 2
                                 4.12                                                                                            may require additional land than that in
                                                                                                                                 possession with the line with concerned
                                                                                                                                 departments. Also, the project may displace
                                                                                                                                 squatters and encroachers, which may lead to
                                                                                                                                 loss of shelter, livelihood or sources of
                                                                                                                                 livelihood.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as
                                                                                                                                 there is no construction of new dams or
                                                                                                                                 activities that are concerned with safe
                                                                                                                                 functioning of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            there are no interventions planned/proposed
                                                                                                                                 over or around an international waterway that
                                                                                                                                 could cause a potential conflict. There are also
                                                                                                                                 no activities that may affect the use or pollute
                                                                                                                                 such a waterway.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             OP 4.10 will not be triggered for this project.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Jul-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.      Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared:
                                      July 2013.

                                      B.      For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
                                      stage ISDS:

                                      C.      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
                                      needed.

                                      The updated/revised ESMF (including baseline information from the four new states, results from



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             the field observations/assessment, institutional capacity and findings from consultations along
                             with other aspects mentioned under sub-section ‘E’ of this ISDS) is expected to be ready by the
                             proposed appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Saurabh Suresh Dani

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 26-Feb-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)                    Date: 26-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
