                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC5249

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                        Project ID:      P145813
                            Project Name:     Sindh Irrigated Agriculture Productivity Enhancement Phase-I Project
                                              (P145813)
                            Task Team         Mahwash Wasiq
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       02-Dec-2013                       Estimated        14-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASDA                              Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), Crops (25%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (30%),
                                              Analysis of economic growth (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    237.00                   Total Bank Financing:        173.90
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         63.10
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               173.90
                              Total                                                                     237.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The main development objective of the project is to improve irrigation efficiency leading to
                           improved agricultural productivity in Sindh. The objective will be achieved through: improved
                           command area water delivery mechanism; improved field irrigation and agronomic practices, and
                           increase in crop diversification.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will be implemented in 6 years and have the following components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Community Water Infrastructure Improvement (Total: USD 120 million, IDA USD
                         98.4 million)

                         Sub-Component A1: Community Water Course Improvement (Total USD 108.0 million, IDA USD
                         86.4 million).

                         This component will cover improvement of water courses, which constitutes the tertiary level water
                         distribution system where water losses are highest. In Sindh, there are 46,699 water courses out of
                         which 28,856 have been improved. Of the remaining 17,843, about 6,000 will be improved through
                         the provision of lining (corresponding to 30% of all watercourses). Lining of water courses in general
                         and in Sindh in particular has three advantages: (1) it decreases conveyance losses and prevents
                         seepage to groundwater aquifers; (2) it helps to deliver water faster to the farmers’ fields, so they can
                         take advantage of the full duration of an irrigation cycle under the wara-bundi system; and (3) it
                         ensures equity in water distribution. Activities under this component will include development of
                         selection criteria, farmer mobilization, establishment of Water Course Associations (WCAs) and
                         their registration, survey and design, and construction. The activities will be undertaken by the field
                         teams under the DGAWM based in all districts. The project will offer guidance on employing variety
                         of lining materials, to be selected by the farmers. Construction will be administered by the farmers as
                         well, and supervised by design and supervision consultants who would also facilitate farmers in
                         efficient and economic sourcing of the material. As indicated above, this activity is well tested and
                         has been successfully implemented throughout Pakistan and in Sindh under the ongoing project. The
                         district level branch offices of the DGAWM will implement this component. The DGAWM with its
                         branch offices at the district level will implement this component. Third party consultants will
                         provide supervision to the construction. M&E consultants will be reporting on the impact of the
                         activity, and perform environmental and social audit under this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component A2: Mitigating Flood Risk For the Poor (Total USD 12.0 million, IDA USD 12.0
                         million).

                         During the two successive 2010 and 2011 floods, farmers in many areas of Sindh experienced
                         flooding followed by long periods during which standing, stagnating water destroyed crops,
                         irrigation systems, food and seed stock, livestock, and homesteads. The direct and indirect losses to
                         the agriculture sector was estimated to be over USD 300 million in 2011, and over USD 400 million
                         in 2010 with reconstruction costs of much higher magnitude. These floods have disproportionately
                         affected the very poor, small farmers and landless in rural Sindh, as the loss of livelihood was much
                         greater given their limited assets. Poor communities, especially those who could not afford to
                         improve their homestead on their own in these areas, have been requesting flood/raised shelters to
                         avoid total loss of livelihood in the event of another disaster. To extend the benefits of the project to
                         the rural poor, this component will provide support for socially and culturally appropriate community
                         flood shelters/centers to be built in areas subject to frequent flooding and on an on-demand basis with
                         communities/public sector providing the land to facilitate construction. Under the project about 70
                         shelters in 7 vulnerable districts will be built. These facilities will provide shelters to the
                         communities during floods, where they can also store their seed grain, food stock, and livestock.
                         These shelters are especially important for the landless and the very poor, particularly women,
                         children, elderly and disabled among them, where their life savings include the animals they own and
                         food stock they consume. Because mostly there are no large planned villages in rural Sindh as people
                         mostly live in small or scattered settlements, these shelters will also be used for community activities
                         where the population can exchange ideas on farming, animal husbandry, health, nutrition, and
                         education - and where women can share their many talents in crafts for which Sindh is famous. As
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such, it is envisaged that these centers will change the current social dynamics in the rural areas and
                         improve social cohesion which is urgently needed. Strong community participation and willingness
                         to contribute in kind with strict norms will be used for wider community participation. Common
                         village lands, government owned lands or lands donated by beneficiary communities will be used for
                         construction of these shelters. Other options including public sector involvement in the use and
                         maintenance of these facilities are being explored. Links are being built with UNICEF Mother and
                         Child Program, the World Bank financed Nutrition and Education Projects and others to utilize these
                         facilities for promotion of women’s interests and to prevent potential capturing of these facilities by
                         powerful land lords in these areas. Water Course Associations will also be encouraged to use these
                         shelters as their meeting points/small offices.
                         Component B: Promotion of High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (HEISs) (Total USD 90.0 million,
                         IDA USD 54.0 million)

                         This component will support construction of high efficiency irrigation systems such as drip, bubbler,
                         and sprinklers for horticulture, vegetables, floriculture and other high value and row crops. The
                         component also will finance the associated training of department staff and farmers including women
                         in the installation, utilization, and O&M of the HEISs. The latter will be installed on about 20,000 ha
                         of (~80,000 acre) irrigated and irrigable land. Drip irrigation is expected to become the dominant
                         irrigation technology to be promoted on 2 ha (5 acre), 4 ha ((10 acre) and 10 ha (25 acre) plots.
                         Smaller units will be encouraged where possible for wider area coverage of the technology and
                         facilitate access of small farmers. The primary target of this activity will be growers of vegetable/
                         cash crops, newly established orchards and other high value and row crops such as cotton, and areas
                         that are not served by the existing irrigation network, that is rainfed areas, especially small farms
                         situated in the outskirts of large metropolitan areas (peri-urban agriculture) where farmers have easy
                         access to the cities and markets where the demand for cash crops and early or off season vegetables
                         is high. The HEIS will be installed by a service provider and given on a shared cost basis, where the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will cover 60 percent of the cost of works, and the farmers will pay the remaining 40 percent.
                         In Sindh province there are numerous capable service providers that can render the necessary
                         services. A technical assistance package will be provided by the vendors to the farmers to promote,
                         adoption of the new technology. In addition, technical assistance and training will be provided to
                         farmers through Component D of the project. Given the novelty of this technology in Sindh, a social
                         awareness campaign and farmer mobilization will be initiated and in each Field Team one person
                         will be trained in O&M of HEIS and will be responsible for promoting the technology to the
                         (individual) farmers, farmers’ groups and WCAs. If needed, small pilot plots of 1-2 ha (2.5--5 acre)
                         each will be initiated and set up in each district to demonstrate the benefits of an HEIS.

                         Component C: Improved Agriculture Practices (Total USD 14.0 million, IDA USD 8.5 million)

                         This component will support the following sub-components:

                         Sub-Component C1: Laser Land Leveling and Deep Plowing (Total USD 10.0 million, IDA USD 4.5
                         million). Under this sub-component, the project will provide for precision land leveling equipment
                         and associated deep ripping which will result in higher efficiency and productivity of water use.
                         Laser land leveling saves up to 30% of irrigation water, results in uniform seed germination, and
                         increases fertilizer uptake, which enhances crop yields by up to 20%, especially in crops irrigated by
                         flooding system. Given the location of Sindh in the delta area, where there are sandy loam soils and
                         hard pans, the project will also introduce and finance a limited amount of equipment for periodic
                         deep?ripping before laser leveling. The impact of periodic deep ripping in Sindh is especially
                         important and will enhance the impact of laser leveling in areas with deep rooted crops such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cotton. The project will provide equipment for deep ripping and the laser leveling to service
                         providers on a shared cost basis. It is estimated that a total number of 2,200 Laser leveling unit
                         capacity in the Province will be created in Sindh under the project. The service providers will carry
                         out both services to interested farmers on a chargeback basis

                         Sub-Component C2: Improved Agriculture Production Technology (Total USD 4.0 million, IDA
                         USD 4.0 million). This sub-component will support improvement in agronomic practices in the form
                         of demonstration and assistance in improved and modern technologies as well as methods to increase
                         agriculture production. These will include: (a) assistance to the establishment/expansion of farmers’
                         information kiosks. The latter have been established with good results under the ongoing project for
                         the left bank of the Indus. Under this project more information kiosks for water use associations will
                         be established to serve the areas not covered by the current project; (b) training of trainers and
                         farmers in agricultural input application including fertilizers and pest management; (c) training and
                         technical assistance in alternative field irrigation practices including promotion of HEIS and
                         associated crop diversification; (d) capacity building of farmers and he Agriculture Extension
                         Department (AED) in pest management as well as knowledge sharing with international
                         organizations; and (e) awareness campaign through mass media. To implement this sub-component
                         together with provision of training in HEIS O&M, the project will finance technical assistance and
                         training consultants with experience in implementation and operation, irrigation scheduling, crop
                         technologies and irrigation agronomy, particularly for the high value crops. Under the ongoing
                         project, an agency was successfully recruited to help in provision of services for input supply
                         producing good results. Continuing with this approach will certainly improve AED services.

                         Component D: Project Management, Technical Assistance (TA), Training, Studies, Monitoring and
                         Evaluation (Total USD 13.0 million, IDA USD 13.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support project management, construction supervision, M&E, studies, technical
                         assistance, and staff training.

                         Sub-Component D1. Detailed Design and Construction Supervision (USD 9.0 million, IDA 9.0
                         million). Under this sub-component, the project will finance design and construction consultants to
                         supervise construction of the water courses improvements, HEIS and flood shelters. They will work
                         closely with the Project Implementation Unit, TA consultants and M&E consultants. They will also
                         carry out various studies to be prepared under the project.

                         Sub-Component D2. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) of Project Impact (USD 3.0 million, IDA
                         USD 3.0 million). This sub-component will cover M&E of the project’s impacts. The M&E activities
                         will provide continuous feedback to the Government of Sindh on the project’s performance and
                         impact of its various components. To implement this sub-component, independent consultants will be
                         recruited to monitor and evaluate: (a) implementation progress, including spot checking of works and
                         quality of construction, and targeting of works as compared to agreed criteria; (b) project impacts;
                         and (c) environmental and social impacts particularly on small and marginalized farmers and female
                         farmers. The DGAWM will also have dedicated staff working in M&E activities and act as
                         counterparts for these consultants.

                         Sub-Component D3. Studies and Training (USD 1.0 million, IDA USD 1.0 million). This sub-
                           component will support strategic studies and pilot projects that will be identified during project
                           implementation. It will also support training, in particular training for project staff, and the provision
                           of TA when and where needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is located in the irrigated areas of Sindh province. The area is characterized by flat lands
                           with inadequate land drainage features. Irrigation returns and drainage effluent are drained either
                           through man-made surface drains or collected in naturally occurring depressions, which are also used
                           as fish ponds. Due to limited drainage, secondary salinization is one of the reasons for land
                           degradation in the province. Extensive irrigation network with inadequate drainage also creates
                           localized waterlogging, another important reason for land degradation. Soils in the province,
                           otherwise, are fertile and very productive. Right bank of the Indus river is generally cultivated with
                           wheat-rice and the left bank is known for wheat-cotton and wheat-sugarcane cropping pattern.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           DGAWM office will mainly be responsible for the implementation of the project. This office is
                           currently implementing Bank-funded Sindh OFWM project and successfully implemented project
                           ESMP. DGAWM office has appointed one of its Deputy Director as the environmental focal person
                           who through support of Water Management Officers at Taluka level are responsible to provide
                           oversight for the implementation of ESMP. DG's office had also hired consultancy supervision
                           consultants, which also includes support to implement ESMP. Besides, DG's office has experience of
                           working with other donors. An acceptable capacity for the preparation and implementation of Bank’s
                           safeguards policies and country’s Environmental regulatory requirements therefore exist, however it
                           will further be strengthened during the implementation of proposed project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              The proposed project interventions are limited
                           BP 4.01                                                to an existing gravity-fed irrigation command
                                                                                  area where agricultural practices are centuries
                                                                                  old. Environmental impacts of the proposed
                                                                                  project interventions are generally positive,
                                                                                  including increased efficiency inthe irrigation
                                                                                  water use, conservation of scarce water
                                                                                  resources and improved groundwater and soil
                                                                                  salinity throughout the project area. However,
                                                                                  during the project implementation there is a
                                                                                  possibility of some low to moderate, short-
                                                                                  duration impacts such as damage to assets, loss
                                                                                  of land and trees, soil erosion etc, therefore the
                                                                                  project has been categorized as ‘B’. The project
                                                                                  is undertaking a comprehensive environmental
                                                                                  assessment, which includes preparation of an
                                                                 environmental management framework/plan to
                                                                 mitigate the potential negative environmental
                                                                 impacts likely to occur due to the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    As the project interventions are limited to an
                                                                 existing irrigation system with most of the
                                                                 activities happening at the farm level, the
                                                                 project will not have any negative impact on
                                                                 any of the natural habitats present in the
                                                                 province including national parks, wetlands and/
                                                                 or any other environmentally sensitive areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The project is limited to an existing irrigation
                                                                 command with no effect on any natural or
                                                                 planted forests. The project will also not cause
                                                                 any changes in the established water rights in
                                                                 the area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   There is a potential for the increased pesticide
                                                                 use resulting due mainly to increased water
                                                                 supplies at the tail of the irrigation system. The
                                                                 borrower will prepare a pest management plan
                                                                 to advise, guide the farmers on mitigation of
                                                                 some of the adverse impacts likely to happen
                                                                 due to the increased pesticide use.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    As no new irrigation system and/or agricultural
                         BP 4.11                                 area is to be developed, there are no chances of
                                                                 adverse impacts on any of the physical or
                                                                 cultural resources within the province. Even the
                                                                 rehabilitation activities under the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 not have any negative impact on any of such
                                                                 resources present in Sindh province.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no indigenous groups of people
                                                                 present in Sindh province that fall under the
                                                                 World Bank’s definition of indigenous people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   This policy is triggered given the possible land
                         4.12                                    needs for some civil works, particularly for the
                                                                 construction of some 70 new shelters. These
                                                                 land needs are expected to be met through
                                                                 community donor or possible negotiated market
                                                                 transactions. The borrower will develop an
                                                                 involuntary resettlement framework to address
                                                                 any possible adverse impacts associated with
                                                                 land needs.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    The project interventions do not involve any
                                                                 kind of works on small/medium or large dams
                                                                 including diversion dams in the project area
                                                                 therefore this policy is not triggered. Majority of
                                                                                                                                 the activities are limited to the existing
                                                                                                                                 irrigation system and those too at the farm level.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           The project area is located in the Indus River
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            Basin which is an international waterway thus
                                                                                                                                 the international waterways safeguard under OP
                                                                                                                                 7.50 is triggered. The project interventions
                                                                                                                                 essentially improve water use and delivery
                                                                                                                                 efficiency and improve drainage
                                                                                                                                 byimprovement of watercourses and better field
                                                                                                                                 water application practices, land leveling, and
                                                                                                                                 high efficiency irrigation system.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Sindh province is part of Pakistan and is not part
                                 7.60                                                                                            of any disputed territory with the neighboring
                                                                                                                                 countries.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is envisaged that safeguards related studies will be completed before appraisal, but in case of
                                      any comments during appraisal, the studies will be revised. November 30, 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mahwash Wasiq

                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 12-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                                                                                               Date: 12-Nov-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
