                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7789
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                          Project ID:    P145813
                            Project Name:      PK Sindh Irrigated Agriculture Productivity Enhancement Project (P145813)
                            Task Team          Mahwash Wasiq
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          11-Aug-2014                       Estimated   13-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), Crops (25%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (30%),
                                              Analysis of economic growth (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     257.71           Total Bank Financing:                199.31
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        58.40
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              199.31
                              Total                                                                                    257.71
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve agriculture productivity for small and medium size
                           farmers in Sindh.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         The project will be implemented in 6 years and have the following components:
                         Component A: Community Water Infrastructure Improvement (Total: US$127.8 million, IDA US$
                         100.4 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       Sub-Component A1: Community Water Course Improvement (Total US$114.2 million, IDA
                         US$86.8 million). The component will assist Government of Sindh efforts to improve the tertiary
                         level water distribution systems (watercourses) where water losses are highest. In Sindh, there are
                         46,699 water courses out of which 28,856 have been improved. Of the remaining 17,843, about
                         5,500 will be improved through the provision of lining (corresponding to 30 percent of watercourse
                         length). Lining of water courses in general and in Sindh in particular has three advantages: (1) it
                         decreases conveyance losses and prevents seepage to groundwater aquifers which is mostly saline;
                         (2) it helps to deliver water faster to the farmers’ fields, so they can take advantage of the full
                         duration of an irrigation cycle under the wara-bundi system; and (3) it ensures equity in water
                         distribution between head and tail users of watercourses.

                         2.       Activities under this sub-component will include development of selection criteria for
                         watercourse selection, farmer mobilization, and establishment of Water Course Associations (WCAs)
                         and their registration, survey and design, and construction. Generally two types of lining will be
                         available for the farmers to choose from: precast concrete parabolic lining (PCPL) segments or
                         traditional rectangular brick masonry lining. The lining will be provided after the earthen section has
                         been improved and realigned. In addition to lining, concrete water outlet structures will be installed
                         for water diversion to the field over the entire length of watercourses.

                         3.      The farmers will co-finance 24 percent of the costs through provision of skilled and unskilled
                         labor. An estimated 137,000 farm families will benefit during the first phase of the project, which
                         covers 5,500 watercourses in 24 districts.

                         4.       Farmer mobilization, survey and design will be carried out by 100 Field Teams based in all
                         24 districts. Training in farmer mobilization and other aspects will be provided to the field teams by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Technical Assistance & Training (TAT) consultants. Design verification and construction
                         supervision and quality control will be performed by Project Implementation Supervision (PIS)
                         Consultants. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) consultants will carry out the third party monitoring
                         of physical progress, impact assessment, and implementation of environmental and social
                         management plans.

                         5.        Sub-Component A2: Mitigating Flood Risk for the Poor (Total US$13.6 million, IDA US
                         $13.6 million). To extend the benefits of the project to rural poor, this subcomponent will finance the
                         provision of 432 flood shelters of three types in the most vulnerable seven districts of Sindh. These
                         flood shelters are especially important for the landless and the very poor, particularly women,
                         children, and elderly and disabled people along with their belongings. Their life savings and
                         belongings include the animals they own and food stock they consume. Current design provides
                         shelter for 121,000 people and about 129,000 cattle in the most affected districts. Some of the
                         shelters are designed to be used for community activities during non-flood seasons. There, local
                         populations can exchange ideas on farming, animal husbandry, health, nutrition, and education - and
                         women can share their many talents in crafts for which Sindh is famous. Strong community
                         participation and willingness to contribute in kind with strict norms will be used for wider
                         community participation. As such, it is envisaged that these centers will change the current social
                         dynamics in the rural areas and improve social cohesion, which is urgently needed.




                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         6.       The land for construction will be largely public or community owned land located in non-
                         cultivable areas preferably on higher ground. An agreement has been reached with the Provincial
                         Disaster Management Authority (PDMA) that once constructed, these shelters will be transferred
Public Disclosure Copy




                         officially to them for operations and maintenance with additional agreement for some that will be
                         used for community activities. The PDMA will be invited to engage closely during implementation.
                         Component B: Promotion and Installation of High Efficiency Irrigation Systems (Total US$66.6
                         million, IDA US$40.6 million)

                         7.       This component will support (a) the introduction and installation of high efficiency irrigation
                         systems (HEISs) such as drippers and bubblers for horticulture, floriculture, vegetables, and other
                         high value crops grown on small commercial farms as well as (b) the introduction and distribution of
                         kitchen garden drip irrigation kits for female headed households and landless farmers.
                         8.       The system will be provided to the farmers on a 40 percent cost sharing basis and will be
                         installed by service providers who will also provide a technical assistance package for the famers in
                         operations and maintenance of the system. Additional training and assistance will be provided by the
                         HEIS specialist in the field teams assisted by the TAT consultants.
                         9.       Sub-component B1: Small and medium-sized HEISs for 2 ha (5 acres), 4 ha (10 acres), and
                         10 ha (25 acres) farms (Total US$64.6 m, IDA US$40.5 m). This sub-component will assist small
                         and medium sized farmers to install and operate HEIS drippers and bubblers for growing high value
                         crops. Under the project 2,600 HEISs will be installed on 14,300 ha (35,000 acres) of irri¬gat¬ed and
                         irrigable land. Criteria for site selection and service providers are provided in Annex 2. Preference
                         will be assigned to 4 to 10 ha farms because of their increased pro¬fi¬ta¬bility, ranging from an
                         EIRR of 15 to 43 percent.

                         10.      Given the novelty of this technology in Sindh, a social awareness and farmer
                         mobi¬li¬za¬tion cam¬paign will be initiated and carried out by the field team with assistance from
                         TAT consultants. Training will include HEIS design, installa¬tion, operation and mainte¬nance,
                         irrigation scheduling, crop technologies, irrigation agro¬no¬my, and crop diversification.
                         11.      Sub-component B2: HEIS Demonstration Sites and Kitchen Garden HEIS kits (Total US$2.1
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million, IDA US$1.8 million). This sub-component will include 48 demonstration sites of 2 ha (5
                         acres), two in each district; and finance the associat¬ed training of department staff, SSCs and
                         farmers including women in the installation, ope¬ra¬tion, and main¬tenance of the HEISs.

                         12.      A kitchen garden HEIS kit consists of drip irrigation equipment for a plot of 10m x 10m =
                         0.01 ha (0.025 acre) including a small water storage of 160 liter (40 gallon) with a convey¬ance pipe
                         for the daily provision of water. Whereas the 100 kitchen garden HEIS kits for demonstration
                         purposes will be provided free of charge, individual households requesting a HEIS kit will need to
                         contribute 10 percent of the investment cost of US$50. It will address the poorest elements of rural
                         Sindh: 10,000 female headed house¬¬¬holds and 10,000 landless farmers, altogether 20,000
                         households.

                         Component C: Improved Agriculture Practices (Total US$24.0 million, IDA US$19.0 million)
                         13.      To increase the benefits of enhanced water availability from watercourse lining and high
                         efficiency irrigation systems, and to improve the application use of appropriate crop inputs, this
                         component will support provision of precision land leveling and deep ripping; improvement in
                         irrigation agronomy; demonstration of and training and assistance in improved and modern
                         technologies and methods to increase irrigation efficiency and agriculture productivity. In particular,
                         the component will provide assistance in crop protection, input application, crop diversification, field
                         irrigation techniques, and training, covering training of service providers and farmers, training of

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         trainers, and establishment of farmers’ information kiosks. This component will include the
                         following sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sub-Component C1: Laser Land Leveling and Deep Ripping (Total US$9.4 million, IDA US$4.4
                         million). Under this sub-component, the project will provide laser guided precision land leveling and
                         associated deep ripping equipment and training in its use to help farmers save irrigation water, curtail
                         irrigation time, improve efficiency of agriculture inputs such as fertilizers, and achieve uniform seed
                         germination, resulting in increased crop yields.

                         Sub-Component C2: Improved Agriculture Production Technology (Total US$12.2 million, IDA US
                         $12.2 million). Under this sub-component the project will support training of farmers to improve
                         their crop and irrigation agronomy practices. Interventions will include: (a) establishing Farmer Field
                         Schools with a focus on IPM (b) training of FFS facilitators (c) in-country exposure visits for farmers
                         (d) demonstration of rearing beneficial insects on the farm and (e) training in crop production under
                         High Efficiency Irrigation System (the drip system).

                         Sub-Component C3: Technical Assistance and Training (TAT) Consultants (Total US$2.4 million,
                         IDA US$2.4 million).
                         To implement the above activities, including the necessary training under HEIS, an experienced
                         consultant firm will be employed with expertise in community mobilization, field irrigation
                         techniques, salinity management, irrigation scheduling, crop production technologies, irrigation
                         agronomy, integrated pest management under the FFS methodology, and post-harvest management
                         technologies. Areas of training for HEIS will include HEIS installation, operation and repair, crop
                         diversification, crop production under HEIS, soil moisture measurement, and fertilizer application.
                         For HEIS they will train the concerned staff of the field teams and other public sector staff as
                         trainers. In addition, the consultancy will support management of the various piloting activities such
                         as HEIS, and training of trainers for operators in laser land leveling and deep ripping.

                         COMPONENT D: PAROJEDT MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING AND EVALUATION (US
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $39.3 million, IDA US$39.3 million)
                         This component will support the cost of project implementation and management, technical
                         assistance for design and construction supervision, M&E consultants, studies, audits and staff
                         training.

                         Sub-Component D1: Supervision and Implementation Assistant Consultants (PSIAC) (US$8.3
                         million, IDA US$8.3 million). Under this sub-component, a consulting firm will be recruited to (i)
                         assist the PIU in overall project implementation and management including technical, procurement,
                         financial management, (ii) engineering and designs, construction supervision; ensuring quality and
                         timely completion of works under all project components and activities; and (iii) timely completion
                         of strategic studies and pilot projects that will be identified during project implementation. They will
                         work closely with the PIU, TAT and M&E consultants, suppliers, contractors, and farmers.
                         Sub-Component D2: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Consultants (US$2.7 million, IDA US$2.7
                         million). This sub-component will cover M&E of the project and impact assessment by third party
                         independent consultants, who will report directly to the Project Steering Committee. The M&E
                         activities will provide continuous feedback to the Government of Sindh on the project’s performance
                         and impact of its various components. To implement this sub-component, independent consultants
                         will be recruited to monitor and evaluate before and after each construction season to review: (a)
                         implementation progress, including spot checking of works and quality of construction, and targeting
                         of works as compared to agreed criteria; (b) project intermediate impacts; and (c) environmental and

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         social impacts particularly on small and marginalized farmers and female farmers. The DGAEWM
                         will also have dedicated staff working in M&E activities and act as counterparts for these
                         consultants. The consultants will also be responsible for establishing a Management Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         System (MIS) and ICT based monitoring program for all project components and activities.

                         Sub-Component D3: Project Management Costs Consultants (US$28.4 million, IDA US$28.4
                         million).
                         This sub-component will finance incremental staffs which are to be recruited to enhance the
                         implementing capacity of the project implementation unit, and incremental operation costs for
                         running project district offices and field offices to supplement their office and other logistic supports,
                         strategic studies and feasibility for pilot projects that will be identified during project
                         implementation. It will also support implementation of various plans such as Environmental
                         Management Plan, Social Management Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework, Grievance Redress
                         Mecha nism, and Gender Action Plan.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the irrigated areas of Sindh province. The area is characterized by flat lands
                         with inadequate land drainage features. Irrigation returns and drainage effluent are drained either
                         through man-made surface drains or collected in naturally occurring depressions, which are also used
                         as fish ponds. Due to limited drainage, secondary salinization is one of the reasons for land
                         degradation in the province. Extensive irrigation network with inadequate drainage also creates
                         localized waterlogging, another important reason for land degradation. Soils in the province,
                         otherwise, are fertile and very productive. Right bank of the Indus river is generally cultivated with
                         wheat-rice and the left bank is known for wheat-cotton and wheat-sugarcane cropping pattern.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaohua Zhang (GURDR)
                         Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Samina Mussarat Islam (GURDR)
                         Fouad Muhammad Khan (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The proposed project interventions are limited to
                          BP 4.01                                              an existing gravity-fed irrigation command area
                                                                               where agricultural practices are centuries old.
                                                                               Environmental impacts of the proposed project
                                                                               interventions are generally positive, including
                                                                               increased efficiency inthe irrigation water use,
                                                                               conservation of scarce water resources and
                                                                               improved groundwater and soil salinity
                                                                               throughout the project area. However, during the
                                                                               project implementation there is a possibility of
                                                                               some low to moderate, short-duration impacts
                                                                               such as damage to assets, loss of land and trees,
                                                                               soil erosion etc, therefore the project has been
                                                                               categorized as ‘B’. The project is undertaking a
                                                                               comprehensive environmental assessment, which


                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                                                                         includes preparation of an environmental
                                                                         management framework/plan to mitigate the
                                                                         potential negative environmental impacts likely to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         occur due to the project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            As the project interventions are limited to an
                                                                         existing irrigation system with most of the
                                                                         activities happening at the farm level, the project
                                                                         will not have any negative impact on any of the
                                                                         natural habitats present in the province including
                                                                         national parks, wetlands and/or any other
                                                                         environmentally sensitive areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project is limited to an existing irrigation
                                                                         command with no effect on any natural or planted
                                                                         forests. The project will also not cause any
                                                                         changes in the established water rights in the area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           There is a potential for the increased pesticide use
                                                                         resulting due mainly to increased water supplies
                                                                         at the tail of the irrigation system. The borrower
                                                                         has prepared a pest management plan to advise,
                                                                         guide the farmers on mitigation of some of the
                                                                         adverse impacts likely to happen due to the
                                                                         increased pesticide use.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            As no new irrigation system and/or agricultural
                         BP 4.11                                         area is to be developed, there are no chances of
                                                                         adverse impacts on any of the physical or cultural
                                                                         resources within the province. Even the
                                                                         rehabilitation activities under the project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         have any negative impact on any of such
                                                                         resources present in Sindh province.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous groups of people present
                                                                         in Sindh province that fall under the World
                                                                         Bank’s definition of indigenous people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This policy is triggered given the possible land
                         4.12                                            needs forthe construction of 70 new flood
                                                                         shelters. IA agreed to make all possible efforts to
                                                                         use the free of cost lands through voluntary
                                                                         donations of communities’ common lands, lands
                                                                         donations by local or district governments or
                                                                         other government line agencies. But in case of
                                                                         non-availability, there is a remote possibility of
                                                                         acquiring private lands through Land Acquisition
                                                                         Act of Pakistan at current market rates/
                                                                         replacement costs.. The borrower has developed a
                                                                         Land Acquisition and Resettlement Planning
                                                                         Framework to fully and sufficiently mitigate any
                                                                         possible adverse impacts associated with lands



                                                                 Page 6 of 13
                                                                                need.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International           Yes             The project area is located in the Indus River
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                Basin which is an international waterway thus the
                                                                                international waterways safeguard under OP 7.50
                                                                                is triggered. The project interventions essentially
                                                                                improve water use and delivery efficiency and
                                                                                improve drainage byimprovement of
                                                                                watercourses and better field water application
                                                                                practices, land leveling, and high efficiency
                                                                                irrigation system.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 Sindh province is part of Pakistan and is not part
                            7.60                                                of any disputed territory with the neighboring
                                                                                countries.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is not expected to have any large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative
                              environmental impacts or safeguards issues. Following are some of the potential impacts of the
                              project;
                              Watercourse improvement. The potentially negative impacts of watercourse improvement could
                              include; loss of flora, pollution of irrigation water by deterrents and soaps due to increased
                              sanitary and washing use, increased use of pesticides due to availability of additional water and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              crop cultivation, un-attended excavated earth/silt due to rehabilitation, temporary diversion
                              channels left un-attended, cutting of trees, shrubs and disturbance to ground vegetation. Improper
                              maintenance of water courses can potentially cause silting and clogging of these channels, thus
                              reducing the irrigation efficiency and water availability. The water course lining while conserving
                              water by reducing the water seepage from the water courses can also potentially reduce the
                              groundwater recharge thus affecting among others the drinking water source for the local
                              population.
                              High Efficiency Irrigation Systems. Impacts could include use of water stored in small water tanks
                              for drinking purposes (when potable water is not available) as well as safety concerns for animals
                              and small children. Salt buildup can also be a potential impact. The flood irrigation helps in
                              leaching of salts present in the irrigation water (particularly when groundwater is used) from the
                              soil thus avoiding salt build up in the crop root zone. However, the proposed high efficiency
                              irrigation system may potentially lead to salt build up in the crop root zone since the leaching is
                              unlikely to take place with the controlled irrigation. To mitigate this drip irrigation system should
                              be preferred for row crops and for areas having loamy soils.
                              Flood Shelters. Potential environmental impacts could include cutting of trees for construction of
                              the shelters. In case of private land acquisition, the project will cause involuntary resettlement
                              impacts.
                              Conflicts in Water Supply Rights. Increased irrigation water availability as a result of water course
                              improvement and/or adopting high efficiency irrigation techniques can potentially cause local


                                                                        Page 7 of 13
                           conflicts among the communities.
                           Disruption of Local Routes. During the construction activities especially the lining of water
                           courses of the project, local routes can potentially be blocked adversely affecting the local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities and their livestock.
                           Impacts on Women, Children, Vulnerable Groups, and Indigenous People. The project
                           interventions will generally benefit the land owners and growers, however, these interventions are
                           unlikely to negatively affect vulnerable groups such as poor, women and children.
                           Water Borne and Water-related Diseases. Construction and operation of irrigation schemes can
                           potentially cause water borne and water-related diseases. In particular, the ponds constructed to
                           store water can provide breeding areas for mosquitoes, potentially causing malaria and dengue.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Water resources development may potentially cause intensification and expansion of cultivation,
                           thus increasing the usage of pesticides and herbicides. A comprehensive Integrated Pest
                           Management Plan has been prepared that includes biological, cultural and environmental means
                           propagation to minimize pest usage.

                           One of the primary long term climate change related impacts in South Asia, especially in canal
                           irrigated area would be the stress on water resources and intermittent flooding due to increased
                           frequency of higher intensity extreme weather events. The project addresses these concerns from
                           multiple dimensions. On the one hand, by improving irrigation efficiency the project aims to
                           conserve an important and potential scarce resource (going forward) in Sindh i.e. water. Better
                           prepared water courses help improve the reliability of farming practice as a source of income at the
                           tail ends of the watercourses and thus also contribute towards food security. Flood shelters serve
                           as an important disaster preparedness measure in an area where extreme weather activity has
                           caused significant loss of lives and livelihood especially in recent years. In case of private land
                           acquisition for flood shelters, involuntary resettlement impacts will occur on affected persons and
                           their socio-economic conditions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Following alternatives were considered during project design and environmental impacts
                           mitigation analysis;
                           No-project Alternative. The ‘no-project’ alternative is not acceptable since in that scenario, a
                           considerable amount of irrigation water will continue to be wasted. As described earlier, the
                           irrigation sector suffers from among other factors low surface water delivery efficiency as well as
                           wasteful on-farm water use, and only 35-40 percent of the irrigation water reaches from the canal
                           head to the crop root zone. No project alternative has greater environmentally negative impacts.
                           Alternative Irrigation Methods. Flood irrigation has been the traditional method in the country for
                           ages. In this method, the entire cultivation field is flooded with the irrigation water. This method is
                           time consuming and hence labor intensive, highly inefficient in terms of water usage, and also
                           results in other problems such as increased vulnerability to pest attacks and proliferation of weeds,
                           in turn resulting in the increased need of pesticides and weedicides. The high efficiency irrigation
                           methods proposed under the Project address all of these problems, in addition to achieving
                           enhanced yields and productivity of the farms. The high efficiency irrigation methods generally
                           result in the reduced need of farm inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, fungicides, and herbicides,
                           as mentioned above. The overall result of the high efficiency irrigation system is therefore a much
                           reduced usage of chemical inputs. High efficiency irrigation methods are the preferred option for
                           irrigating the cultivation fields in the country.

                                                                      Page 8 of 13
                           Alternative Land Leveling Methods. The conventional leveling with the help of tractors or graders
                           is the major alternate to the laser land leveling, which is included in the proposed project. Through
                           the conventional methods, land cannot be leveled with precision; hence the advantages of leveling
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cannot be fully achieved. Unleveled fields result in improper irrigation, wastage of irrigation water
                           and also require additional farm labor. On the basis of the above, it is evident that the precision
                           land leveling through laser leveling is a preferred mode of farm leveling.
                           Alternative Methods of On-farm Water Conservation. The alternatives available for the on-farm
                           water conservation include i) piped conveyance system; re-alignment and brick-lining the entire
                           length of the water course; and re-aligning and improving the water course, but keeping it earthen
                           (ie, without brick-lining). No major difference exists among the above options in terms of the
                           environmental and social consequences, except that the third option would not fully achieve the
                           objective of water conservation and associated benefits. The cost of the first alternative would be
                           prohibitive with marginal benefits compared to the second alternative, and the reduction of water
                           losses will not be substantial in case of the third option. Therefore, the benefit-cost ratio is best for
                           the second alternative, which has been selected for the proposed project.
                           Alternative Methods of Implementing the Proposed Initiatives. The beneficiaries of the high
                           efficiency irrigation/laser land leveling/water course improvement schemes under the proposed
                           project would be required to share the cost of establishing the schemes. Once established, these
                           schemes will be operated and maintained by the beneficiaries themselves. This arrangement will
                           ensure ‘ownership’ of these schemes by the beneficiaries, and thus the sustainability of the
                           initiative. Other options include i) full cost of the scheme to be covered by the Project; ii) full cost
                           of the scheme to be covered by the beneficiary. No major difference exists among the above
                           options in terms of the environmental and social consequences, except that the selected option will
                           ensure beneficiary and community participation. The first option would result in lack of ownership
                           of the schemes by the beneficiaries, while the second option may fail to attract the farmers to
                           adopt the new initiatives included under the proposed project.
                           Alternative Methods for Acquisition of Lands for Flood Shelters: Implementing Agency will make
                           all possible efforts not to acquire private lands, to avoid involuntary resettlement impacts. The
                           lands are expected to be taken through donations by communities, local/district governments or
Public Disclosure Copy




                           other government line agencies. A due diligence will be conducted for each sub-project to ensure
                           that provision of lands through donations would not cause any adverse impacts on any private or
                           public assets or income.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A detailed Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) has been conducted that assesses the project
                           interventions for their potential impacts, identifies negative impacts, proposes mitigation
                           measures, presents institutional arrangements and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for
                           ensuring implementation of mitigation measures and prescribes a monitoring and reporting
                           regime. Further the EIA provides environmental checklists and guidelines for all interventions that
                           involve physical works of any nature.
                           Though the project does not involve distribution of or use of any pesticides however the change in
                           water usage may affect the pesticide usage regime in the project area. The Integrated Pest
                           Management policy is thus triggered and an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) has been
                           prepared. Activities to be undertaken as part of the IPMP for SIAPEP include biological and social
                           control methods (capacity building) highlighted under Component C of the project as well as
                           monitoring and testing to be carried out under the IPM for this project as well as the IPMP for
                           SAGP.
                           Environmental impacts for all project interventions are identified. Potential impacts include


                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                           decrease in groundwater recharge, loss or flora or cutting of trees, increase in siltation due to
                           improper disposal of excavated material or inadequate design or construction of watercourses and
                           impact on inclusive access to resources for all genders. Mitigation measures have been proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for all the potential impacts, none of which are expected to be intense, expansive or irreversible.
                           Mitigation measures include compensatory tree plantation by the ratio of 1 to 4 trees for each tree
                           felled, construction of washing bays to continue ensured access to resources for women and
                           measures for adequate disposal of excavated material. An IPMP that includes capacity building,
                           biological control and monitoring measures has been prepared to address pesticide usage concerns.
                           A comprehensive institutional strengthening mechanism has been developed to address
                           environmental and other safeguards concerns. The overall responsibility for implementation of
                           EIA and EMP lies with DGAEWM. In addition he will be assisted by a senior environmental and
                           social specialist and an environmental focal person in the PIC. The environmental and social
                           specialist will be responsible for collection of completed checklists and other documentation from
                           regional offices and compiling quarterly environmental progress reports. The environmental and
                           social specialist will also design and implement a capacity building program to ensure compliance
                           with the EIA and EMP. Implementation of EIA and EMP shall be carried out through the regional
                           offices of the Agriculture extension. A biennial Third Party Validation of EMP implementation
                           shall be conducted by the monitoring and evaluation consultant.
                           The EIA and EMP for the project build upon significant lessons learned during the implementation
                           of Sindh On-Farm Water Management Project. To ensure that compliance with environmental
                           safeguards policies is improved, institutional arrangements and monitoring parameters have been
                           designed in the current EIA and EMP to make environmental compliance a key feature of project
                           implementation from day one.
                           The borrower has developed a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Planning Framework (LARF)
                           to avoid or minimize adverse impacts, which may cause due to acquisition of private land or
                           donated lands under people use. The procedures laid down in LARF are in conformity with the
                           World Bank Resettlement Policy 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, as well as the applicable laws
                           and regulations of Government of Pakistan and Sindh. It has also procedures for due diligence to
                           ensure that donated lands would not cause any adverse impacts. The purpose of this LARF is to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           provide policy and legal framework and procedures to manage Land Acquisition and Resettlement
                           (LAR). And in case of acquisition of private land, Resettlement Plans will be prepared by IA,
                           which will be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank. Resettlement Plans will be fully
                           implemented before start of civil works at the respective sub-projects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A stakeholder analysis was conducted under the Social Assessment of the project to identify
                           project stakeholder and their stakes. The key stakeholder include Agriculture Department,
                           Government of Sindh; administrative, management and executing field staff of Agriculture
                           Engineering & Water Management Wing; Sister Wings of Agriculture Department and Water
                           Management, Water Course Associations; Civil Society Organizations; supplies and service
                           providers, Project Supervision and Implementation Consultants, Monitoring and Evaluation
                           Consultants and contractors, and more importantly direct beneficiaries who are the small and
                           medium size male and female land owners, and local communities in the project area. The
                           secondary stakeholders/indirect beneficiaries include marginal owners-cum-tenants, tenants and
                           agricultural laborers, and small village-based artisans. The project focused is needed particular on
                           women as the most disadvantaged among the target groups. Consultations with intended
                           beneficiaries, landless and female farmers were conducted on project interventions through
                           meetings Focus Group Discussions in different parts of Sindh, whereas discussions with the


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           institutional stakeholders were arranged in consultation workshops. Consultative workshops were
                           held with project beneficiaries and other local communities at Hyderabad, T. M. Khan,
                           Mirpurkhas, Nawabshah, Sukkur, Shikarpur, Larkana and Thatta. The process of stakeholder
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultation was conceived to integrate stakeholder concerns in project design. The consultations
                           also helped document local knowledge with respect to the various sets of issues and concerns. In
                           general, both the institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries appreciated the project objectives and
                           expressed a desire to participate in the implementation. Key concerns included equitable
                           distribution of benefits and attention to environmentally and socially negative aspects of project
                           implementation.

                           The LARF, EIA and EMP will be disclosed on the DAE&WM (IA) website and the World Bank
                           InfoShop. And in case of acquisition of private land, the World Bank approved Resettlement Plans
                           will be disclosed in the same manner and will also be translated into local language(s), and will be
                           disseminated among affected persons through localized means of communication.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         04-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         04-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process: Disclosure of LARF
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      21-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         04-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                    Page 12 of 13
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   Name: Mahwash Wasiq
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)   Date: 12-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Page 13 of 13
