                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8641
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Apr-2014, 28-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Russian Federation                Project ID:    P143159
                            Project Name:      Integrated Environmental Monitoring Project (P143159)
                            Task Team          Adriana Jordanova Damiano
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Apr-2014                       Estimated   25-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEN                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Information and communications (40%), Solid waste
                                              management (40%), General water, sanitation and flood prote ction sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (35%), Pollution management and
                                              environmental health (30%), Other environment and natural re sources
                                              management (20%), Climate change (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     153.00           Total Bank Financing:                 50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 103.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     50.00
                              Total                                                                                    153.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the national and selected regions’ capacity
                           to generate environmental monitoring data and provide accessible, quality and reliable environmental
                           monitoring information to various users from the public and private sectors.

                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         Specifically, the project will support methodological and technological enhancement of the
                         environmental monitoring network at federal level and selected pilot regions. This will include GIS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based and (remote sensing) services; enhancing data system of nationwide environmental
                         information which is used for monitoring, control, planning and assessment of the environment, and
                         research; establishment of compliance monitoring data system which contains data on pollution
                         loads; national GIS -based portal and modern equipment, that will allow expanding decision making
                         capacity of various users and thus strengthen the fundamentals of environmental management. The
                         project will support targeted regional programs for environmental monitoring in selected pilot
                         regions, including support to monitoring infrastructure and capacity of regional authorities for
                         region-sector specific environmental monitoring.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will take the form of an investment loan. The project will finance technical assistance (e.
                         g., studies, knowledge exchange, and training), investments in ICT (system design, software and
                         hardware), monitoring equipment, laboratory equipment etc. and will have four components: (1)
                         Support to institutional, regulatory-and methodological framework for environmental monitoring; (2)
                         Information technologies and systems of ecological monitoring; (3) Public access to environmental
                         information; and (4) Project management.
                         Component 1: Support to institutional, regulatory and methodological framework for environmental
                         monitoring (estimated cost US$15.0 million). This Component will address functional gaps in the
                         current environmental monitoring system. The activities will specifically include:(i) improvement of
                         regulatory tools for comprehensive ecological monitoring based on good international practice; (ii)
                         development of comprehensive environmental quality monitoring system and requirements for
                         homogeneity and representativeness of information in line with recommendations of international
                         organizations (e.g., WHO, WMO, OECD, UNECE) and good international practice (EU, USA,
                         Canada etc.); (iii) development of guidelines for the anthropogenic load impact assessment and
                         analysis of limiting and critical ecological factors; (iv) analysis of operational costs of regional
                         segments of existing and perspective USSEM subsystems in pilot regions, using management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accounting model for calculating the cost of environmental information products and economic
                         valuation of environmental performance; (v) development of methodology for collection and
                         processing of observation data, quality controls, formats and protocols for representativeness and
                         accuracy of data, as well as the creation and testing an interactive information model for specific
                         users and areas of application; (vi) staff training on new methodologies and use of new equipment
                         for:

                         •       MENR, agencies headquarters, regional offices and branches of the sub-systems of
                         ecological monitoring;
                         •       Research and information centers (e.g., Main Geophysical Observatory Voejkov, Scientific-
                         Research Institute of Atmospheric Air, (SRI," NPO “Typhoon”, Fedorov Institute of Applied
                         Geophysics, Federal Center for Geographic Information Systems, and the Russian Academy of
                         Science;
                         •       Territorial environmental and geo-information centers responsible for collection and
                         processing of environmental data.
                         During project preparation, an analysis will be carried out of existing departmental facilities for
                         processing and storage of environmental data, observation and data collection points, in order to
                         substantiate the subsequent system optimization and modernization, including observation
                         equipment, ICT and laboratory infrastructure requirements. The methodological framework for
                         operationalizing the monitoring system will be developed under Component 1 early on during project


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         implementation. This includes the methodological guidelines for dataset formats, archiving, spatial
                         visualization (harmonized with the principles of the European Monitoring and Evaluation Program
                         (EMEP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Information technology and environmental monitoring systems (estimated cost US
                         $125.0 million). This component will support two levels of monitoring infrastructure improvements:
                         (i) at regional level, through elimination of major technology gaps and moderniza tion of existing
                         observation system in the pilot regions. Candidate regions include the Arkhangelsk, Murmansk,
                         Kaluga, Chelyabinsk and Sverdlovsk oblasts and Krasnoyarski Krai (industrial areas), and Kostroma,
                         Voronezh, Smolensk oblasts (agricultural areas), all of which with high concentration of pollution in
                         densely populated areas, and (ii) at national level, through supporting integration and optimization of
                         the existing system for collection, processing and storage of environmental observation data; and
                         establishment of a single information space which allows for real time data processing, transmission,
                         integration and visualization, access and data sharing by a diverse group of users.

                         In selected pilot regions the project will support modernization of analytical laboratories directly
                         related to air, water and soil quality monitoring and a demonstration model for accounting of
                         anthropogenic impact and reporting, using spatial datasets for sector groups applicable to specific
                         users. During preparation the feasibility of including project support to wildlife monitoring sub-
                         systems in the pilot regions by equipping regional authorities with automated infrastructure for
                         monitoring and control will be determined.

                         In addition, this component will include the services of a System Integrator. His services will be key
                         to resolve a number of system integration tasks as follows:

                         •        Conducting a pre-project survey at the federal level and in the pilot regions, including the
                         analysis of information and telecommunication resources created and used by the federal and
                         regional authorities for assessment of negative environmental impacts and ecological monitoring, as
                         well as the analysis of human resource potential;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Carrying out the engineering design of the FIS of SFD, including federal and territorial
                         segments;
                         •        Providing technical support to the leading implementing agency and Project Implementation
                         Unit (PIU) in implementation of project activities - from formulation of technical requirements up to
                         performing the designer supervision over the execution of contracts for creation of system
                         components;
                         •        Ensuring system integration (format/logical, hardware and software compatibility of
                         individual complexes, subsystems and components of FIS of SFD.

                         Component 3: Public access to environmental information (estimated cost US$8.0 million). In Russia
                         the general public had limited capacity to participate in formulation of environmental policies.
                         Current GORF policies call for a shift towards broader involvement of public and a stronger role in
                         local environmental matters through:

                         (i)      Enhanced public access to environmental information. Specifically, the project will target
                         schools, community organizations to increase the demand for information and public understanding
                         of the factors affecting the environmental quality (e.g. surface and ground waters; air quality) and
                         health related impacts. Support will be provided to target groups in building awareness on
                         environment related human health risks.
                         (ii)     A website (in each pilot region) with visual maps of the spatial distribution of emission

                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                         levels and pollutants in selected urban centers. This will demonstrate innovative methods for
                         providing near-time reporting of spatial and temporal distribution of air pollutants in heavily
                         industrialized urban communities atmospheric dispersion models (ADMs), and regional Geographic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Information Systems (GIS).

                         The project will also support a series of events (i.e. conferences, workshop, scientific exchanges,
                         knowledge sharing events) on environmental monitoring, policy development, international best
                         practice, in respect of environmental managemen t and conservation with representation from federal
                         and regional executive bodies, academia and non-governmental organizations.

                         Component 4: Project management (estimated cost US$5.0 million). This component will finance
                         project management cost in relation to PIU management and staff, and operational cost to meet the
                         requirements of the Bank fiduciary policies on procurement, financial management, contract
                         management, reporting and safeguards.

                         2.       Implementation

                         The project activities are designed to facilitate the implementation of the environmental policy of the
                         Russian Federation. While successful implementation of the policies and regulations to a large extent
                         depends on timely and accurate information on environmental conditions, increasing the
                         transparency and access to information will have positive impact and will gradually change public
                         behavior and expand the demand for and possibility of public involvement in local environmental
                         matters. The project will be implemented over a five years period. The leading Implementing Agency
                         will be the Ministry of Natural Resources and Ecology of Russia (MNRE). Project implementation
                         will be carried out according to the principles of Resolution No. 43 of January 28, 2005, which
                         requires the selection of Project Implementation Unit (PIU) prior to project appraisal. For effective
                         implementation of administrative and technical functions, the PIU will be selected based on agreed
                         Terms of Reference to perform the following functions: (i) organization of competitive selection of
                         consultants and contractors in accordance with the rules of the World Bank; (ii) ensuring a target use
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the loan and co-financing funds; (iii) delivery of project and financial reporting under the project;
                         (iv) coordination of all project activities.

                         Financial provision for counterpart funds for preparation and project implementation are already
                         secured within the budget allocations of the Russian Federation and are linked to the lending pipeline
                         in the CPS. A principle approval of the project concept has been granted by Ministry of Finance and
                         Ministry of Economic Development to the effect that the project financing is provided in the federal
                         budget for planning period of 2014 - 2015, and also included in the external borrowing program of
                         the Russian Federation for 2013 and the planning period of 2014 - 2015.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented at national level and three pilot regions: Arkhangelskiy Kray,
                         Kaluzhskaya Oblast, and Krasnoyarskiy Kray.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                            BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The proposed project will support the development of a unified environmental monitoring system
                              as a pillar of the modernization of Russian environmental management system and research it will
                              not generate adverse environmental impacts. Furthermore the project investments will generate
                              positive environmental and social impacts as the result of establishing the enabling infrastructure
                              and methodological framework for improved capacity at national and regional level to produce
                              and supply reliable environmental information to various users. This will include data generation,
                              storage, interpretation, visualization and public access to environmental information.
                              Establishment of functioning unified monitoring system will contribute to prevention and
                              reduction of pollution, sustainable allocation and use of resources, deliver data to inform national
                              and international policies used to reduce impacts to human health and facilitate public
                              participation in environmental decision making. The use of GIS data content and services
                              describing the environmental conditions would also allow Russia and pilot states to generate
                              annual reports on the state of the environment which are compatible with its international
                              obligations. The project was assigned environmental assessment category “C” and therefore no EA
                              is required.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:




                                                                        Page 5 of 6
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            As category "C" the project does not require EIA and disclosure will be applicable to the ISDS.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Adriana Jordanova Damiano
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)                           Date: 28-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
