                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC6135

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Guyana                           Project ID:       P147924
                            Project Name:       Guyana Universal Secondary Education (P147924)
                            Task Team           Hongyu Yang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           04-Mar-2014                      Estimated         28-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      LCSHE                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Secondary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        10.00               Total Bank Financing:              10.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    10.00
                              Total                                                                          10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the Project is to increase the 11th grade survival rate and the number of students that
                           complete secondary education in Guyana’s Regions 3 and 4 (including Georgetown), by constructing
                           and equipping schools, training teachers, and distributing learning materials.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1: Constructing and equipping secondary schools (majority of the funs) – Two sub-
                           components would be supported:
                         (i)     Expansion of the GSS modality: Up to 6 new GSS would be established, 4 GSS in Region 4,
                         1 GSS in Region 3 and 1 GSS in Georgetown (with the final number depending on feasibility studies,
                         analysis of recent government-financed secondary schools, and other investment priorities). This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would consolidate 10 SDs into complete secondary schools, reduce severe overcrowding at 4 existing
                         GSS, and prepare for increasing student populations coming from the primary level to all GSS in
                         these areas;
                         (ii)    Furniture and Equipment of 6 GSS: This would include those GSS to be constructed under
                         the project, and would include necessary provisions for laboratories and specialist rooms required
                         under the secondary education curriculum.

                         Component 2: Improving teaching and learning – Two sub-components would be supported:
                         (i)      In-Service Teacher training and upgrading in mathematics: this would include: (a) improved
                         processes and capacity for teacher appraisal and diagnostic of training needs; (b) the upgrading of
                         unqualified mathematics teachers and the administration of qualification exams in mathematics; (c)
                         enhanced capacity of trainers at NCERD, CPCE and UG to provide this training; and (d) Reinforce
                         the existing MOE teacher policy, including by strengthening teacher support and supervision
                         system.. It would target secondary teachers in Regions 3 and 4 (including Georgetown) and would
                         focus on math and pedagogy, complementing other activities supported through the IDA-financed
                         Improving Teacher Education Project.
                         (ii)     Provision of learning materials, including ICTs: this would focus on: (a) mathematics,
                         including a pilot computer-assisted learning program that would promote innovation and provide
                         lessons for scaling up improved mastery of mathematics; and (b) expanded distribution of science
                         kits (already piloted by UNESCO). This sub-component would initially be restricted to Regions 3
                         and 4 in the first two years of implementation, and could be expanded to cover student-teachers in
                         their last year of training, or other regions in subsequent years.

                         Component 3: Management, Monitoring and Evaluation– Three sub-components would be
                         supported:
                         (i)       Education Information Management System (EMIS) for Secondary Education, through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         which school principals would be able to upload their administrative data directly. This would
                         benefit the entire secondary education sub-sector nationwide;
                         (ii)      Monitoring and Evaluation of Quality: this would include (a) an impact evaluation of the use
                         of ICTs for improving student learning outcomes in mathematics to assess effectiveness of
                         technology-assisted learning, and (b) support for application of UNESCO’s Learning Metrics to
                         secondary education (covering communication, numeracy, interaction, problem-solving, workplace
                         skills); and
                         (iii)     Project management and monitoring.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Preliminary plans are to create six secondary schools distributed within Region 4 (four schools),
                         Region 3 (one school), and in Georgetown (one school). Region 3 (Essequibo Islands – West
                         Demerara) and Region 4 (Demerara – Mahaica) are both located in coastal urban areas, near the
                         capitol city of Georgetown. These regions are on the east side of the Essequibo River surrounding
                         the capitol on the low-lying fertile coastal plain along which most of the population is concentrated.

                         While the projects will focus on meeting needs in these urban coastal areas, the final number and
                         specific locations of schools will depend on feasibility studies, analysis of recent government-
                           financed secondary schools, and other investment priorities. Proposed project activities and locations
                           will therefore be verified in a pre-appraisal mission during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Ministry of Education (MOE) would be the implementing agency. The MOE has extensive
                           experience implementing externally financed projects (World Bank, IDB, EFA-FTI). The Bank has
                           taken and continues to undertake measures (i.e., fiduciary and M&E training for the MOE and
                           Project staff, on-the-job training and the provision of advice on an ongoing basis) to strengthen the
                           MOE Planning Unit and its fiduciary capacities. The proposed Project would continue to support
                           analytical work and capacity building for existing staff, as well as the hiring of additional technical
                           and fiduciary specialists as needed. Technical responsibilities for implementation would lie with the
                           Department of Secondary Education, which reports to the Chief Education Officer and Permanent
                           Secretary. The proposed Project would leverage and build on this capacity and experience in both
                           agencies.

                           An Environmental Assessment and Management Plan (EAMP) will be developed for each site during
                           project preparation, and will contain descriptions of the proposed works, the environmental
                           conditions which may be affected, and a generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP) with
                           mitigation measures and model contracting clauses addressing environmental protection during
                           construction and operation. During project preparation, the roles of the respective agencies will be
                           explored and clarified, and the responsibility for implementing the EAMP will be clarified and
                           defined within the Operations Manual.

                           Periodic supervision missions by World Bank environmental and social specialists will verify the
                           development and implementation of the safeguards instruments, including the screening of
                           subprojects, the incorporation of mitigation measures into contract documents, and the execution of
                           field inspections and monitoring.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (LCSSO)
                           Michael J. Darr (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project is Category B in terms of potential
                           BP 4.01                                               environmental impacts, and OP4.01 is triggered.
                                                                                 The main environmental impacts expected of
                                                                                 the Project are localized, low and possible to
                                                                                 mitigate or prevent, and these will be related to
                                                                                 the construction and rehabilitation works
                                                                                 planned under Component 1. Construction
                                                                                 activities will create minor impacts such as dust,
                                                                                 noise, storage and disposal of debris, traffic and
                                                                                 utilities disruption, and safety of workers and
                                                                                 road users.
                                                                                 A simplified Environmental Assessment and
                                                                                 Management Plan (EAMP) will be prepared and
                                                            disclosed for each site that is commensurate
                                                            with the level of design (e.g. pre-feasibility,
                                                            feasibility, etc.). Each EAMP will include: i) a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            description of the project (e.g. location, size and
                                                            features of the new school); ii) a simple
                                                            description of the existing environmental and
                                                            social baseline conditions of the project site,
                                                            affected areas and communities; iii) an
                                                            assessment of the potential environmental and
                                                            social effects likely to occur (e.g. increased
                                                            noise levels and traffic disruption during
                                                            construction, safety issues, waste management
                                                            during construction and school operations
                                                            among other issues); iv) generic mitigation
                                                            measures applicable during the design and
                                                            construction phases (e.g. waste water and
                                                            sanitation services, generic health and safety
                                                            measures, etc.), which will be similar for each
                                                            of the 6 new schools; v) specific environmental
                                                            and social measures for each site to address any
                                                            site-specific problems; and, vi) legal and
                                                            institutional provisions (e.g. the environmental
                                                            permits to be acquired, governmental agencies
                                                            involved during constructions and operations,
                                                            etc.). The EAMP will also include mitigation
                                                            measures applicable during operations. For
                                                            example, waste management activities will be
                                                            implemented because Component 1 includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            provisions for laboratories and specialist rooms
                                                            required under the secondary education
                                                            curriculum.
                                                            The EAMP will include a public information
                                                            and communications strategy to help ease
                                                            concerns from secondary students and their
                                                            families, as well as to build buy-in for the
                                                            Project and tolerance for any temporary
                                                            inconveniences that the project may cause. The
                                                            project will also establish a grievance redress
                                                            mechanism that will collect complaints of the
                                                            communities and provide timely response.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   This policy is not triggered since the potential
                                                            impacts to natural habitats will not be
                                                            significant due to the location of the works
                                                            (adjacent to existing schools and in urban areas)
                                                            and the small scale of project interventions.
                                                            Any impacts on vegetation will be carefully
                                                            screened during project preparation and through
                                                                 provisions in the EAMP to ensure that natural
                                                                 habitats are not impacted.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This policy is not triggered because any impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 are expected to be small and very unlikely to
                                                                 affect management of forest resources.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    Pesticide may be used in small quantities for
                                                                 termite treatments of foundations and ceilings,
                                                                 or for vector control during school operations;
                                                                 however, the EAMP will specify that only
                                                                 licensed, authorized pest control specialists may
                                                                 provide these services.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    This policy is not triggered since there are no
                         BP 4.11                                 physical cultural resources at any of the existing
                                                                 school sites and the size of project/site is small.
                                                                 Given that the construction of new school and
                                                                 rehabilitation works could result in small
                                                                 earthworks, the EAMP will specify that site
                                                                 screening must be performed to avoid affecting
                                                                 physical cultural resources; that stakeholders
                                                                 contribute to project conceptual design; and,
                                                                 that chance-find procedures must be included in
                                                                 contracting documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   The current project sites are along the coastal
                                                                 zones in Regions 3, 4 and Georgetown and not
                                                                 in the regions of the hinterland where
                                                                 Amerindian populations reside. These project
                                                                 sites have been selected as the challenges of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 overcrowding are especially acute in these poor
                                                                 coastal urban regions – not so in the hinterland.
                                                                 Nevertheless, during project preparation if a
                                                                 decision is taken to include any of Component
                                                                 2’s activities in hinterland regions (for example
                                                                 the provision of learning materials including
                                                                 ICT’s) then the Indigenous Peoples Safeguard
                                                                 Policy (OP/BP 4.10) will be triggered and the
                                                                 relevant instruments (Frameworks and Plans)
                                                                 would be developed and associated
                                                                 consultations occur. At this stage therefore the
                                                                 IP Safeguard is TBD.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   Private land acquisition is not envisaged as
                         4.12                                    existing Government land/school sites have
                                                                 been selected. However, the Involuntary
                                                                 Resettlement Safeguard Policy (OP/BP 4.12) is
                                                                 TBD at this stage until the ownership status of
                                                                 the proposed sites can be screened and verified
                                                                 during project preparation and it can be
                                                                                                                                 determined whether the lands are free and clear.
                                                                                                                                 The Bank team will confirm whether there are
                                                                                                                                 any claims on the land. Should private land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 acquisition be entailed the project will trigger
                                                                                                                                 the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard Policy
                                                                                                                                 (OP/BP 4.12) and prepare relevant instruments
                                                                                                                                 (Resettlement Policy Framework or
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Plans) as necessary prior to project
                                                                                                                                 appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            This policy is not triggered because the Project
                                                                                                                                 will not finance the construction of new dams
                                                                                                                                 nor will support other investments that rely on
                                                                                                                                 services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             Schools to be constructed are not in disputed
                                 7.60                                                                                            areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Feb-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguards related studies will be updated between now and March 3, 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Hongyu Yang

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 13-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Janet K. Entwistle (SM)                                                                                              Date: 15-Nov-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
