                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC8988

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Nepal                           Project ID:      P150066
                            Project Name:     Nepal: Power Sector Reform and Sustainable Hydropower Development
                                              (PSRSHD) (P150066)
                            Task Team         Jie Tang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       15-Dec-2014                       Estimated        26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEEDR                              Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Hydropower (50%), General energy sector (20%), Other domestic and
                                              international trade (15%), Transmission and Distribution of Electr icity (10%),
                                              General education sector (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Environmental
                                              policies and institutions (20%), Corporate governance (2 0%), Education for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              knowledge economy (5%), Gender (5%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     32.00                   Total Bank Financing:         25.00
                            Financing Gap:           6.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         1.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               25.00
                              Total                                                                     26.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           23.     The proposed Development Objective is to support the GON in (a) preparing its hydropower
                           and transmission line projects following international best practices and standards; and (b)
                         identifying key policy recommendations and sector reforms for sustainable water resource
                         management and hydropower development.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Project intends to offer a single window for a holistic and coherent set of technical and
                         analytical studies, capacity-building activities and policy dialogue on the energy sector and
                         preparation of next-step critical hydropower and transmission line projects to prepare Nepal for
                         upcoming large-scale private and public investments in hydropower. The proposed Project has three
                         components: i) Preparation of hydropower and transmission line investment projects; ii) Studies for
                         policy recommendations and sector reform; and iii) Capacity Building for Safeguard Management
                         and Hydropower Development.

                         The Bank has been closely coordinating with other donors involved in Nepal to align objectives and
                         approaches and allow a fluid dialogue with the GoN and the implementing agencies. The ADB,
                         DfID, USAID, MCC, JICA, KfW and the Norway have taken part in identifying the activities needed
                         under the Project how the project could build on the Donors’ existing activities, such as DfID’s
                         support to IBN or ADB’s TA on Financial Restructuring. Once the list of activities is finalized with
                         the GON, further donor coordination will determine how to responsibilities will be distributed among
                         donors.

                         Component A: Preparation of hydropower and transmission line investment projects ($25 million).
                         This component will support preparation of two to three hydropower projects as proposed by the
                         Government, and one cross-border high voltage transmission line project following
                         recommendations of the Transmission System Master Planning supported under the on-going
                         NIETTP, in line with international standards and World Bank Safeguard Policies. It will include
                         preparation of detailed project design, preparation of bidding documents, and environmental and
                         social impact assessment and mitigation. The GON has officially proposed the Upper Arun (356
                         MW), Ikhuwa Khola (18 MW) for Bank support of project preparation. Other projects will be
                         confirmed with the Government during the preparation stage.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B: Studies for policy recommendations and sector reform, to address critical power
                         sector issues ($4 million). This component will support studies of key policy instruments and sector
                         reform agendas to address the critical barriers to hydropower development and challenges in power
                         sector development. The major studies may include:
                         (a)      Tariff reform and system loss reduction to restore sector financial sustainability of NEA (the
                         loss reduction has already been covered under the proposed Grid Solar and Energy Efficiency Project
                         (GSEEP), which is under preparation for IDA financing);
                         (b)      Restructuring of NEA’s generation, transmission and distribution business ;
                         (c)      Power sector regulation - establishment of an Independent Regulator
                         (d)      GoN policies for encouraging private investment in hydropower and transmission line (GoN
                         guarantee as needed, open investment in selected transmission line to private sector)
                         (e)      Power trading strategy and institutional set up (for example, the need of creation of a power
                         trading company)
                         (f)      Basin-wide approach for water resources management and hydropower development
                         planning, for selected river basin(s);
                         (g)      Improvement of hydropower licensing from an ad hoc approach to an open, transparent,
                         competitive licensing process based on basin-wide hydropower development planning;
                         (h)      Transmission Master Planning (under implementation with the on-going NIETTP) and
                         policy for investment in transmission projects;
                         (i)     Review of existing legal and regulatory framework in the power sector and key
                         recommendations of improvement Distribution System / Rural Electrification Master Planning (grid
                         & off-grid coordination, to guide future investments in energy access, covered under the GSEEP);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (j)     Review renewable energy potentials, such as solar and micro hydro, and prepare a renewable
                         energy policy to envisage objectives, targets, timeline and policy instruments to enable private
                         investments or private-public partnership to achieve the objectives.
                         Key studies and scope of work of this Component will be defined during the project preparation,
                         through further consultations and discussion with GoN, NEA and development partners.

                         Component C: Capacity Building for Safeguard Management and Hydropower Development ($2
                         million). It is critical to improve environmental and social safeguard management system and
                         capacity to facilitate and ensure sustainable hydropower development in Nepal. Key studies and
                         activities may include:
                         (a)      Adaptation to recommendations of the climate change impact on Nepal water resources and
                         hydropower, which is review through on-going bank-funded TA
                         (b)      Review and introduction of environmental and social regulations for hydropower following
                         the results of the activities funded under the recently approved Kabeli A Hydroelectric Project
                         (KAHEP)
                         (1)      Cumulative impact assessment, including minimum ecological flows,
                         (2)      guidelines for hydropower resettlement
                         (3)      Strategic environment assessment to support basin-wide approach for hydropower
                         development planning (not covered under the KAHEP)
                         (4) Guidelines on Benefit Sharing
                         (c)      NEA Corporate policy for compensation of transmission line ROW
                         (d)      Capacity-building and support to key Government agencies involved in hydropower
                         development
                         (e)      HR development through education of next generation of engineers and professional for
                         hydropower, with support to universities in i) student exchange programs, ii) faculty exchange
                         programs, iii) hydropower-related curriculum enhancement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project itself involves no physical works and will consist of technical studies, policy reviews and
                         capacity-building conducted in the offices of the implementing agencies in Kathmandu, Nepal.
                         The specific basins and proposed investments for which integrated water resource management plans
                         and project-specific technical and environmental and social studies will be prepared under
                         component C have yet to be identified with the GON.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         NEA, MOE and MOSTE recently prepared two bank-financed projects (Kali Gandaki A
                         Rehabilitation and KAHEP) and have developed their institutional capacity on environmental and
                         social assessment and management as per Bank Safeguard Policy requirements. The project intends
                         to further develop their understanding of the Policies and their capacity to plan, prepare and
                         implement hydropower projects in accordance with Bank safeguard policies, Environment, Health
                         and Safety (EHS) Guidelines, and other relevant international standards and guidelines. Furthermore,
                         the project will support detailed review and strengthening of the regulatory and legal framework with
                         regards to Safeguards aspects of project planning and implementation, in particular on involuntary
                         resettlement and Cumulative Impact Assessment, in order to prepare the sector for upcoming
                         hydropower investments.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaohua Zhang (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Poonam Pillai (GSURR)
                           James Orehmie Monday (GENDR)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
                           Leanne Farrell (GENDR)
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          While the studies and capacity building
                           BP 4.01                                     activities under this TA will not themselves
                                                                       generate any adverse environmental or social
                                                                       impacts, the project aims to prepare two to three
                                                                       specific hydropower projects, transmission
                                                                       lines, and support basin-level planning activities
                                                                       under Component C which aim to enable future
                                                                       infrastructure investments that may have
                                                                       significant potential environmental and social
                                                                       impacts. The TA is therefore considered
                                                                       Category "A" as per OP 4.01. To comply with
                                                                       Bank safeguard requirements, an Environmental
                                                                       and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                                       will be prepared to specify appropriate
                                                                       requirements, processes, and institutional
                                                                       responsibilities for carrying out project-specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       ESIAs in accordance with Bank safeguards and
                                                                       national requirements for all proposed specific
                                                                       investments which receive preparatory support
                                                                       through this TA.

                                                                       In addition, strategic planning processes at
                                                                       national or basin levels supported through the
                                                                       project will also incorporate environmental and
                                                                       social factors and stakeholder participation into
                                                                       processes related to prioritization, siting, and
                                                                       design of future energy-sector investments.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          The ESMF will specify appropriate
                                                                       requirements for investment-specific ESIAs to
                                                                       ensure that any potential impacts to natural
                                                                       habitats are appropriately assessed and managed
                                                                       in accordance with this policy.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36             Yes          The ESMF will specify appropriate
                                                                       requirements for investment-specific ESIAs to
                                                                       ensure that any potential impacts to forests are
                                                                 appropriately assessed and managed, and any
                                                                 forestry programs developed as part of basin-
                                                                 level or project-specific environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 management programs are consistent with this
                                                                 policy’s requirements.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This policy is not expected to be triggered by
                                                                 the specific projects receiving preparation
                                                                 support through this TA; nonetheless, the ESMF
                                                                 will specify appropriate requirements for
                                                                 investment-specific ESIAs to ensure that any
                                                                 use of pesticides or herbicides in connection
                                                                 with the future investments (such as for
                                                                 transmission line ROW maintenance, vector
                                                                 control, reforestation programs, etc.) are
                                                                 appropriately assessed and managed in
                                                                 accordance with this policy.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The ESMF will specify appropriate
                         BP 4.11                                 requirements for investment-specific ESIAs to
                                                                 ensure that any potential impacts to physical
                                                                 cultural resources are appropriately assessed and
                                                                 managed in accordance with this policy.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project ESMF will include an Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples’ Planning Framework lay out the
                                                                 requirements for carrying out Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples’ Plans for any future investment being
                                                                 prepared with support of this TA which affects
                                                                 indigenous peoples.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project ESMF will include a Resettlement
                         4.12                                    Policy Framework to lay out the requirements
                                                                 for carrying out investment-specific
                                                                 Resettlement Action Plans in accordance with
                                                                 this policy for any future investments being
                                                                 prepared with support of this TA which result in
                                                                 involuntary displacement of households or
                                                                 livelihood activities due to land acquisition.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes   The project ESMF will specify measures to
                                                                 ensure compliance with this policy for all
                                                                 hydropower projects being prepared with
                                                                 support of this TA with dam heights over 15m.
                         Projects on International         TBD   If any of the specific projects being prepared
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    with support of this TA could lead to impacts on
                                                                 international waterways, the Bank team will
                                                                 ensure notification to riparians’ is made in
                                                                 accordance with this policy.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, consulted with
                                      project stakeholders by NEA, and disclosed locally and in the Bank’s InfoShop prior to appraisal,
                                      outlining the safeguard policy compliance approach and requirements for the project.

                                      The specific safeguard studies themselves for proposed investments being prepared with support
                                      from the TA are part of theproject outcomes, and will be conducted during implementation of the
                                      TA.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jie Tang

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 16-Oct-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 24-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
