                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7446
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Lao People's Democratic                     P131201
                                                                           Project ID:
                                               Republic
                            Project Name:      Lao PDR - Small and Medium Enterprise Access to Finance Project (P131201)
                            Task Team       Jose De Luna-Martinez
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       28-Mar-2014                           Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASFP                                  Lending     Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        SME Finance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        47.00              Total Bank Financing: 32.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                20.00
                              International Finance Corporation (IFC)                                                    12.00
                              Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                                  15.00
                              Total                                                                                      47.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           This project aims at providing long-term funding sources for banks to provide long-term credit to
                           SMEs. The project will support the growth of privately-owned SMEs by increasing the supply of


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         long-term finance provided by commercial banks and by strengthening the capability of the
                         Department for Small and Medium Enterprise Promotion (DOSMEP) to formulate and implement
                         public policies that promote access to finance for SMEs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         The project has three components:

                         1)      A Line of Credit
                         2)      A Risk Sharing Facility
                         3)      Technical Assistance

                         Component 1: A Line of Credit (IDA US$12 million)

                         IDA will provide US$12 million to the Ministry of Finance (MoF) which will pass on project funds
                         to the Department of SME Promotion (DOSMEP). DOSMEP will provide long-term funding in local
                         currency to participating financial institutions (PFIs) - financially-sound and well administered
                         commercial banks. Because DOSMEP is not a financial institution, the funds to be provided by
                         DOSMEP to PFIs will be in the form of long-term bank deposits (5-7 years) in local currency
                         (maximum US$4 million to a PFI). The PFIs will pay interest to DOSMEP same as the 3 month
                         deposit rate in local currency (or interbank rate), and pay back the entire deposit amount to DOSMEP
                         at the end of the agreed period. The PFIs will on-lend these funds for long term loans (up to US
                         $200,000 equivalent in local currency with 2-7 years maturity at market rates) to privately-owned
                         SMEs enabling them to carry out long term capital investments that increase their business
                         operations and enhance their productivity. Although, SMEs operating in any sector will be eligible, it
                         is expected that most of the demand for credit will come from SMEs in the manufacturing, services
                         and trade sectors.

                         Component 2. Risk Sharing Facility (IDA US$3 million and IFC up to US$12 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support the establishment of a Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) which will provide a
                         partial credit guarantee to eligible private commercial banks (PFIs) that lend to SMEs. The RSF will
                         cover 50 percent of the losses, on a pari passu basis, that the PFIs may incur in their SME lending
                         operations (enabling them to lower their excessive collateral requirements for loans to SMEs). The
                         total lending amount to be covered by the RSF could reach up to US$30 million, where IDA will
                         provide US$3 million on behalf of the Lao Government, IFC up to US$12 million, and PFIs will
                         absorb the remaining up to US$15 million. To cover claims from PFIs, the resources from IDA will
                         be used first (first loss). If, and once the IDA resources are exhausted, then IFC will start to use its
                         own resources to cover the losses (second loss) from the loan portfolio. The IFC will serve as the
                         Agent, on behalf of DOSMEP, to manage the RSF, and will conduct due diligence of PFIs. The
                         Agent Agreement between the DOSMEP and IFC as well as the participation of PFIs in RSF, will be
                         subject to approval by the World Bank. The team is aware of a perceived conflict of interest between
                         the IFC and the World Bank on the RSF and has advised the Lao Government about the same.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance (US$5 million)

                         This component will provide technical assistance (TA) to strengthen capacity of DOSMEP in areas
                         such as formulation and implementation of a SME development strategy, SMEs census, design of
                         new SME lending and non-lending products, impact assessment, SME business advisory services, as
                         well as project implementation and monitoring and evaluation, including outsourcing of


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         procurement, financial management functions to the National Implementation Unit (NIU) of the
                         Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MoIC). The project will also provide TA to PFIs in improving
                         their SME lending business such as the design of SME banking strategy and new SME banking
Public Disclosure Copy




                         products, and compliance with Bank’s environmental standards, etc.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will provide financing to eligible SMEs, through Participating Financial Intermediaries
                         (PFI). The banking system in Lao is small, with only 82 bank branches. Banks’ outreach is highly
                         concentrated in urban areas. Most banks are reluctant to serve rural areas given the difficulties that
                         banks have faced in executing collateral in those areas in the past. Banks also find difficult to find
                         registered SMEs in those areas, as most firms operate in the informal sector. This operation will
                         finance projects that take place mainly in urban areas (cities and towns with more than 10,000
                         people).

                         The target beneficiary SMEs are registered small (1-19 employees) and medium private enterprises
                         (20 to 99 employees) operating in Lao PDR that have been in business for at least two years and wish
                         to expand their business activities. As a minimum, SMEs must present a viable business plan to the
                         commercial banks, have a good credit history, and have all legal documents required by banks
                         willing to finance them, including collateral. It is anticipated that the majority of beneficiary SMEs
                         are in the trade, manufacturing, and services sectors. Specifically, beneficiary SMEs are expected to
                         comprise of the following private business types: Restaurants, coffee shops, hotels, grocery stores,
                         transportation firms, medical laboratories, information technology companies, private schools, radio
                         and TV stations, cable companies, gasoline stations, travel agencies, private tour operators,
                         production and distribution of construction materials, automobile repair centers, etc.

                         Types of activities to be financed are: Acquisition of new transportation equipment (automobiles,
                         trucks, other specialized equipment, and replace parts), acquisition of communications equipment
                         (phone and fax equipment, computers, printers, servers, software, other hardware, etc.), purchase of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction materials, building of warehouses or expansion of existing physical premises in the land
                         fully-owned by the SME, acquisition of fixed assets (industrial machines, refrigerators, industrial
                         equipment, replace parts, tools and equipment, etc), and working capital needs (loans for payment of
                         salaries, marketing costs, audit and accounting costs, etc).

                         The project will not finance land acquisitions, namely because banks are not able to provide long-
                         term loans with maturities of 15 to 30 years, which is the usual maturity required to finance this type
                         of operations. Moreover, the project is expected to close in 5 years or so.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Manida Unkulvasapaul (CEAMV)
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             OP 4.01 Beneficiary SMEs of line of credit
                          BP 4.01                                             (Component 1) and Risk Sharing Facility
                                                                              (Component 2) are expected to engage in diverse
                                                                              types of activities, some of which may have
                                                                              negative environmental and/or social impacts and



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                 risks. The exact location, nature, scale and scope
                                 of environmental and social impacts can only be
                                 known during implementation when PFIs receive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 applications from eligible SMEs. Given the nature
                                 and size of credit to be provided to each SME,
                                 however, the potential negative impacts are most
                                 likely to be minor, localized, and reversible and
                                 can be mitigated with well-known standard
                                 measures and environmental and social good
                                 practice.

                                 It is expected that the wide majority of
                                 transactions will be Category C or Category B
                                 transactions. In the unlikely case where a
                                 transaction may be considered as a Category A
                                 the FI will inform the IFC and/or the World Bank
                                 to determine whether such transaction should be
                                 considered eligible based upon significance of
                                 potential impacts and client capacity.

                                 To screen, minimize and mitigate potential
                                 environmental and social impacts and risks on the
                                 line of credit to the SMEs under Component 1
                                 and the risk sharing facility under Component 2,
                                 an environmental and social management
                                 framework (ESMF) was developed during
                                 preparation which includes environmental and
                                 social screening of transactions, environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 categorization, environmental and social review
                                 and assessment, monitoring and supervision. It
                                 also requires PFIs participating in RSF to
                                 establish an Environmental and Social
                                 Management System.

                                 The ESMF combines both the requirements of the
                                 IFC 'sSP and World Bank safeguard policies.
                                 Most transactions will typically be covered by PS
                                 1 on Environment and Social Management and
                                 PS 2 on Labor and Work Conditions as well the
                                 WBG Guidelines on Environment, Health and
                                 Safety. The ESMF contains and the Operation
                                 Manual will provide in specific detail how the
                                 applicable IFC SP and WB safeguards policies
                                 will apply. In cases, such as for medium sized
                                 companies, were the IFC Performance Standards
                                 may also apply for potential effects on natural
                                 habitats, forestry and Indigenous Peoples the



                         Page 4 of 10
                                                                         ESMF contains and the Operation Manual will
                                                                         also provide for the specific details on how to
                                                                         apply together the relevant IFC and World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         policies
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           The project activities are not envisaged to create
                                                                         significant negative impacts on natural habitats.
                                                                         Nevertheless, the ESMF includes provisions to
                                                                         screen impacts of transactions on natural habitats.
                                                                         Transactions that will cause significant
                                                                         degradation of critical natural habitats will not be
                                                                         supported in line with the policy. Transactions
                                                                         that will cause adverse impacts or degradation of
                                                                         non-critical natural habitats may be supported
                                                                         provided that the benefits of the transaction
                                                                         outweigh the negative impacts and that measures
                                                                         are devised and implemented to address negative
                                                                         impacts in line with the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The project will not support transactions that may
                                                                         significantly affect or degrade critical natural
                                                                         forests. However, production and distribution of
                                                                         construction materials is one of the eligible
                                                                         activities under the project, which will likely
                                                                         involve wood/lumber production. The ESMF
                                                                         includes provisions to screen transactions and
                                                                         their potential impacts on forests, forest health
                                                                         and forest-dependent communities. The screening
                                                                         will also ensure that lumbers are sourced legally
                                                                         and further due diligence of the sources will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         pursued as part of processing and approval of the
                                                                         transaction.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            None of the transactions is expected to involve
                                                                         procurement of pesticides or pesticide equipment
                                                                         or lead to an increase in usage of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The project activities will be limited to
                         BP 4.11                                         acquisition of new equipment, purchase of
                                                                         construction materials, building of warehouses or
                                                                         expansion of existing physical premises in the
                                                                         land fully-owned by the SME, acquisition of
                                                                         fixed assets, and working capital needs. There is
                                                                         no civil works or activities in new areas that are
                                                                         expected affect physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Some transactions may entail sourcing of
                                                                         materials from areas that have the presence of
                                                                         indigenous peoples (e.g., production and
                                                                         distribution of construction materials) or some
                                                                         transactions may involve IP businesses.



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                       An Ethnic Group Planning Framework (EGPF)
                                                                       has been prepared detailing the process and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       actions to be undertaken if applicable for specific
                                                                       transactions in the course of project
                                                                       implementation. The EGPF includes screening
                                                                       for the presence of indigenous people in areas
                                                                       where these transactions take place and, where
                                                                       they are present, the project will ensure that they
                                                                       are adequately consulted and are benefiting in a
                                                                       culturally appropriate manner from these
                                                                       transactions and are not excluded. The EGPF also
                                                                       includes provisions to assess if a transaction in an
                                                                       area with indigenous peoples may have any
                                                                       adverse impacts and measures to avoid or
                                                                       mitigate for such impacts in a culturally
                                                                       appropriate manner.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The project will not result any involuntary
                         4.12                                          resettlement or acquisition of lands as civil works
                                                                       such as building of warehouses or expansion of
                                                                       existing physical premises will be undertaken in
                                                                       the land fully-owned by the SMEs. Moreover, in
                                                                       practice commercial banks cannot finance land
                                                                       purchases due to the long time usually needed for
                                                                       repayment of loans (20 to 30 years). Banks do not
                                                                       have access to long-term sources of funds to
                                                                       finance loans with a maturity of more than 10
                                                                       years. It is expected that the sub-projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       supported by this operation will not have a
                                                                       maturity of more than 8 years. This project is
                                                                       expected to close in four years. Loan applicants
                                                                       will be required under ESMF to demonstrate that
                                                                       transactions will be carried out on their own land
                                                                       to which there is no legacy issue or competing
                                                                       claims.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No           The project is not envisaged to support any
                                                                       transactions that will involve any dam
                                                                       construction and rehabilitation or any transactions
                                                                       that would depend on existing dam or dam under
                                                                       construction.
                         Projects on International        No           The project activities/transactions will be located
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          in urban areas in Lao and are not expected to
                                                                       trigger the policy.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           The project activities/transactions will be located
                         7.60                                          mainly in urban areas and are not expected to be
                                                                       located in disputed areas.



                                                               Page 6 of 10
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Beneficiary SMEs of line of credit (Component 1) and Risk Sharing Facility (Component 2) are
                              expected to engage in diverse types of activities some of which may entail negative impact on
                              local people or environment. The exact location, nature, scale and scope of environmental impacts
                              can only be known during implementation when PFIs receive applications from eligible SMEs.
                              Given the nature and size of credit to be provided to each SME (about $30,000) the potential
                              negative impacts are likely to be minor, localized, and reversible and can be mitigated with simple
                              measures and environmental good practice. To ensure that the potential environmental and social
                              risks are adequately mitigated, an environmental and social management framework (“ESMF”)
                              has been developed describing the safeguard measures to be carried out by the Participating
                              Financial Intermediary (PFI) and the eligible SMEs including safeguard screening, assessment,
                              and mitigation of potential negative impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The Project will not create any potential indirect and/or long term negative impacts. It is
                              anticipated that given rapid development of hydropower projects and socioeconomic development
                              in Lao PDR, development of service providers and other related activities would likely to be
                              rapidly increased mostly in Vientiane and large cities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC) through the Department of Small and Medium
                              Enterprises Promotion (DOSMEP) is responsible for management of SME services and will be the
                              responsible for the implementation of the project.

                             To screen and manage the environment and social risk of the project, MOIC has developed an
                             ESMF to guide the project implementation unit and the participating financial intermediary to
                             screen and manage the social and environmental risk and monitor the implementation of the
                             ESMF.

                             The ESMF also requires PFIs participating in RSF to establish an Environmental and Social
                             Management System in compliance with IFC’s Sustainability Policy (SP). The ESMF combines
                             both the requirements of the World Bank safeguard policies and International Finance
                             Corporation’s SP.

                             The ESMF also has an Ethnic Minority Development Framework detailing the process and
                             requirements to be undertaken in case it applies to specific transactions in the course of project
                             implementation. This includes screening for the presence of IPs in areas where these transactions
                             take place and, where they are present, the project will ensure that they are adequately consulted,
                             are benefiting from these transactions in a culturally appropriate manner. and are not excluded.
                             The ESMF also includes provisions to assess if a transaction in an area with indigenous peoples


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           may have any adverse impacts and measures to avoid or mitigate for such impacts in a culturally
                           appropriate manner.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Given weak institutional capacity of MOIC on policies and regulations related to safeguards for
                           SMEs and limited knowledge and capacity of PFIs and SMEs, technical assistance will be
                           provided as part of Component 3 to establish appropriate regulatory mechanisms and building
                           knowledge and capacity of the MOIC and ensure effective implementation of the ESMF. The TA
                           will include training on WB’s safeguard policy and IFC's SP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders for this project include small and medium enterprises, local entrepreneurs'
                           associations and chambers of commerce, and NGOs supporting SMEs and entrepreneurs as well in
                           broader manner beneficiaries of increased investments and services by SME in Laos.

                           The project is not expected to create significant negative impacts on stakeholders or other people
                           in Lao PDR. The ESMF provides a checklist that will be used by all PFIs to ascertain the absence
                           of involuntary resettlement as part of the appraisal of proposals for credit lines. The main
                           provisions of the ESMF will be further elaborated in the project's operation manual. The ESMF
                           was uploaded at DOSMEP's website and translated into Lao language. The document is easily
                           available to anyone interested in this project. In addition, on March 11, 2014, DOSMEP organized
                           a workshop in Vientiane open to all the public to present the ESMF and receive feedback from
                           participants. Participants included representatives from SMEs' Associations, NGOs, commercial
                           banks, as well as other government institutions in Laos. During the workshop, most questions of
                           participants were related to the interest rates of the loans to SMEs, minimum amount of loans, list
                           of activities that will not be financed (negative list), and technical assistance to be provided under
                           the project to commercial banks in order to meet the standards described in the ESMF. During
                           project implementation, the ESMS will remain available to the public.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Mar-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        20-Mar-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                      04-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The ESMF of this project has been disclosed to the public by the Department for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Small and Medium Enterprise Promotion through its website (www.smepdo.org) and
                                         a workshop open to the public was held on March 11, 2014. Participants at the
                                         workshop included: NGOs,entrepreneurs' associations, SMEs, commercial banks,
                                         and various government agencies. Questions of participants were related to the
                                         interest rates of the loans to SMEs, minimum amount of loans, list of activities that
                                         will not be financed (negative list), and technical assistance to be provided under the
                                         project to commercial banks in order to meet the standards described in the ESMF.
                                         Overall, all participants expressed enormous support to this project and welcome the
                                         technical assistance to be provided by the World Bank to ensure compliance with the
                                         ESMF. The ESMF has been further refined to clarify the list of activities that will not
                                         be supported under the project.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        20-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                      04-Mar-2014
                           Comments: An Ethnic Group Planning Framework has been prepared as part of this project and
                                         has been disclosed to the public together with the ESMF. During the public
                                         consultation workshop on March 11, 2014, all participants expressed enormous
                                         support to this project and welcome the assistance to be provided by the World Bank
                                         to ensure compliance with the ESMF, as well as the Ethnic Group Planning
                                         Framework.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jose De Luna-Martinez
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 23-Mar-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Hormoz Aghdaey (SM)                               Date: 24-Mar-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
