                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3393
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                    Project ID:    P132490
                            Project Name:      Kyrgyz Global Partnership for Education (GPE) - 3 (P132490)
                            Task Team          Dingyong Hou
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          13-May-2013                        Estimated   02-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH2                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Pre-primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         16.27              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     3.57
                              Education for All Supervising Entity                                                        12.70
                              Total                                                                                       16.27
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project’s objective is to increase equitable access to pre-school education, and to
                           establish conditions for improving its quality.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Project would be organized around three components: (i) expansion of quality pre-
                           primary education; (ii) improved policy, programs and system effectiveness; and (iii)

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         communications and implementation support. All components would support priorities delineated in
                         MoES Education Strategy 2020 and MTEDP, and complement activities promoted by other donors in
                         the education sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component One - Expansion of quality pre-primary education: The objectives of this component are
                         to increase access to pre-school education for children aged 4-5 years in targeted areas and to enable
                         all children who are in the year prior to Grade One to complete a full-year school preparation
                         program. As such, this component would finance: (i) the provision of teaching-learning materials
                         and furniture to enable the opening or expansion of kindergartens in poor communities with limited
                         or no access to pre-school services, as well as to enable the universal coverage of the full-year
                         preparation program; and (ii) training of kindergarten and preparation program teachers on the
                         knowledge and skills needed to deliver appropriate education programs. The component is
                         constituted of three sub-components that reinforce one another by promoting greater coverage,
                         quality and integration.

                         Sub-component 1.1 - Expansion of school preparation program: This sub-component seeks to
                         expand the delivery of the full-year school preparation program in the year prior to starting Grade
                         One. The Project would finance the development and implementation of a training program for all
                         teachers and Deputy Directors who are responsible to deliver the preparation program, as well as the
                         provision of essential teaching-learning materials, furniture and equipment to all primary and
                         kindergarten classrooms where the program is taught.

                         Sub-component 1.2 - Expansion of early education services: This sub-component would finance the
                         establishment or expansion of up to 100 new community kindergartens enrolling approximately
                         10,000 children aged 4-5 years. The Project would support the development and selection of
                         proposals from targeted Aiyl Okmotus (AOs) to establish new community-based kindergartens. For
                         the selected kindergartens, the Project would finance teaching-learning materials, furniture and
                         equipment, and, if needed, upgrading of sanitation facilities. The Project would also finance the
                         design and delivery of an in-service teacher training program for teachers hired to work in the new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         community kindergarten classrooms, to build their teaching-learning knowledge and skills.

                         Sub-component 1.3 - Support for inclusive education: This component would finance a pilot
                         initiative to integrate children aged 4-6 years with special education needs into mainstream
                         kindergartens and preparatory classrooms, with a view to drafting a program for national expansion.
                         The initiative would cover preparatory classrooms and kindergartens in a rayon with little or no
                         access to specialized kindergarten schools, and would target children with special education needs
                         who can be accommodated in a mainstream classroom.

                         Component Two - Improved policy, programs and system effectiveness: The objective of this
                         component is to improve policy, programs and system effectiveness. To that end, it would finance
                         technical assistance, materials, and the monitoring of child development and classroom practices.

                         Enhancing Policy: The Project would finance technical assistance and study visits in a range of pre-
                         school education areas where the MoES is pursuing reforms, so as to improve the design of these
                         reforms. The areas would include, inter-alia: the review and revision of the legal-regulatory
                         framework pertaining to pre-school financing, the introduction of shift models of pre-school
                         education, and inclusive education; and the revision of the pre-school curriculum (covering children
                         aged 3-6 years), including the development of an education program for mixed groups in
                         community-based kindergartens.

                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         Enhancing Quality: The Project would finance the publication and dissemination of Early Learning
                         Development Standards (ELDS). These have already been developed by the MoES and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders with UNICEF support, and are a basis for the planned revision of the pre-school
                         curriculum. The Project would also finance the publication and dissemination of materials resulting
                         from the revision of the pre-school curriculum (covering children aged 3-6 years).

                         Enhancing Measurement: The Project would finance a pilot introduction of a school readiness
                         measurement instrument, such as the Early Development Instrument (EDI) . This would develop
                         knowledge regarding the effectiveness of ECE and build technical capacity in the MoES, as well as
                         provide a reliable, low-cost tool that could be scaled-up. The instrument would be a teacher-
                         completed questionnaire that assesses children’s readiness to learn at school. The instrument would
                         cover essential domains of child development, as well as the child’s special skills and challenges.
                         The instrument would be adapted to ensure proper contextualization, piloted and integrated into the
                         teacher training under component 1.1.

                         Component Three - Communications and implementation support: The objective of this component
                         is to finance communications and incremental operating costs generated by the Project.

                         Sub-component 3.1- Communications and advocacy: This sub-component would finance activities
                         to engage and inform stakeholders about the importance of early childhood education so as to
                         stimulate parental demand for, and involvement in ECE; and about emerging priorities and reforms
                         in the education sector, including inter-alia curriculum reform at the pre-school level, the
                         introduction of the full-year preparatory program, the opening of affordable half-day pre-school
                         institutions, and revisions to the legal-regulatory framework governing pre-school education.

                         Sub-component 3.2- Stakeholder monitoring and evaluation: This subcomponent would finance
                         monitoring and evaluation of project implementation by a third party which would be selected from
                         non-governmental and or civil society organizations to provide an independent assessment of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation process and results through ongoing monitoring and an evaluation upon completion
                         of the project.

                         Sub-component 3.3 -Implementation support: This sub-component would finance incremental
                         project operating costs, including inter-alia translation, interpretation, equipment, supervision costs
                         (transportation and per diem), salaries of the staff in the Project Coordinating Unit, and incremental
                         operating costs at the Ministry of Education and Science.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Kyrgyz Republic: Sector and country wide

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Amy Evans (AES)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Minor civil works required to upgrade or
                          BP 4.01                                              convert existing community facilities for use as
                                                                               pre-school education facilities under sub-


                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                                                                                component 1.1., Early Education Services.
                                                                                Minimal to moderate environmental impacts are
                                                                                expected from civil works for rehabilitation or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                renovation of community facilities in various
                                                                                locations around the country.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project does not present any large scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts.
                              The Project will fund minor civil works required to upgrade or convert existing community
                              facilities for use as pre-school education facilities. Minimal to moderate environmental impacts
                              are expected from civil works for rehabilitation or renovation of community facilities in various
                              locations around the country. Specific sites are not yet known, but would be identified in each
                              annual workplan during implementation.

                             Expected environmental impacts from these sub-projects include dust and noise related to
                             demolition and construction; disposal of construction waste; and waste management during
                             operation of the facilities. An Environmental Management Framework has been prepared. It
                             includes a screening tool to identify sub-project activities that would require environmental
                             assessments and management plans (sub-project EMPs), and provides guidance for preparation of
                             the EMPs. It is anticipated that sub-project activities would fall into category B or C. Should any
                             project activities be determined to have significant safeguards issues such that they would be
                             considered category A, the project would need to be restructured to reflect the change in category.
                             The EMF includes a negative list specifying the land acquisition would not be eligible for funding
                             under the project.



                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The team considered omitting minor civil works from the Project activities, but decided that the
                           health and social benefits of basic sanitation (latrines, hand-washing stations) and other
                           renovations far outweighed the very moderate environmental impacts of civil works.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower has assessed potential environmental impacts of the Project, and has prepared an
                           Environmental Management Framework (EMF) satisfactory to the Bank to address and mitigate
                           the moderate environmental risks. The MoES Project Coordination Unit (PCU) is responsible for
                           overseeing Project implementation, including safeguards aspects. The PCU would include seven
                           staff: (i) one project coordinator (directly responsible for the GPE project and for safeguards
                           aspects); (ii) two financial management/disbursement specialists; (iii) two procurement specialists;
                           (iv) one translator; and (v) one administrative assistant. The PCU Director would report regularly
                           to the Deputy Minister; PCU staff would report directly to its Director, and work closely as needed
                           with other staff of the MoES and its subordinate agencies.

                           A specialist will be identified within the PCU to be responsible for coordination and supervision of
                           the EMF and environmental risk mitigation measures to be undertaken in the Project. In addition, a
                           local environmental specialist will be recruited by the PCU to support this function. The local
                           environmental specialist and PCU staff will work closely with the MoES procurement team, the
                           CCU and with national and oblast level environmental officials. They will (a) coordinate relevant
                           training for staff, designers and local contractors; (b) disseminate existing environmental
                           management guidelines and develop guidelines for identification, implementation, monitoring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           evaluation of mitigation measures; (c) ensure that contracting for construction and supply of
                           equipment includes reference to appropriate guidelines and standards; and (d) conduct periodic site
                           visits to supervise and monitor compliance.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include MoES Departments, Ecology Education and Communication
                           Department under the Public Agency for Environment Protection and Forestry, rayon Education
                           Departments, Ministry of Health, ARIS, international partners (Aga Khan Foundation, UNICEF),
                           media, and NGOs involved in early childhood education. A stakeholder consultation meeting was
                           held in Bishkek on 18 April 2013 to present the EMF and hear feedback. The meeting did not
                           identify any concerns about the approach to environmental safeguards described in the EMF, and
                           welcomed the opportunity that the Project provides for improved physical conditions and
                           sanitation in pre-schools.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         24-Apr-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Apr-2013




                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Kyrgyz Republic                                                  01-Apr-2013
                              Comments: http://edu.gov.kg
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Dingyong Hou
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)                        Date: 11-Dec-2013



                                                                       Page 6 of 6
