                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7299
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Azerbaijan                          Project ID:    P144700
                            Project Name:      Judicial Services and Smart Infrastructure Project (P144700)
                            Task Team          Amitabha Mukherjee
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Jan-2014                         Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSP4                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Law and justice (60%), Public administration- Information and communications
                                              (20%), General public administration sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Judicial and other dispute resolution mechanisms (50%), e-Government (30%),
                                              Access to law and justice (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     626.00           Total Bank Financing:                   100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     526.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        100.00
                              Total                                                                                        626.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to improve access to justice for all, increase the
                           transparency of functioning of justice services and increase the efficiency of provision of selected
                           justice services.



                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The JSSIP (total estimated project cost US$626 million including VAT at 18%) is envisaged to have
                         four components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A: Judicial Service Delivery Improvements (estimated cost US$72 million) component will finance
                         legal aid (including for the vulnerable and marginalized); e-filing of cases; e-notarial services;
                         enforcement of judicial decisions; automated case and document management systems; business
                         registry and business inspection modernization. It will also finance technical assistance and analytics
                         on access to justice for vulnerable groups and examination of gender issues. In order to provide these
                         services, the justice system ICT infrastructure will be strengthened through (i) the installation of
                         Wide Area Networks and a Network Operations/ICT Management System and (ii) the construction
                         of one Data Center and one Disaster Recovery Center (the estimated cost of civil works is US$15
                         million) - these will help the justice system to deal with increasing data flows arising from
                         progressively higher case inflows, increased electronic access by external users and an increased
                         number of courts across the country.

                         B: Strengthening Sector Efficiency, Institutional Capacity and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
                         (estimated cost US$28 million) will finance technical assistance and training for activities such as
                         analysis of court case backlogs; a Sector Efficiency and Expenditure Review (SEER); a justice sector
                         performance monitoring framework; building sector M&E capacity; periodic user surveys (to
                         institutionalize user feedback); IT management and operational capability especially for the Ministry
                         of Justice; communications, outreach and change management and strengthening the professionalism
                         and training of judges and judicial staff.

                         C: Expansion and Modernization of Justice Physical Infrastructure (estimated cost US$481 million)
                         will finance the construction of ‘smart courts’ and related ICT infrastructure in 10-13 locations
                         across the country. The "smart courts" will be functionally innovative courthouses and court
                         complexes integrating IT applications and services in different cities in Azerbaijan. New court
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction activities are envisaged (these may change as preparation progresses) as follows: court
                         complexes in six locations with each complex housing 3-5 courts (two in Baku City and one each in
                         the cities of Gandja, Sumgait, Sheki and Shirvan), district-level courts in four outlying locations
                         (Absheron, Masalli, Gusar and Zardab), three high-volume district courts in Baku City (Baku City
                         Narimanov district, Baku City Surakhani district and Baku City Khatai district) - for a total of 13
                         locations for construction of courts and court complexes (estimated civil works cost US$400
                         million). The MOJ’s proposed courthouse/court complex locations are based on the following
                         criteria: (i) regional court complexes in the 5 largest cities; (ii) courts in Masalli and Gusar to serve
                         areas with significant ethnic minorities (Talysh and Lezghin); (iii) a court in Absheron to serve
                         Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs); (iv) three urban locations in Baku (Narimanov, Surakhani and
                         Khatai) with very high case volumes. This component will also finance technical assistance and
                         training for capacity-strengthening for facility design, supervision and operations. It will also
                         finance consultancy services associated with construction (e.g. updating architectural and technical
                         designs where needed, author and technical supervision; and independent review of design and
                         construction).

                         D: Project Management and Coordination (estimated cost US$10 million) will finance staff salaries
                         for the project implementation unit, incremental operating costs, training for project and key
                         governmental staff associated with the project, and project audit.



                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         In addition there is a provision of US$35 million for contingencies.

                         Results and impact will be measured by a set of project results indicators.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented country-wide. Construction of court complexes and courthouses is
                         currently proposed at Baku City (5 locations), Gandja, Sumgait, Sheki, Shirvan, Absheron, Masalli,
                         Gusar and Zardab. In addition the locations of the Data Center and Disaster Recovery Center will be
                         in or near Baku City. The final list of locations may differ from this initial list. The new
                         construction is planned to be mostly undertaken in already developed urban areas with municipal
                         services. In some cases (in the outlying areas, e.g. Masalli) municipal services may not be well-
                         developed.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
                         Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) is
                          BP 4.01                                             triggered. The environmental impacts are
                                                                              associated with the proposed construction of
                                                                              courthouses, court complexes, a Data Center and
                                                                              a Disaster Recovery Center. These will be
                                                                              similar to those already addressed in the updated
                                                                              Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the
                                                                              on-going Judicial Modernization Project (JMP).
                                                                              For the purposes of the proposed project the EMP
                                                                              has been updated to reflect the most recent
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              changes in the description of project activities and
                                                                              geographical coverage.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes               OP 4.11 ‘Physical Cultural Resources’ is
                          BP 4.11                                             triggered as civil works could occur in historical
                                                                              urban areas which may be subject to potential
                                                                              chance finds. The EMP includes proactive
                                                                              measures to carry out preliminary surveys/
                                                                              assessments of relevant sites prior to beginning
                                                                              works, to determine there are historically valuable
                                                                              assets or artifacts which require protection. The
                                                                              EMP also incorporates the procedures to be
                                                                              followed by the contractor and client in case of



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                                                 chance finds at project sites. There are no cases
                                                                                 involving renovation of known historical
                                                                                 buildings.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes                No land acquisition or physical displacement of
                            4.12                                                 residents is expected. However, experience from
                                                                                 ongoing Bank-financed projects shows that minor
                                                                                 land acquisition could be needed to improve
                                                                                 construction design and provide access space. In
                                                                                 addition, land acquisition may be required due to
                                                                                 unforeseen events.

                                                                                 OP 4.12 ‘Involuntary Resettlement’ will be
                                                                                 triggered as a precaution. An RPF was prepared
                                                                                 by the MOJ, approved by the Bank and disclosed
                                                                                 during the restructuring of the JMP. This RPF has
                                                                                 been updated to apply to the proposed project.
                                                                                 The RPF was disclosed in Azerbaijan on
                                                                                 November 19, 2013 and subsequently disclosed
                                                                                 by the Bank on December 3, 2013 via the World
                                                                                 Bank Infoshop. Site-specific RAPs will be
                                                                                 developed - if and as necessary – during
                                                                                 implementation. The RPF and RAPs will ensure
                                                                                 proper calculation and recording of the land area
                                                                                 to be acquired and identify and mitigate the
                                                                                 impacts of land acquisition for the affected
                                                                                 persons to ensure that there is no adverse effect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 on living conditions and livelihoods. The Bank
                                                                                 and client will jointly monitor compliance with
                                                                                 social safeguards.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The negative environmental impacts which might be caused by the project activities are not
                              considered to be significant or irreversible, are of temporary nature and mainly associated with the
                              construction and rehabilitation of courthouse facilities, the Data Center and the Disaster Recovery
                              Center - all to be implemented in the proposed project sites. The impacts include generation of


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           excessive dust, solid waste and waste water (both construction and domestic) as well as noise and
                           vibration which, if not properly managed, may cause contamination of soil and surface water,
                           affect air quality and have an impact on human health. These anticipated impacts will be avoided,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           minimized or mitigated by the implementation of the preventive, restorative and mitigation
                           measures envisaged by the project Environmental Management Plan (EMP). Those measures will
                           be detailed in site-specific EMP Checklists to be prepared for each project site at the design stage
                           and included in the Bidding documents and respective construction contracts. The EMP includes
                           proactive measures to carry out preliminary surveys/assessments of relevant sites prior to
                           beginning works, to determine if there are historically valuable assets or artifacts which require
                           protection. The EMP also incorporates the procedures to be followed by the contractor and client
                           in case of chance finds at project sites. There are no cases involving renovation of known
                           historical buildings.

                           The project triggers the World Bank’s Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) on a
                           precautionary basis. While no immediate land acquisition is needed or identified based on
                           proposed sites, the policy has been triggered given that sites are primarily in populated areas and
                           unanticipated land acquisition could arise. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
                           prepared. It describes potential project impacts and sets out policies and procedures that will apply
                           to the project. It provides compensation principles and eligibility criteria which are in line with
                           World Bank social safeguards policies. A robust social screening process will ensure identification
                           of and attention to any project affected persons (PAPs) at project sites. In cases of identified
                           impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in line with the RPF provisions. The
                           RAP will mitigate impacts and losses. Wherever land acquisition impacts are triggered based on
                           the social screening, a site-specific RAP will be developed in consultation with affected persons
                           and the draft will be submitted to the World Bank for prior review. The RAP will provide a
                           detailed inventory of project impacts, compensation and rehabilitation packages for eligible
                           categories of PAPs and grievance redress mechanisms in line with the provisions of the RPF and
                           OP 4.12. All actions and compensations specified in any RAP will be completed before
                           commencement of any civil works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The long-term environmental and social impacts are expected to be positive as the project sites
                           will be generally improved and better managed in future. The indirect impacts are also expected to
                           be positive as the buildings will be operated in an environmentally sustainable manner (efficient
                           heating system, paper recycling etc.).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project sites have been chosen based on the need for improved access to justice and improved
                           provision of judicial services. Alternatives would have been considered if any environmental or
                           social risks had been identified for certain sites. This was not the case. Detailed assessment of each
                           site should be carried out at the design stage as part of the site-specific EMPs (Checklists) and
                           social screening in accordance with the RPF.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Environmental Management Plan, Resettlement Policy Framework and two site-specific
                           EMPs were prepared for the project by the MoJ Project Implementation Unit (PIU). These have
                           been duly disclosed on the MoJ official web-site, disclosed at the two selected sites and posted in


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           the World Bank Infoshop. All the site-specific EMPs to be prepared further during the project
                           implementation , and any site-specific Resettlement Actions Plans (RAPs) deemed necessary
                           following social screening, will undergo the similar disclosure process. The implementing agency
Public Disclosure Copy




                           demonstrated its commitment and capacity to deal effectively with the environmental and social
                           aspects under the on-going project. In the PIU there is a designated staff responsible for regular
                           environmental and social monitoring and coordination of environmental and social matters with
                           designers, technical experts and contractors, and for providing regular (quarterly) reports to the
                           world Bank. Similar arrangements will be maintained for the new project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project stakeholders include the staff of the court houses to be constructed as well as the
                           population which will enjoy better quality services at the new courts. Discussions with judges,
                           support staff and bailiffs were held in Baku and other regional locations during the preparation and
                           implementation of the original on-going project. Also, consultations were held then with
                           community associations and NGOs. Two site-specific EMPs were duly disclosed at the project
                           sites. Similar disclosure procedure are envisaged for all the other site-specific EMPs, and any
                           necessary RAPs, to be prepared later in the course of project implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Azerbaijan                                                       19-Nov-2013
                           Comments: This has been disclosed on the public website of the Ministry of Justice.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Azerbaijan                                                       19-Nov-2013
                           Comments: This has been disclosed on the public website of the Ministry of Justice.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not applicable.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?




                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Amitabha Mukherjee
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                              Date: 09-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Adrian Fozzard (SM)                               Date: 09-Jan-2014




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
