                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6156

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Vanuatu                          Project ID:      P148079
                            Project Name:       Rural Electrification Project (P148079)
                            Task Team           Kamleshwar Prasad Khelawa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           18-Feb-2014                      Estimated        26-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASNS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Climate change (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         15.00                Total Bank Financing:       15.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   15.00
                              Total                                                                         15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed development objective (PDO) is to increase access to electricity services for rural
                           households and public institutions located in dispersed off-grid areas.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project, which will run for 6 years, will target some 17,500 households and 600 public facilities,
                           including schools, health centers and other small public service facilities nationwide that are
                           presently unelectrified, located beyond the economic and feasible grid extension area, and too
                         dispersed across the off-grid area to be considered in future projects for isolated micro- or mini-grid
                         configurations. For the successful electrification of this off-grid area, the least cost, practical and
                         nearest term solution is likely to be solar photovoltaic (PV) systems. For households, such systems
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are likely to be demand driven “plug and play? solar home systems for lighting with capability for
                         mobile phone charging and other small uses. For public facilities, such as schools and health centers,
                         special purpose systems, sourced through tender, will provide lighting as well as capability to power
                         devices, such as computers, DVD players, small TVs, electronic microscopy and refrigeration for
                         medicines. Experience from other rural programs in Vanuatu and other Pacific Island States,
                         indicates that the sustainable dissemination and maintenance of PV systems in remote areas is one of
                         the most challenging tasks in rural electrification. The Project will employ subsidies and private-
                         sector led marketing to enable access by up to 85% of off-grid households (totaling a target of
                         17,500) to solar PV systems. In cooperation with the Ministries of Health and Education, up to 90%
                         of unelectrified rural schools and public service institutions will be provided PV systems. There are
                         presently 11 private sector PV providers in Vanuatu; approximately 5 have been established for the
                         past 5 years at least, and have design, installation and maintenance capability for large PV systems,
                         such as those considered under Component 2 below. The project will include a screening study of
                         areas suitable for micro- and mini-grids for future project based micro-/mini-grid development.

                         The project will have four main components:

                         1.        Component 1: Electrification of off-grid households (US$ 4.0 – 5.0 million): This
                         component will “buy down? through subsidies the capital cost of PV systems, ranging from 2.5 peak
                         Watts (Wp) portable pico-solar lanterns to 30 Wp fixed panel, plug and play systems, to make them
                         affordable to the target off-grid households. Capital cost subsidies, initially based on system capacity,
                         will be passed on through participating accredited dealers to consumers purchasing in the open
                         competitive market. The exact level and schedule of subsidies will be determined at the preparation
                         stage; however, a preliminary study carried out for AusAID in 2011-2012 recommended a 50 percent
                         cost subsidy for home systems purchased by the consumer. In effect, this component will expand the
                         current limited commercial market in Vanuatu for 1-2 Wp pico-solar systems to the next or middle
Public Disclosure Copy




                         range of products that provide significantly higher outputs . This product range limits the systems
                         implemented by the Project to those that are portable or easily installed by the buyer. Because of this,
                         it is anticipated project implementation will be greatly simplified as the need for on-site provider
                         installation in individual homes is eliminated, along with the associated costs. Although the system
                         capacities are much lower than the “solar home systems? (SHS) category (approximately 50-100
                         Wp) used in projects in larger countries, this range of small plug and play systems is considered
                         highly suitable in the context of Vanuatu. Given the dispersed nature of off-grid populations in
                         Vanuatu, a dealer model (consumer buys equipment outright) or open market mechanism for PV
                         dissemination is proposed for the Project (see Component 3 below) as opposed to the fee-for-service
                         model (supplier charges an ongoing fee), which often requires a much longer lead time than dealer
                         models. Since a sufficient number of potential competing dealers already exist in the country, it is
                         anticipated the dealer model will continue to build capacity in the private sector, including on-going
                         maintenance associated with the portable home electric systems. Ongoing maintenance will require a
                         distribution system for replacement batteries, which will be a requirement for dealer accreditation.

                         2.       Component 2: Electricity access for off-grid public institutions (US$ 4.5 – 5.5 million). This
                         component will fully finance the procurement and installation of solar PV systems, ranging from
                         200-600 Wp capacity, for public institutions located in targeted off-grid areas, including but not
                         limited to schools, health centers and other small public service facilities. A modular design of the
                         solar PV systems will be followed for the public institutions to ensure the system can easily be
                         upgraded to meet the institutions’ needs in the future. This component will be implemented in
                         cooperation with the Ministries of Health and Education and others, as necessary. A competitive
                         tender process will be held to award a contract for the supply, installation and maintenance of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         systems over a five year period. To the extent permitted by geographic factors, the subprojects will
                         be bundled to achieve economies of scale and to facilitate regular maintenance. Accredited
                         companies participating in Component 1 will qualify to tender for activities under this Component.

                         3.       Component 3: Regulation, business development and studies (US$ 2.0 – 2.5 million). This
                         component will include: a) Establishment of regulations and national technical and consumer
                         protection standards for the installation and maintenance of solar PV systems to be used by the
                         private sector, and for environmental and social impact management, including the disposal of
                         batteries, as necessary; b) Accreditation and capacity building for private sector participants:
                         accreditation program that ensures their operation is financially sound, their personnel competency,
                         and their products meet minimum technical and quality standards, and provision of specialized
                         courses in PV technology, to expand availability of local technicians; c) Maintenance training
                         program: for long-term sustainability of the solar PV installations, a training program will be
                         provided to suppliers, local service providers and end users to build local capacity; d) Leveraging
                         microfinance: to encourage lending to rural consumers, the project facilitate development of
                         products, sharing of knowledge and training of borrowers; and e) Program targeting: to ensure least
                         cost solutions to electrify rural areas are considered, this project will undertake a preliminary
                         screening study to identify areas economically suited to electrification by micro- or mini-grids, by
                         examining population size, disbursement of the population, local energy resource availability,
                         proximity to the concession areas and other key factors. Further detailed studies will be undertaken,
                         outside of this project, to determine the feasibility, including identification of energy resources and
                         economics of micro- or mini-grids in the areas identified.

                         4.       Component 4: Project Management and Support (US$ 2.0 – 2.5 million). This component
                         will finance project management activities that will include: a) capacity building and implementation
                         support: assistance from experts and advisers to DoE to assist with the implementation of the Project,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including procurement support to manage and monitor the bidding process and contract and
                         independent verification processes. Verification is expected to be undertaken by a verification agent
                         who is independent of the project implementing agency to ensure that subsidies are only provided in
                         accordance with the project design; b) Workshops and training for the DoE: conduct courses,
                         seminars and other capacity building and training activities for DoE staff related to the technical
                         components of this project; and c) Awareness raising program: market the program to the rural
                         communities and Ministries, to the participating vendors/dealers and service providers, conduct
                         surveys and studies to identify prospective markets, and conduct promotional campaigns,
                         demonstrations and other activities to raise general public awareness.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Vanuatu and includes remote communities in the outer islands that are not in
                         close proximity to the existing grid to consider grid extensions feasible, or clustered in one area to
                         consider micro- or mini-grid installations, for providing access to basic electricity services.

                         Public Institutions: The existing buildings which will be selected for the installation of the PV
                         systems will be wholly owned by the Government of Vanuatu and installation will be within the
                         boundaries of the existing facilities.
                           Households: The PV systems intended for the households, which will be subsided by the Project, will
                           be simple systems that are portable or easily installed by the buyer. With this approach, on-site
                           provider installation in individual homes is prevented.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Department of Energy in the new Ministry of Climate Change Adaptation, Geo-Hazards
                           Meteorology, Energy and Environment has little experience with World Bank Safeguard policies.
                           However with the recently approved Energy Sector Development Project and the capacity
                           development measures planned, the client is expected to quickly gain knowledge and skills to handle
                           safeguard related aspects of the project. The project will prepare an Environmental Code of Practice
                           to guide the handling of safeguards, and will supplement all the above with targeted training of both
                           the client and beneficiaries in environmental and social management aspects.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Anil H. Somani (EASDE)
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (EASDE)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The project will subsidize/finance installation of
                           BP 4.01                                              PV panels in individual private households and
                                                                                in health and educational facilities owned by
                                                                                GoV. Most of the installation will be carried out
                                                                                in remote areas where extension of the existing
                                                                                electric grid or development of mini or micro
                                                                                grids may not be feasible or practical. Panels
                                                                                will be installed either on roof tops or mounted
                                                                                on pole(s), where roof orientation is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                suitable. As such there will be no construction
                                                                                related impacts. The major environmental issues
                                                                                associated with the installation will be the
                                                                                recycle/disposal of spent storage batteries at the
                                                                                end of their useful lives. This will be addressed
                                                                                through development of an appropriate program
                                                                                for collection, transport, storage and disposal of
                                                                                batteries. An Environmental Code of Practice
                                                                                for battery disposal and or regulations for waste
                                                                                disposal, fashioned after Fiji and other PI
                                                                                countries, will be developed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               Project activities will not take place in or impact
                                                                                Natural Habitat areas.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               Project activities will not impact Forests.

                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The project will not involve use of pesticides/
                                                                                herbicides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            It is anticipated that all PV panels will be
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         mounted on roofs and no new construction
                                                                                                                                 activities are anticipated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           Indigenous peoples are present in the area of
                                                                                                                                 influence due to the rural context of this project
                                                                                                                                 in the outer islands. Since the majority of
                                                                                                                                 beneficiaries are IPs, the project does not need
                                                                                                                                 to prepare any instrument and the elements of
                                                                                                                                 the IPP will be integrated into the design of the
                                                                                                                                 project including consultations for broader
                                                                                                                                 community support of the project.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            There will be no need for land since project
                                 4.12                                                                                            activities will take place within the existing
                                                                                                                                 confines of households and public facilities. The
                                                                                                                                 proposed study on identification and
                                                                                                                                 quantification of the remaining nationwide off-
                                                                                                                                 grid market for individual systems will examine
                                                                                                                                 population size, dispersion, local energy
                                                                                                                                 resource availability and other key factors, and
                                                                                                                                 will not result in immediate or near future
                                                                                                                                 investments.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            No dams will be affected by the project.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             No project activities will take place on
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There is no known disputed area in the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            area of influence.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      December 31, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Kamleshwar Prasad Khelawa

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)                                                                                                     Date: 26-Nov-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
