                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA6893
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Jul-2013, 25-Oct-2013, 03-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                               Project ID:    P127867
                            Project Name:       China: Qinghai Xining Urban Transport Project (P127867)
                            Task Team           Ke Fang
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           03-Jun-2013                         Estimated   27-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                         Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASCS                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                    Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Climate change (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       250.66                 Total Bank Financing:      120.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       130.66
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                          120.00
                              Total                                                                                          250.66
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enable Xining residents to travel between
                           the city center and the western part of the city in a fast, efficient, and safe manner, through strategic
                           improvements to Wusixi Road, a major transport and urban development corridor.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1: Urban Roads. This component will finance construction of three short road sections

                                                                          Page 1 of 9
                         (the total distance is less than 10km), which are part of the proposed integrated public transport
                         corridor and are necessary for providing good quality public transport services in newly developed
                         Xichuan District in the west of the city. Sufficient provisions for public transport and NMT will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         included to these roads. All road works will also include underground utilities, e.g. drainage and
                         sewerage pipes, and environmental protection measures.

                         Component 2: Public Transport. This component will finance improvements to public transport
                         infrastructure, operations, and complementary facilities on the proposed integrated public transport
                         corridor on Wusixi Road. Major improvements include: (i) construction of dedicated bus lanes,
                         construction of safe, comfort, and accessible bus stops and terminals; provision of bus priority
                         signals, and provision of safe and accessible pedestrian crossings, pedestrian paths, bicycle lanes and
                         other non-motorized transport facilities along the Wusixi Road corridor; (ii) installation and
                         operation of a new bus dispatching system utilizing intelligent transport systems (ITS) and advanced
                         public transport management; (iii) procurement of new buses which will be cleaner, safer, and more
                         user-friendly than the existing buses; and (iv) construction of a public transport interchange at the
                         western end of Wusixi Road corridor which will provide fast, efficient, and comfort transfers
                         between intra- and inter- city bus services, construction of two access roads to the interchange, as
                         well as development of an advanced management and service system for the interchange.

                         Component 3: Intelligent Traffic Management. This component will finance the development of an
                         intelligent traffic management system in support of the Wusixi Road public transport priority
                         corridor. It will include investments in installing and operating: (i) a traffic command center; (ii) an
                         area traffic control (ATC) system; and (iii) equipment for advanced traffic monitoring, enforcement,
                         and information services, such as closed-circuit television (CCTV) monitoring cameras, traffic
                         enforcement cameras, variable message signs, a data collection and analysis system, and the fiber
                         optical network.

                         Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building. This component will improve the city’s institutional
                         capacity for urban transport planning and management through financing the following activities: (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strategic studies in support of achieving the PDO and the city’s development goals; (ii) training and
                         knowledge exchange for government officials and technical staff involved in urban transport
                         planning, public transport service planning and management, and traffic and safety management; (iii)
                         project management support including project monitoring and evaluation and technical consultancies
                         for implementation of the ICM approach; and (iv) public communication on the ICM approach.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is located in Xining, the capital of Qinghai Province in the western part of
                         China. Xining is located in the eastern part of Qinghai province and in the Huang River Valley of the
                         Qinghai-Tibet Plateau with an average altitude of over 2200 meters. The urban population is about
                         1.2 million concentrating on the built up areas in a total size of 104 km2.

                         The proposed roads projects are located in the western part of the Xining City, where current land
                         use is farmland and rural residential area.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zhefu Liu (EASCS)
                         Peishen Wang (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes            The proposed project includes construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         three new urban roads with total length of 8.1km,
                                                                         one bus interchange hub (including two short
                                                                         branch roads of 0.8km surrounding the hub) and
                                                                         improvement of a bus corridor. These physical
                                                                         construction activities will have potential adverse
                                                                         environmental impacts, e.g. nuisance of dust and
                                                                         noise, wastewater and spoil materials, disturbance
                                                                         to traffic and local communities along the roads,
                                                                         etc. Environmental impacts during operation
                                                                         mainly include noise, road safety, vehicle
                                                                         emission, disposal of waste and wastewater
                                                                         generated at the bus interchange hub etc. These
                                                                         potential impacts are common issues for urban
                                                                         infrastructure construction, and are small scale,
                                                                         site-specific, and can be readily mitigated with
                                                                         well-known engineering design and good
                                                                         construction management practice. The project is
                                                                         classified as a category B project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             The project is in the urban and peri-urban area
                                                                         of Xining and the areas already disturbed by
                                                                         intensive human activities. The project will not
                                                                         convert, degrade or restore any natural habitats or
                                                                         critical natural habitats, and hence this policy is
                                                                         not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project will not finance activities that would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                         critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                         habitats as defined under the policy. Hence this
                                                                         policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             This policy is not triggered. The project is not
                                                                         expected to procure pesticides or impact on pest
                                                                         management practice.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            A number of individual family tombs are to be
                         BP 4.11                                         relocated, which has been adequately addressed
                                                                         through the Resettlement Action Plan. In
                                                                         addition, chance-find procedures is included in
                                                                         the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             The main project area is located about 10-15 km
                                                                         away from the downtown area. The project will
                                                                         affect six villages by land acquisition and housing
                                                                         demolition. The task team conducted the
                                                                         screening in those affected villages and
                                                                         concluded that no minority communities which
                                                                         are considered as Indigenous Peoples according


                                                                 Page 3 of 9
                                                                                to OP4.10 are inside or near these villages.
                                                                                Hence, OP 4.10 was not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes                A resettlement action plan was prepared to
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.12                                                mitigate the negative impacts on land acquisition
                                                                                and housing demolition.
                                                                                A due diligence review was conducted and
                                                                                reported the roads that link to the proposed roads
                                                                                under this project in the RAP.
                                                                                A resettlement policy framework was prepared to
                                                                                provide the resettlement procedures and
                                                                                guidelines for another two locally funded roads
                                                                                linked to the proposed roads under this project,
                                                                                which might be implemented prior to the Closure
                                                                                of the Bank loan.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                 The project will not involve impacts to any
                                                                                dams in the project area. This policy is not
                                                                                triggered.
                            Projects on International        No                   The project will not involve trans-boundary
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                The policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Environmental safeguards

                             The project area is peri-urban area of Xining City where land use is farmland and rural residential
                             areas. The environmental issues of the proposed project activities are mainly construction related
                             impacts, e.g. nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater and spoil materials, disturbance to traffic and
                             local communities along the roads, etc. Limited impacts during operation stage mainly include
                             noise, road safety, vehicle emission, disposal of waste and wastewater generated at the bus
                             interchange hub etc.

                             Among potential environmental impacts, the main sensitive environmental sites include a
                             Huangshuihe River (where Xicheng Ave will cross) and a small Yunguchuan River (where Wusi
                             Road will cross). To protect the two rivers, careful selection of bridge scheme and design were
                             adopted to avoid in-water piers and maintain the original hydrological condition undisturbed.

                             A few individual family tombs are to be relocated due to road construction. These graves were
                             identified and consultations were conducted with concerned families. The relocation of these
                             tombs under OP4.11 is addressed under OP4.12.

                             The potential impacts of the project are common issues for urban infrastructure construction, and
                             are small scale, site-specific and temporary, and can be readily mitigated with well-known


                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                         engineering design and good construction management practice. There is no large scale,
                         significant or irreversible impacts envisaged in the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social safeguards

                         Since collective land and private structures will be required by the project, Bank Involuntary
                         Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 is triggered. During the project preparation, the resettlement negative
                         impacts were analyzed by the institutes in charge of feasibility study and the RAP preparation to
                         optimize the project design. The project designs were refined to minimize the negative impacts to
                         land acquisition and to avoid housing demolition as much as possible. The project will require
                         acquisition of 52.8 hectares of land, including 52.3 hectares of collective land, and 0.5 hectares of
                         state owned land. It will also require demolition of 150,661 square meters of structures. The
                         number of families affected by land acquisition will be 481 households with 1921 persons, among
                         them 121 households with 527 populations to be relocated.

                         A number of individual family tombs are to be relocated due to road construction. These tombs
                         were identified and consultations with concerned families were conducted. It is concluded that
                         these scattered graves belong to individual families, and do not have archaeological,
                         paleontological, architectural, religious, aesthetic or cultural significance. Following the
                         consultation with the World Bank Physical Cultural Resources Advisor for recent projects, it is
                         agreed that these graves are considered as physical cultural resources as per OP4.11 Physical
                         Culture Resources and therefore OP4.11 is triggered. As individual household tombs are a
                         common issue under infrastructure projects in China, there are well established national/local
                         regulations governing the consultation, relocation and compensation that have been fully
                         incorporated into the RAP process in line with OP4.12.

                         The RAP prepared by the project entity provides detail regarding resettlement policy principles
                         and regulations to be followed, compensation rates and budget, mitigation measures to restore
                         incomes where necessary and institutional and monitoring arrangements. The draft RAP was
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disclosed at municipal website by March 26, 2013 and the final RAP, including due diligence
                         review to the identified linkage projects and the resettlement policy framework (RPF) to address
                         the linked projects that will be implemented prior to the Closure of the Bank loan, was advertised
                         at municipal website by June 15, 2013.

                         A resettlement office under Xining PMO will be set up to supervise the resettlement
                         implementation and the branches of the resettlement offices in the district and county will
                         implement the RAP. The Xining land and resources bureaus will be responsible for the land
                         acquisition approval and carry out resettlement supervision based on the national requirement.

                         A due diligence review was conducted and identified that one ring road funded by the municipal
                         government will be completed in Year 2014 and the land acquisition on Yanxiaocun Bus Terminal
                         was completed prior to the project identification. The due diligence review confirmed that these
                         activities were carried out in accordance with Chinese land law, Qinghai provincial land
                         administrative management regulation and local regulation. The living conditions of the resettled
                         people have been restored in compliance of the substantive aspects of Bank involuntary
                         resettlement.

                         Another two roads linked to the Bank supported project might be implemented prior to the
                         Closure of the Bank loan. A resettlement policy framework was prepared to address the

                                                                    Page 5 of 9
                          resettlement issues to be carried out based on the Bank OP 4.12 and the RPF provided the
                          resettlement procedures and guidelines.
                          Gender impact surveys were conducted and the impacts were an alyzed. The mitigation measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                          to address women’s concerns were adopted according to the information collected from public
                          consultations and women focus-group discussions. Those were presented in the RAP.
                          Resettlement independent monitoring will supervise the associated activities and report to the
                          PMO and the Bank.

                           As part of due diligence work a socio-economic impact survey was carried out, which concluded
                           that there are no minority communities in the affected villages of the project area. This finding is
                           also confirmed in conclusions of the RAP. Therefore, the Bank Policy on Indigenous Peoples OP/
                           BP 4.10 was not triggered.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There will be urbanization development in the project area according to the master plan of city
                           development.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives of road section, bridge scheme have been considered during the feasibility study and
                           EA preparation, with overall consideration of environmental, social, technical and economic
                           factors.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An EIA and EMP have been prepared for the project by an EA institute with previous World Bank
                           project experiences. The EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse environmental and social
                           impacts, based on which a stand-alone EMP was developed to identify environmental management
                           setup, mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting and budget estimate. The EMP includes (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           generic Environmental Code Of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for inclusion in the bidding
                           documents and contracts; (ii) Specific mitigations measures for potential adverse impacts during
                           operation; (iii) Institutional arrangement of Environmental supervision, monitoring plan and
                           Reporting requirements and (iv) EMP implementation budget.

                          The main environmental concerns and mitigation measures include:
                          •        Crossing sensitive sites: The project road Xichengdajie Avenue will cross Huangshuihe
                          River (classified as water source protection area) via bridge. Alternative bridge schemes were
                          studies with overall consideration of environmental, social, technical and economic aspects. The
                          final scheme selected has no in-water piers to avoid disturbance of waterbody during construction.
                          The Wusi Road will cross a small creek Yunguchuan, where two alternatives were compared. The
                          selected culvert scheme maintained the original river channel with minimum disturbance. Strict
                          construction management will be enforced during construction stage to minimize the potential
                          impact on water quality and hydrology. In addition, a few individual family tombs are to be
                          relocated due to road construction. These tombs were identified and consultations were conducted
                          with concerned families. The relocation of these tombs under OP4.11 is being addressed under
                          OP4.12.

                          •       Construction related impacts: The main impacts of the project will be the nuisance related
                          to construction activities, including dust, noise, wastewater and solid waste management, social


                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                          disturbance, traffic safety etc. Cumulative impacts from Nanraocheng (South Perimeter Road),
                          Wusi Xilu and expansion of Chaidamu Road are also considered in the EIA. These impacts are of
                          temporary feature and can be readily mitigated with sound planning and construction management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The key measures include: proper planning of road traffic diversion; coordination with police
                          department, and prior notice through public media; proper relocation of public utility facilities
                          without interrupting usual life of local community; arrangement of temporary access with
                          adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, protection net, night light etc.) for local residents,
                          business, schools etc.; bulletin board information disclosure; use of low noise equipment and
                          proper maintenance; installation of temporary noise reduction facility if necessary; night-time
                          construction will be restricted, and prior public notice as well as EPB approval are required for
                          activities that need continuous construction over nighttime; frequent water spraying on
                          construction site and access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials
                          and timely site clean up after construction; careful balance of excavation and backfilling and fully
                          reuse of spoil material; etc.

                          EMP implementation will be managed by Xining PMO. An environmental management unit will
                          be established in the PMO with dedicated environmental staff. The contractors and supervision
                          engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective
                          implementation of the EMP.

                          The PMO contracted an experienced institute to guide the social safeguards documentation. The
                          relevant agencies to engage into the project implementation participated into the project
                          preparation. During the project preparation, the social safeguards consulting institute worked with
                          the design institute in charge of project feasibility study on the selections of the project locations.
                          The analytical works were undertaken and the project negative impacts were minimized, and the
                          mitigation measures were developed according to the Bank requirement. Public consultations were
                          undertaken by the consulting institute and the project entities in the engaged district/county to
                          address the importance of the safeguards policy. The project preparation was a well-done process
                          to disseminate the Bank requirement on social safeguards and combined the people concerns into
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the RAP and also important process to provide on-job training courses to each engaged levels of
                          the agencies in the district/county and as well as village level.

                          An experienced monitoring institute, independent to the PMO and the project agencies, will be
                          contracted to monitoring the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed by
                          the Bank twice a year as requested.

                           Though with little direct experience of Bank projects, the PMO and sub-project proponents are
                           familiar with domestic environmental and social safeguards polices which are close to Bank
                           policies. Safeguards training and guidance are provided to the PMO during the project preparation
                           stage, and the Bank will closely supervise the project safeguards performance during
                           implementation stage.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the project areas and
                           the adjacent areas as Laobaixing strongly requested through people’s meetings and media. The
                           project stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the engaged districts and
                           counties. The affected people considered the project will give them opportunities to have better
                           living environment and develop their businesses.


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
                           were conducted among project-affected public in the project area following to both national
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental and social policies as well as World Bank policies (OP4.01 and OP4.12). The main
                           public concerns (e.g. land acquisition/resettlement compensation, noise, dust etc.) have been
                           incorporated in the project design and RAP and EMP mitigation measures. Public consultation
                           will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the district and county and also the independent
                           monitoring agency, and the project information were disseminated to the displaced families for
                           refining the project design, and the locations of the project.

                           The EIA/EMP have been locally disclosed on Jan 30, 2013 (and again on April 25, 2013) in the
                           website of Xining Urban-rural Development Commission and public offices of local villages, with
                           announcement published in Xining Wanbao newspaper on Jan 31, 2013. The draft RAP has been
                           locally disclosed at the municipal website since March 26, 2013. The final RAP/RPF was
                           advertised at municipal website by June 15, 2013. The EIA/EMP and RAP/RPF have been
                           disclosed in InfoShop on May 3, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-May-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Jan-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-May-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            26-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Ke Fang
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                          Date: 03-Dec-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
