                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA7694

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Indonesia                         Project ID:    P149737
                                                        Parent         P126424
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      ID-TF Additional Financing for PNPM Peduli (P149737)
   Parent Project     Indonesia: PNPM Peduli (P126424)
   Name:
   Task Team          Natasha Hayward
   Leader:
   Estimated                                            Estimated   10-Feb-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     EASID                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), Law and justice (20%),
                     General education sector (20%), Health (20%), SME Fin ance (20%)
   Theme(s):         HIV/AIDS (20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%), Social
                     Inclusion (20%), Social risk mitigation (20%), Child health (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       0.70           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 0.00
     Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                            0.70
     Total                                                                                    0.70
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?



                                             Page 1 of 10
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The development objective of PNPM Peduli is to strengthen the capacities of Indonesian CSOs to
   reach and empower marginalized communities to improve their socio-economic conditions.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The three components for the projects have not changed and remain as:

A. To create partnerships between CSOs and marginalized groups for implementation strategies to
empower these groups. In creating partnerships between CSOs and marginalized groups to
implement strategies that empower the groups to become self-reliant, take action and participate,
this component will finance small economic activities supporting access to health / education and
legal services, provision of specialized services and activities on rights and social justice.

B. To strengthen Indonesian CSOs capacities to empower marginalized groups. This com[ponnet
aims to strengthen the capacity of Indonesian CSOs to act as facilitators in a development process
where marginalized men, women, children and transgender persons are empowered to take action,
access services and participate. This component finances CSOs capacity building activities such as
training, learning forums, peer reviews and mentorship.

C. To strengthen the capacities of Indonesian executing organizations to identify and provide grants
and technical support to CSOs partners that work with and empower marginalized groups. This
component aims to strengthen the capacities of executing agencies at national level to manage small
grants, identify and provide technical support to CSOs partners that work with marginalized groups.
This component finances technical assistance, capacity support and mentoring executing
organizations.
In its National Mid-Term Development Plan 2010-2014, the Government of Indonesia (GoI) made
inclusive and equitable growth a main priority, whereby the potential of all citizens is realized.
PNPM Peduli was conceptualized by GoI in 2010 as part of promoting inclusive and equitable
growth. It responds to the growing awareness that the broad brush strokes of PNPM Mandiri were
not reaching certain populations excluded from mainstream development processes. This was due to
factors such as discrimination, stigma and/or geographic and social isolation that limit their access to
the rights, services and opportunities afforded to other citizens. PNPM Peduli partners with local
civil society organizations (CSOs) working locally with marginalized groups in order to fill gaps left
by PNPM Mandiri and other Government programs.

Three national CSOs (the program’s Executing Organizations, or EOs) were selected through a
competitive process and in June 2011. Separate grant agreements were then signed between the PSF
and 1) Association for Community Empowerment (ACE); 2) Partnership for Governance Reform
(Kemitraan); and 3) the Institute for Human Resource Study and Development under Nadlahtul
Ulama (Lakpesdam/NU). The three EOs have awarded sub-grants to 66 local partners (either CSOs
or branches of their organization) to implement activities together with marginalized communities.


                                             Page 2 of 10
To date, the program has involved 14,400 marginalized individuals connected into 437 community
groups in 231 villages, across 91 districts in 25 provinces.

Through local projects carried out under the program, excluded communities and individuals are
accessing an open menu of activities in health, education, agriculture, economic development, and
human rights. Activities to date have included access to basic services including healthcare and
education, such as ID cards and mobile health clinics to remote indigenous communities and small-
scale livelihoods. CSOs and communities also engage with local government on their rights, and
access to services and livelihoods. PNPM Peduli activities will continue to foster inclusive growth
providing support services and technical assistance to marginalized groups currently not able to
access, or access easily, PNPM and other poverty reduction and social protection programs.

In 2012, an independent review was carried out for the first year’s implementation of PNPM Peduli.
The review concluded that the project was making great strides in responding to priorities identified
by GoI and the project was well-positioned to support the inclusion of marginalized groups within
government services and poverty alleviation programs. Beneficiaries were able to articulate emerging
changes related to increased awareness, improved confidence, higher levels of participation, and the
expansion of social networks and improved bargaining power. The review also noted that the
achievements of PNPM Peduli in establishing the architecture for the delivery of the Project are
significant and is forging internal change within the World Bank.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
In Phase I, the program is reaching 231 villages in 91 districts across 25 provinces: Bali, Banten,
Bengkulu, Central Java, Central Kalimantan, Central Sulawesi, DI Yogyakarta , DKI Jakarta, East
Java, East Kalimantan, East Nusa Tenggara, Jambi, Lampung, Maluku , Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam,
North Sumatera, North Sulawesi, Papua , South Sulawesi, South Sumatera, West Java, West Papua,
West Nusa Tenggara, West Kalimantan , West Sumatera.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Juan Martinez (EASIS)
Dennie Stenly Mamonto (EASIS)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             This policy is triggered because the project
 BP 4.01                                            involves construction of village infrastructure for
                                                    small economic activities, and inclusion of
                                                    vulnerable groups of people. However, most
                                                    projects are small-scale and therefore there are no
                                                    large-scale, significant, or irreversible impacts
                                                    anticipated to occur from these activities. Most
                                                    sub-grants will focus on capacity and skills
                                                    training to marginalized beneficiaries, advocacy,
                                                    legal aid and participatory governance. Any
                                                    potential negative environmental and social
                                                    impacts will therefore typically be negligible,
                                                    site-specific, small in scale and can be managed
                                                    locally by adopting screening criteria and



                                            Page 3 of 10
                                                adequate mitigation measures as outlined in the
                                                Operational Manual and specifically in the
                                                Environmental and Social Codes of Practices
                                                (ECOPs). Further the project will implement
                                                measures to ensure inclusion of the marginalized
                                                and vulnerable groups of people at every stage of
                                                the subproject cycle through the application of the
                                                participatory approach.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

Pest Management OP 4.09           No

Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The policy is triggered due to the presence of
                                                Indigenous Peoples in the project areas and
                                                sSeveral sub-projects specifically target
                                                indigenous people to improve their economic and
                                                social conditions. All sub-grant projects,
                                                including those working with indigenous peoples,
                                                will be prepared with free prior and informed
                                                consultation in order to provide for broad
                                                community support throughout the participatory
                                                project cycle, in design, implementation,
                                                monitoring and evaluation. These processes are
                                                described in the sub-grant proposals and tracked
                                                through quarterly reports (templates developed by
                                                the program) and field monitoring and outlined in
                                                the IPPF which is part of the IGSES for the
                                                PNPM Rural.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            This policy is not triggered because the project
4.12                                            activities are small scale and focused on capacity
                                                building and community organizing and therefore
                                                do not require land. In the event that small pieces
                                                of land are required, voluntary land donation will
                                                be applied. Details on the voluntary land donation
                                                process are provided for in the IGSES. It is
                                                expected that there will be no adverse impacts on
                                                individuals or communities as a result of these
                                                activities.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                                  No



                                        Page 4 of 10
   Projects on International
   Waterways
   Projects    OP/BP 7.50
            in Disputed  Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The environmental assessment rating for the project remains unchanged and the safeguard
     framework of PNPM Peduli will apply to the proposed AF. The project is classified as Category B
     given that it is unlikely to lead to significant adverse social and environmental impacts.

    The project is under the PNPM Mandiri umbrella, with the main Government counterpart being
    The Coordinating Ministry of People’s Welfare (Kemenko Kesra), providing strategic oversight to
    the program. The safeguards framework outlined in the PNPM umbrella Implementation
    Guidelines of Social and Environmental Safeguards (IGSES) that has been updated with several
    improvements is the main instrument that applies to PNPM Peduli. This includes the existing
    PNPM Environmental and Social Codes of Practices (ECOPs) and Indigenous Peoples Planning
    Framework. The PNPM Peduli Operational Manual is the main reference document for CSOs to
    gain information on the aforementioned safeguards instruments and their use.

    PNPM Peduli EOs and local CSO partners and branches are implementing projects covering the
    following thematic areas: economic development, agriculture and rural development, forestry,
    husbandry, fisheries, social empowerment, human rights, health, reproductive health, education,
    legal aid, policy advocacy.

    Below is a list of examples of activities financed under PNPM Peduli:

    •       Provision of health and education services (eg. mobile clinics) to remote or isolated
    communities that cannot access public services,
    •       Policy advocacy work empowering marginalized people,
    •       Leadership training for cadres,
    •       Provision of legal aid services and legal education,
    •       Training of health service providers,
    •       Preventive health care
    •       Skills training (rattan processing, rubber cultivation, organic farming)
    •       Business training to marginalized individuals or groups (e.g. business plan development,
    marketing), provision of small equipment for livelihood development (e.g. weaving machine,
    fishing nets, food processing machine), and provision of animal husbandry for beneficiaries.

    Most projects are small-scale and therefore there are no large-scale, significant, or irreversible
    negative impacts anticipated to occur from these activities. Most of the sub-grants in PNPM
    Peduli will be focused on capacity building and skills training to marginalized beneficiaries,
    advocacy, legal aid and participatory governance. One sub-project includes the disposal of minor
    clinical waste and the safeguards team has reviewed the project's processes for removal of this
    waste. The sub-project has sound mitigation measures in place to ensure no adverse impacts on the
    environment or community. Any potential negative environmental impacts will therefore typically


                                             Page 5 of 10
 be negligible, site-specific, small in scale and can be managed locally by adopting screening
 criteria and adequate mitigation measures as outlined in the Operational Manual and specifically in
 the Environmental and Social Codes of Practices (ECOPs). The IGSES of the PNPM Rural will
 also be used as a guideline to anticipate potential social and environmental negative impacts of
 new activity proposals in the PNPM Peduli AF which are not covered in ECOPs, such as clinic
 waste management and village infrastructure development.

 Indigenous peoples are present in the project area and several of the sub-projects specifically target
 indigenous people with the aim of improving their economic and social conditions. All sub-grant
 projects working with indigenous peoples are expected to be prepared with free prior and informed
 consultation with indigenous community support throughout the project cycle in order to promote
 broad community support during design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
 subprojects. These processes are described in the sub-grant proposals and tracked through
 quarterly reports (templates developed by the program). The Indigenous Peoples Planning
 Framework contains the principles and elements for identifying potential negative impacts, a
 framework for implementing free prior and informed consultation with the effected indigenous
 communities in each stage of the subproject cycle; institutional arrangements for screening project
 supported activities, evaluating their effects on indigenous communities; and monitoring and
 reporting arrangements.

 EOs will not approve sub-grants or utilize PNPM Peduli funds to finance ineligible activities and
 materials and substances banned under the project’s negative list (in the Operational Manual).

  Land purchase or compensation has been listed as an ineligible activity in the PNPM Peduli
  Operational Manual, and with PNPM Peduli activities predominantly focus on capacity building
  and skills training. There is no involuntary resettlement (there will be no activities involving
  infrastructure) and adverse impacts from small scale land acquisition. In the event small pieces of
  land are required for project activities, voluntary land donation will be applied. Processes for
  voluntary land donation have been outlined in , the existing PNPM IGSES and Environmental and
  Social Codes of Practices (ECOPs) describes the process of how to document and archive the land
  donations.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  There are no significant long-term potential impacts triggered by this project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  PNPM Peduli is implemented by Executing Organizations which are responsible for screening
  possible environmental and social impacts of their sub-grant activities during planning. If any
  impacts are identified they are provided with supervision and guidance for developing and
  implementing measures to mitigate the impacts. Specific guidelines for environmental
  management and Indigenous People safeguards issues will be referred to in the updated IGSES
  2012. The safeguards screening, implementation and reporting is outlined in the PNPM Peduli
  Operational Manual and reference to these guidelines are included in the sub-grant manuals.



                                            Page 6 of 10
 In the initial Original Project start-up, on 25 March 2011, the World Bank conducted a safeguards
 assessment of the EOs’ capacity to identify and mitigate safeguards risks. The assessment
 identified very limited understanding of the World Bank safeguard policies and the need for
 strengthening EO capacity to manage potential environmental and social safeguard risks related to
 implementation of activities. Initial safeguards training was then provided to EOs on 30 March
 2011, to provide basic knowledge on safeguard policies and how to manage potential
 environmental and social risks. The PNPM Peduli Operational Manual includes specific
 environmental and social guidelines for screening site-specific impact. The EOs’ progress
 implementation reports contains a section on safeguard implementation for applicable cases.

 The World Bank has and will continue to provide safeguards training and support during project
 implementation. Following the provision of ‘train the trainer’ training EOs are in a position to
 provide safeguards training to their sub-grantees so that they have the capacity to manage any
 potential safeguards risks. Close supervision and monitoring from the Task Team and safeguards
 team is being provided during project implementation, specifically for safeguards compliance, and
 will continue under the AF.

 The WB’s Safeguards assessment was then updated on 29 April 2013 with visiting missions and
 discussion with 3 existing EOs and their CSO partners in Jogjakarta, West Kalimantan and South
 Sulawesi provinces. The EOs and CSOs involved in the updated assessment were Satunama
 foundation (ACE partner), YPPN (Kemitraan partner) and Lakpesdam NU Bulukumba
 (Lakpesdam NU branch). The assessment for the existing EOs found that the activities of the
 PNPM Peduli project showed that stakeholders and beneficiaries have implemented some
 safeguards compliance measures, such as making the indigenous people and the marginalised
 people as the main target of the activity and promoting and implementing the environmental
 friendly principles.

 However, it was evident that the EOs and CSOs involved in the assessment, while following steps,
 did not fully understand safeguards and applicability of the relevant policies. The training and
 guidance on the safeguards policy implementation had not therefore been sufficient up to that date.
 Information transfer on safeguards was done once in the national level meetings, but it had not
 been well followed up with beneficiaries in project locations. The safeguards implementation
 documentation was not well managed.

  As an example, the safeguards aspects were not always well identified in the proposal of the
  program partners, in spite of a dedicated column for initial screening outputs. The column was
  found to be empty in some cases where the proposed activities related to safeguards, for instance,
  the involvement of indigenous people. Additional ‘refresher’ training regarding the safeguards
  implementation under the AF were recommended for the existing EOs . Where Safeguards issues
  are identified, the PSF has been providing support to national and local CSO partners to prepare
  and document appropriate mitigation measures. Some improvement has been seen in the ability of
  CSOs to document specific mitigation measures carried out compared with the beginning of the
  pilot in 2011 where they required a lot more support from the PSF. Safeguards documentation
  should continue to be improved by ensuring that the safeguards aspects and the positive success
  stories are part of both the proposals and the regular activity reports.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders and decision makers regarding day to day activity implementation are the


                                           Page 7 of 10
  PNPM Peduli EOs, local CSO partners/branches and beneficiaries. CSOs/branches are expected to
  develop their project designs and activities in close partnership with beneficiaries and involve
  beneficiaries in all stages of the project cycle (consultation, design, implementation, review).

  Project activities have reached more than 14,000 marginalized people including adult and children
  victims of trafficking, boatless fisherfolk, homeless and landless ethnic minorities, landless
  farmers, male and female sex workers, migrant workers, people living with HIV and AIDS,
  plantation laborers, poor ethnic minorities, poor farmers, poor female-headed households, poor
  indigenous people, poor people in the state border area, poor women micro-entrepreneurs, youth
  drop-outs, scavengers/garbage collectors, sexual minorities, street beggars, street children,
  transgender people, victims of conflict, victims of domestic or community abuse, and youth in
  conflict with the law.

  Disclosure is mandatory. The PNPM Rural Operations Manual, including IEGSES, were
  disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on the PNPM Rural website http://pnpm-perdesaan.or.id/ on 5
  October 2012. An executive summary of the IGSES in English is available through the Bank’s
  InfoShop. Additional English-language material is available upon request. PNPM Peduli’s
  Operational Manual which contains provisions on safeguards policies as outlined under the parent
  project was originally posted on the PSF and EO websites in July 2011 and updated in October
  2012. In order to promote access and understanding of such information amongst target remote IP
  and other marginalized groups, the Project has been successful in utilizing its local networks, CSO
  partnerships, for consultation and project outreach to share information and ensure involvement of
  communities during project planning, preparation, ongoing monitoring and evaluation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Aug-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     05-Oct-2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

 Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Aug-2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      05-Oct-2012




                                            Page 8 of 10
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                           12-Sep-2012
  Comments: Disclosure is mandatory. The PNPM Rural Operations Manual, including IEGSES,
                were disclosed in Bahasa Indonesia on the PNPM Rural website http://pnpm-
                perdesaan.or.id/ on 5 October 2012. An executive summary of the IGSES in English
                is available through the Bank’sInfoShop. Additional English-language material is
                available upon request. PNPM Peduli’s Operational Manual which contains
                provisions on safeguards policies as outlined under the parent project was originally
                posted on the PSF and EO websites in July 2011 and updated in October 2012. In
                order to promote access and understanding of such information amongst target
                remote IP and other marginalized groups, the Project has been successful in utilizing
                its local networks, CSO partnerships, for consultation and project outreach to share
                information and ensure involvement of communities during project planning,
                preparation, ongoing monitoring and evaluation.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Sector Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?

                                            Page 9 of 10
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Natasha Hayward
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (RSA)                     Date: 17-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Kevin A Tomlinson (SM)                         Date: 22-Apr-2014




                                            Page 10 of 10
