INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR1 150
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cambodia                   Project ID:  P109648
Project Name: Cambodia Trade Development Support Program (RETF093573) (P109648)
Task Team       Julian Latimer Clarke
Leader(s):
Estimated       14-Oct-2008                Estimated    05-Jan-2009
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Public administration- Industry and trade (100%)
Theme:          Export development and competitiveness (50%), Trade facilitation and market
access (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      12.35            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
Cambodia Trade Development Trust Fund                           12.35
Total                                                           12.35
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The objective of the proposed Cambodia multi-donor trust fund for trade-related assistance ("Trade
Development Trust Fund" or TDTF) is to maximize the contribut                   ion
of trade to economic development and poverty reduction in Cambodia. The purp
Page 1 of4


﻿ose of the activities to be funded by the TDTF is to increase efficiency in poli
cy implementation, transparency in trade-related transactions, export competitiv
eness, and institutional and human capacity.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The objective of the proposed Cambodia multi-donor trust fund for trade-related assistance ("Trade
Development Trust Fund" or TDTF) is to maximize the contribut                    ion
of trade to economic development and poverty reduction in Cambodia. The purp
o        ose of the activities to be funded by the TDTF is to increase efficiency in poli
cy implementation, transparency in trade-related transactions, export competitiv
eness, and institutional and human capacity.
3. Project Description
The TDTF - a programmatic MDTF - has 2 main components: (i) Recipient Executed investment
type of operation which includes technical assistance and capacity building initiatives; and (ii) Bank
Executed component with analytical and advisory services activities and a technical facilitating team.
The main role of the latter is to provide advisory services to trade-related agencies implementing the
MDTF and assistance to the TTL on technical aspects of rolling-out a comprehensive trade initiative
as well as overall TF program management. Recipient executed activities will be defined in greater
detail the Results Based Action Plan approved by the government. Indicatively, the areas that will be
supported, in cooperation with other development partners, may include: trade facilitation, including
customs reform and modernization; improved product quality and compliance with international SPS
and TBT standards; and prioritized implementation of the RGC's WTO commitments.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The program will be implemented nationwide with policy towards achieving maximized contribution
of trade to economic development and poverty reduction in the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
U        Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment   No
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
Pest Management OP 4.09    No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37  No
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Page 2 of 4


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The overall program operation does not raise any significant environmental or social concerns.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No negative long-term environmental or social impacts are foreseen by this operation. The
project is financing minor renovations works for existing office building, there is no scope for any
kind of land acquisition, taking of assets, or restrictions on use of natural resources.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The program will not finance any activities which may either cause depletion of natural resources
or adverse environmental impacts, but rather capture long-term pro-poor and environmentally and
socially sustainable development.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
There is no safeguard policy triggered by the program.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders have been consulted through the project preparation to achieve maximized pro-
poor and sustainable development.
o        B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
O
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 3 of 4


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Julian Latimer Clarke
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Ian John Douglas Gillson (PMGR)      Date: 16-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


