                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR8713
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Bulgaria                                     Project ID:           P099895
                            Project Name:       Municipal Infrastructure Development (P099895)
                            Task Team           Anna Cestari
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           18-May-2009                                  Estimated   24-Nov-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSUW                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (65%), Public
                                                administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (35%)
                            Theme:              Water resource management (60%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                                (30%), Land administration and management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       148.30           Total Bank Financing:                                       118.70
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              29.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                118.70
                              Total                                                                                                148.30
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project objective is to improve the provision of water and wastewater supply. This
                           objective will be met through: a) preparing projects eligible f                             or EU


                                                                                 Page 1 of 11
                         Structural funds; b) updating land use plans in the coastal
                         municipalities                                  . The land use plans will review the water and
                         wastewater investment needs; c)                                   rehabilitating the water network
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and supporting institutional improvements in RW                                     Cs; and d)
                         rehabilitating and completing dams to ensure adequate water supply.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed project objective is to improve the provision of water and wastewater supply. This
                         objective will be met through: a) preparing projects eligible f                                or EU
                         Structural funds; b) updating land use plans in the coastal
                         municipalities                                  . The land use plans will review the water and
                         wastewater investment needs; c)                                   rehabilitating the water network
                         and supporting institutional improvements in RW                                     Cs; and d)
                         rehabilitating and completing dams to ensure adequate water supply.
                          3. Project Description
                         The project consists of three components:

                         Component 1 (Project Implementation Support), financing project operations;
                         Component 2 (Preparation of Master Plans), financing the preparation of Regional water supply and
                         sewerage master plans covering the whole of Bulgaria, except Sofia city and;
                         Component 3 (Completion and Rehabilitation of Dams) funding the rehabilitation/construction of
                         dams and associated water treatment plants.

                         As a result of project restructuring, the project was scaled down in a following manner:

                         Component 3 was scaled down by dropping the construction of the Neikovtsi dam due to insufficient
                         funds. Based on updated cost estimates, the current funding is sufficient to cover the costs for
                         construction of three dams, i.e. Plovdivtsi, Luda Yana and Studena. However, the design for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Neikovtsi dam will still be completed under the project.

                         Addition to component 3 presents the rehabilitation of Studena Water Treatment Plant (WTP). This
                         investment is supported by the Master Plan for the Pernik designated area prepared with project
                         financing, and it is linked to the Studena dam. The WTP, proposed to be rehabilitated under the
                         project, provides drinking water to more than 90 000 residents in the municipality of Pernik,
                         including the city of Pernik. The WTP is envisaged to be rehabilitated through a design-and-build
                         contract.


                         The restructuring also supports the extension of the Closing Date by 24 months, to December 31,
                         2017, which would allow sufficient time for completion of all works, and for impoundment of the
                         reservoirs to deliver water to the treatment plants for final testing. Funds are reallocated from
                         Components 2 and 3 to Component 1 to finance the Project Implementation Support Assistance
                         (PISA) and construction site supervision consultants through the extended project closing date.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The restructuring excludes the Neikovtsi dam from original project scope. It however adds the
                         Pernik-Studena WTP as a new investment for the project in the vicinity of Studena dam, supported


                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                           by the project. This is a simple rehabilitation of an existing plant and is considered a category B
                           investment. An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared and implemented. Given
                           that the rehabilitation works will be undertaken entirely within the premises of the current WTP no
Public Disclosure Copy




                           land acquisition (not temporary or permanent) will be required to implement this investment.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Ramachandran R. Mohan (SASDS)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                           Jorge E. Villegas (ECSSO)
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment: the project is rated as environmental assessment
                              category A because the completion of the three dams could potentially have adverse impacts on
                              the upstream or downstream environment. Possible environmental impacts are divided into those
                              related to temporary aspects during construction works and possible long-term impacts due to the
                              existence of the reservoir and dam and its operation overall.

                             Potential environmental effects due to the existence and operation of the dams and impoundments
                             may be related to: (i) changes in downstream morphology of riverbeds and banks due to altered


                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         sediment loads of the rivers that would result in increased local erosion; (ii) changes in
                         downstream hydrology (total flows, seasonal flows, short-term fluctuations); (iii) changes in
                         downstream water quality (e.g., nutrient load, concentration of heavy metals, temperature); (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reduction of biodiversity and river ecosystems due to blockage of movement of local species (e.g.
                         fish) and because of elimination of floods; and (v) impacts on existing infrastructure such as roads
                         and bridges. These impacts are expected to be moderate and manageable as indicated in the EIAs/
                         EMPs for each site.
                         Plovidtsi and Luda Yana dams are partially constructed and their construction will be completed
                         according to revised and updated designs. Studena dam is a completed dam, currently in operation
                         that requires rehabilitation. The previous construction has significantly affected the dam sites. The
                         additional construction related impacts during completion of the dams are likely to be localized
                         and can be prevented or reduced to acceptable levels by applying international construction
                         practice and planning. Such potential impacts may be related to: (i) air pollution/dust, noise,
                         vibration, and access restriction, (ii) improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii)
                         temporary pollution of soil and surface waters due to accidental spillage of fuel and oil from
                         construction activities; (v) safety hazards including worker safety; (vi) damage to trees and
                         existing vegetation, and (vii) chance finds of physical cultural resources. However, these impacts
                         will be properly managed during the construction phase by the contractor and closely supervised
                         by PIU and designated supervising engineer.
                         In order to study the potential impacts of the project and to propose related mitigation measures to
                         address such impacts during construction and operation of the proposed dams, the Borrower
                         prepared the following environmental safeguard documents to meet the OP/BP 4.01 requirements:
                         a) An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that describes the project overall
                         environmental assessment process to be followed by Government during implementation;
                         b) Three Environmental Due Diligence (EDD) Reports reflecting briefly the environmental
                         situation in October 2007 at the three incomplete dam sites (Luda Yana, Neikovtsi and Plovdivtsi
                         dams) where works stopped some years ago due to lack of finances;
                         c) Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) for Luda Yana and Neikovtsi dams, including
                         Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) were developed based on the EDD Reports and new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         site investigations in 2008. As construction of these two dams started before Bulgaria enforced
                         EIA legislation, the dams did not require preparation of EIAs according to national legislation. For
                         Plovdivtsi Dam, an EIA was approved by Ministry of Environment in accordance with the
                         Bulgarian legislation, in 2000, based on which construction permit was issued. Supplemental
                         Update EIA acceptable to the Bank was prepared by the Borrower to meet OP/BP 4.01
                         requirements, All documents mentioned above were finalized accordingly by the Client prior to
                         project appraisal. The updated designs for Plovdivtsi, Studena and Luda Yana do not include
                         significant modifications and hence the provisions of the existing EIAs and EMP are still relevant.
                         These final documents were also disclosed in country and at the Infoshop; and
                         d) A stand-alone EMP for the rehabilitation works proposed at Studena dam. In addition to above
                         mentioned documents, and as a consequence of project restructuring, a stand-alone EMP will be
                         prepared for the rehabilitation of the Studena-Pernik WTP.

                         These reports were developed based on information provided by the existing, old feasibility
                         studies and detail designs as well as visual assessments of the existing sites. The documents
                         summarize each dam history, include option analysis, identify the legislative and organizational
                         structures for environmental management; describe the existing environmental and social
                         conditions and the anticipated environmental impacts during dam construction and operations.
                         They also outline the environmental impact mitigation and monitoring plan; and describe the
                         public consultation process.

                                                                   Page 4 of 11
                         One of the important mitigation measures for the operational period will be the maintenance of an
                         environmental flow adequate to maintain downstream environmental conditions. The basis for
                         calculating the required flow is a model that is detailed in the EIAs and was found to be acceptable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         by the Bank. Prior to construction, the EMPs and EIAs if necessary will be revised to reflect any
                         new engineering documentation and information collected during the process.
                         During the preparation of the above noted environmental safeguard documents two rounds of
                         public meetings were held at the national and local level, in October-December 2007 and February
                         2009.

                         OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: The bulk of the land required for the main dam wall, dam
                         lakes and corresponding submerged area, ancillary structures and adjacent infrastructure for the
                         Plovdivtsi, Luda Yana and Neikovtsi dams had previously been acquired by the Government of
                         Bulgaria in the years between 1982 and 2000, before initial discussions between Government and
                         the Bank about financing completion of the dams. Therefore, while the previous land acquisition is
                         linked to construction of the dam, it is not linked to the project. It must be noted that none of these
                         dams has required physical displacement of population. A deadline of May 14, 2007 for land
                         restitution claims was set in accordance with the Agricultural Land Ownership and Use Act 1991
                         and the Act Restoring Ownership on Forests and Forest Stock Land Tracts from the Forestry Fund,
                         1997. On this basis, OPCQC, LEGEN and the Region concluded that the past land acquisition is a
                         legacy issue and not a current issue, and OP 4.12 does not apply to it. As good practice, during
                         preparation the Bank sought information on the past land acquisition and resettlement activities
                         and this is available in the Social Due Diligence (SDD) reports for the three dams. In the footprint
                         of all three dams there is informal use of the land, primarily for grazing animals, and the local
                         authorities have agreed that alternative land for grazing purposes would be provided to the affected
                         people. The government indicated that October 26, 2007 (the last date of the survey) was the cut-
                         off date after which any person carrying out illegal informal activities in the area is not eligible to
                         receive any assistance.
                         A Land Acquisition Policy Framework (LAPF) was prepared to address any potential
                         requirements of future land acquisition. The SDD and the LAPF were publicly discussed at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national and local levels in October-December 2007 and February 2009 and were disclosed on
                         March 24, 2009. Currently, RAPs are being prepared for the Plovdivtsi, Luda Yana and Neikovtsi
                         by the Borrower with the objective of fully documenting the land acquisition process and status of
                         pending activities identified in the SDD.

                         The LAPF also applies to Component 2 of the Project which involves developing Master Plans
                         including the preparation of site-specific assessments and recommendations for siting of facilities
                         that could involve expropriation of land. Therefore, the LAPF will be applied to such land
                         acquisition if needed; to date it has not been required.

                         OP/BP 4.37 Safety of Dams: due to the completion of the Luda Yana, Neikovtsi, and Plovdivtsi
                         dams and the rehabilitation of the Studena dam, the policy is triggered. Bulgarian dam safety
                         requirements are in line with those of the Bank and for the project design, construction, and
                         operation the Bulgarian legislation and Bank policies will be followed. Prior to appraisal, the
                         Government appointed a panel of three national experts on dam safety. The panel provided
                         comments on the Terms of Reference for the feasibility studies and designs and reviewed the
                         feasibility studies and engineering designs and will continue to provide guidance during
                         implementation of works, whenever necessary.
                         In order to address the safety of constructed dams, the Borrower is preparing Emergency
                         Preparedness Plans for each dam site as part of the updated designs, including action plans in case

                                                                    Page 5 of 11
                         of seismic or hydrological risks. In addition, the Borrower is preparing a Plan for Construction
                         Supervision and Quality Assurance, and an Instrumentation Plan and Operation and Maintenance
                         Plan, which will be reviewed and endorsed by the Panel of Experts on Dam Safety before
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tendering for construction. The operation and maintenance plan will be refined during
                         implementation and finalized at least six months before first filling of the reservoirs.

                          OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways. The project restructuring does not bring
                         changes to implementation of this policy. The policy is applicable due to the completion of the
                         following dams as they are located on streams that eventually discharge to riparian countries or
                         international waterways as follows: (i) the Luda Yana dam is constructed on the Luda Yana stream
                         which is a tributary of the Maritsa River that forms a border between Turkey and Greece and
                         finally discharges into the Aegean Sea; (ii) the Neikovtsi dam is constructed on the Neykovska and
                         Sarbogaska streams, which are tributaries of the Trevnenska River, which discharges in the Yantra
                         River, that flows eventually into the Danube, and (iii) the Plovdivtsi dam is constructed on the
                         Iskretska stream, which is a tributary of the Arda River that flows into the Maritsa River.
                         However, given the relatively small volume of the water retained in the dams compared to the
                         flow of the rivers that exit Bulgaria, there would be no adverse effect on water quantity and quality
                         for other riparian countries. Although the works financed under the Project will not cause any
                         adverse downstream effects to any international waterways, as per the Bank OP 7.50, through a
                         letter dated March 19, 2008, the Bulgaria n Government has authorized the Bank to notify the
                         riparian states about the project. Through letters dated March 21, 2008, the Bank, on behalf of the
                         Government, has informed Turkey, Greece, and the International Commission for the Protection of
                         the Danube River about the earlier version of the project. (The current project scope differs from
                         the one finalized in February 2008. The earlier design included a component to rehabilitate water
                         supply networks in six regional water utilities and technical assistance to utilities to implement the
                         project and increase operational efficiency. The Government of Bulgaria subsequently requested
                         changes to the project design that are reflected in the current project.)

                          Furthermore, there has been an exchange of letters between the Bank and Government of Turkey
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (GoT) regarding the construction of dams and the summary follows:
                          -       Through a letter dated May 30, 2008, the GoT sought additional information on the
                         project;
                          -       Through a letter dated June 19, 2008 the Bank provided references to the publicly
                         available documents on Environmental Due Diligence and Social Due Diligence documents and
                         hard copies of these documents were also provided. The Bank requested that GoT provide any
                         comments by July 21, 2008;
                          -       Through a letter dated July 8, 2008, the GoT requested that additional time be provided to
                         review the documents;
                          -       Through a letter dated July 15, 2008, the Bank requested that any comments should be
                         provided by September 5, 2008;
                          -       Through a letter dated September 2, 2008, the GoT noted their general concern regarding
                         potential adverse impact of the project concerning water quality and quantity, bio-capacity for
                         cropland, grazing land and forest related to the proposed dams. Other comments were raised
                         regarding the need for the dam designs to consider adequate capacity to "absorb flooding"; the
                         dam management should take into account the river basin capacity as well as downstream water
                         demand in various months; and the hydraulic and meteorological data should be provided by
                         Bulgarian authorities to Turkey on a regular basis. Further, any irregularities in flow should be
                         reported through the Center of Early Warning Mechanism formed between the two countries. The
                         GoB already maintains a designated minimum flow, provides reports on water releases to the GoT

                                                                    Page 6 of 11
                         in keeping with existing agreements and will continue to do so with regard to the three dams, after
                         their construction is completed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The Borrower and World Bank agreed that the World Bank will maintain communication with the
                         riparian countries related to final EIA findings. The final EIAs for the three dams were publicly
                         disclosed on the website of MRDPW and in Washington at the Infoshop on May 12, 2009. The
                         World Bank sent the updated information on the project, including the final EIAs, to riparian
                         countries and the International Commission on Danube River Protection on May 13, 2009. The
                         riparian countries have been requested to reply to the information provided in the letter by June 15,
                         2009. On June 15, the Government of Greece informed that the EIAs were not found on the
                         websites indicated and requested more time to review the documents. Therefore, the deadline for
                         response was extended until July 15, 2009. On July 21, the Government of Greece requested
                         additional information on the project; the information was sent on July 22, 2009 and a new
                         deadline for response was on August 27, 2009. No further comments were received by this
                         deadline, thus in accordance with OP/BP 7.50 the process is considered completed.

                          OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats. Natural Habitats will apply since small areas of one or more of the
                         dam sites may fall within Protected Areas (also Natura 2000 sites). Based on existing information
                         it is expected that only the sanitary protection zones of the dams will overlap with PAs, and the
                         management regime for such protection zones are compatible with PA management. This will be
                         confirmed during preparation of the feasibility studies and detailed designs, and the updated EMPs
                         will include any required mitigation measures to ensure that local biodiversity is not adversely
                         affected.

                          The OP/BP 4.36 Forestry is not triggered, although a few trees must be removed from the future
                         reservoir basins once civil works begin, these trees are sparse and scattered, left over from
                         vegetation clearing years ago during the initial dam construction, and do not constitute a forest.
                         Near the crest of Luda Yana dam, about 0.6 ha of trees will be removed when dam construction
                         resumes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources policy is not triggered because the investigations conducted
                         during EDD and EIA preparation process raised no concerns regarding potential chance finds of
                         cultural properties at the proposed dam sites. However, the EMPs include provisions for cultural
                         heritage and archeology if chance finds occur during construction works.

                         UPDATE DUE TO RESTRUCTURING
                         In addition to above mentioned investment, the restructured project will include rehabilitation of
                         Pernik-Studena water treatment plant, investment closely linked with the Studena dam. Studena
                         Dam is in the valley of the river of Struma about 0.5 km upstream of the village Studena and 15
                         km upstream of Pernik, and serves as water source for Sofia District.

                         For the rehabilitation Pernik-Studena water treatment plant an EMP will be prepared, putting a
                         special emphasis on impacts and mitigation measures during rehabilitation in order not to
                         compromise the supply, the water quality during rehabilitation works, and monitoring of water
                         quality during regular operation of the water treatment plant. No land acquisition is required for
                         rehabilitation of water treatment plant as all works will be implemented entirely within the
                         premises of the drinking water production station.




                                                                   Page 7 of 11
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            Completion of the dams with associated site restoration and water regulation will result in a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           significant improvement over existing environmental conditions, which continue to reflect impacts
                           of previous construction. Potential long-term environmental changes could appear in relation with
                           the creation of lakes upstream of the dams where the water would be stored and with the release
                           patterns from these reservoirs. Associated impacts might affect local resources such as fish,
                           recreation and hydropower activities. However, the anticipated reservoir areas do not include
                           critical habitats and the retention volumes are not expected to be significant enough to create
                           significant environmental damage (Plovdivtsi dam - 2.45 mln. m3; Neikovtsi dam - 4.80 mln. m3;
                           and Luda Yana dam - 19.94 mln. m3). The possibility of developing hydropower plants around
                           these dams is not excluded and this could trigger further indirect impacts. Also, once the dams are
                           built, its modern automatic technology and operation demands a relatively small number of
                           employers, which must have special training and technical expertise.

                           UPDATE DUE TO RESTRUCTURING The rehabilitation of Pernik-Studena WTP will result in a
                           significant improvement of the quality of supply of water to Sofia district. No negative indirect or
                           long term impacts are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Because a significant amount of construction has already taken place at each of the three dam
                           sites (up to 70% completed) it is not practical to consider alternative sites. The EIAs summarize
                           options that were considered in the original feasibility studies and designs, such as rehabilitation of
                           existing water supply sources, alternative sites for the dams, types of dam walls and related
                           facilities, etc. and the reasons for the choices which were made. The EIA noted that the "no-
                           project" alternative (leaving the partially completed dams in place with no further investment) is
                           undesirable for two reasons: on one hand, because of the urgency of addressing the acute shortage
                           of drinking water for affected populations (some 80,000 people) and, on the other hand, because in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the absence of further investment the construction and reservoir sites would be left in their present
                           damaged condition and would not be remediated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Current Bulgarian legislation requires preparation and approval of EIAs for new dam
                           construction. Since construction at 2 dam sites (Luda Yana and Neikovtsi) started more than 10
                           years ago and under a different Water Law, no EIAs for these works were required and there was
                           no requirement under current Bulgarian EIA legislation to prepare them at this time. However, in
                           order to meet the OP/BP 4.01 requirements, these EIAs have been prepared (October 2008). For
                           the Plovdivtsi Dam, an EIA was approved by Ministry of Environment in 2000, based on which
                           construction permit was issued, however there were some gaps with respect to requirements for a
                           Category A EIA under OP 4.01 and a Supplemental EIA t has been prepared to fill these gaps. The
                           environmental and social safeguards disclosed during project preparation are: Environmental Due
                           Diligence Reports (2007); Social Due Diligence Reports (2007); updated Land Acquisition Policy
                           Framework (2009); draft Luda Yana and Neikovtsi EIAs and the Plovdivtsi Supplemental EIA
                           have been disclosed in local language and discussed in public meetings (February 2009). The final
                           EIA documents were disclosed in country and Infoshop, and the Executive Summaries were
                           submitted to the Board on May 12, 2009 (before project appraisal).



                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                           UPDATE DUE TO RESTRUCTURING: The Borrower will prepare an EMP for the rehabilitation
                           of Pernik-Studena WTP, in the coming months. The EMP mitigation measures and monitoring
                           will streamline the rehabilitation design and will be part of the bidding documents for contractor
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and supervising engineer and therefore part of the works contracts.

                           The implementing agency will be the Ministry of Regional Development (MRD). The ministry has
                           the institutional capacity to implement the project satisfactorily, including addressing safeguard
                           issues. Within the MRD, the PIU established within the Water Supply and Sewerage Department
                           will be responsible for day to day implementation of the project and will include a technical expert
                           responsible for safeguards due diligence; overall, the PIU will ensure that the institutional and
                           financial capacities of the ministry are used to address and manage environmental issues of the
                           project. A communication plan was outlined prior to negotiations and will be put in place under
                           Component 1 to clarify that the LAPF is applicable to future land acquisition, not to past actions,
                           and thereby to reduce the risk of perception of linkage between past expropriations and the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders include the project-affected population, relevant NGOs, dam safety and
                           ecology protection experts, municipalities of the 3 project dam sites, representatives of GoB
                           including MRDPW and MoF.

                            In October 2007, public consultations were held on EDD and SDD reports at the project sites
                           where the dams would be finalized. The local population is supporting the completion of the dams
                           as the project activities had ceased since 2001 without yielding the benefit of provision of
                           uninterrupted supply of quality drinking water. Local residents mentioned that they face water
                           rationing and look forward to the completion of the dams. A national level consultation, including
                           non-government groups and various stakeholders, was also carried out on December
                           12, 2007 where the participants expressed interest in the project and to date there has been no
                           opposition to the proposed dam investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Furthermore, the results of the EIAs for Luda Yana, Neikovtsi and Plovdivtsi were presented to
                           the affected population at national and local level during February 2 - 13, 2009. Public views were
                           solicited regarding employment opportunities during construction and operation of the dams,
                           planning of restoration activities at the local quarries and construction sites, environmental effects
                           during possible detonation activities, transportation of materials from quarries to the d am sites
                           (especially in the case of Neikovtsi dam located partially in a protected area), impacts from project
                           related access roads, measures taken against erosion and risks from earthquakes and floods.
                           Disclosure of final EIA documents for all three dam investments took place in country and at the
                           Infoshop on May 12, 2009.

                           UPDATE DUE TO RESTRUCTURING: The EMP for Pernik-Studena WTP will be prepared and
                           disclosed in both English and Bulgarian in the Sofia District and village Pernik, where the WTP is
                           located. The EMP will be presented to affected population in a public meeting prior to the bidding
                           process.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          20-Nov-2008
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       22-Jan-2009


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      29-Apr-2009
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Bulgaria                                                         06-Dec-2008
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Feb-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bulgaria                                                         24-Mar-2009
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?


                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Anna Cestari
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 29-May-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Sumila Gulyani (SM)                             Date: 09-Jun-2014




                                                                      Page 11 of 11
