                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR8460
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Armenia                                      Project ID:           P115647
                            Project Name:      E-Society and Innovation for Competitiveness (EIC) Project (P115647)
                            Task Team          Sandra Sargent
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Sep-2010                                  Estimated   30-Nov-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Information technology (30%), Public administration- Information and
                                               communications (24%), Telecommunications (20%), General industr y and trade
                                               sector (19%), Banking (7%)
                            Theme:             Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (19%), Infrastructure services for
                                               private sector development (55%), Technology diffusion (19%), Administrative
                                               and civil service reform (7%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        30.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       24.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              6.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                24.00
                              Total                                                                                                30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 6
                         The primary Project Development Objective is to catalyze an innovation driven e-Society in Armenia
                         by promoting growth of the local IT and high-tech sector and
                         affordable, efficient and secure access to broadband, ICT-enabled services and i
Public Disclosure Copy




                         nformation by citizens, government and businesses.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The primary Project Development Objective is to catalyze an innovation driven e-Society in Armenia
                         by promoting growth of the local IT and high-tech sector and
                         affordable, efficient and secure access to broadband, ICT-enabled services and i
                         nformation by citizens, government and businesses.
                          3. Project Description
                         The Project aims at addressing constraints to competitiveness of the economy by promoting
                         innovation and the development of an ICT-enabled Society (e-Society) in Armenia. It is structured
                         around two core components: (i) e-Society and Digital Inclusion Infrastructure Development, and (ii)
                         Innovation Infrastructure for IT Sector and Technology Clusters Development. Each component
                         addresses a specific gap in the ICT development of the country identified through the Government’s
                         ICT Strategy adopted in 2008.

                         The e-Society and Digital Inclusion Infrastructure Development component was designed to increase
                         access to affordable broadband services for citizens, businesses, and public institutions countrywide.
                         Toward this end, the Project proceeds were to be used for works for laying optic fiber cables along
                         the existing highways and motor roads. After the Project restructuring, this component is
                         considerably scaled down and now aims at the provision of Internet coverage for 344 rural locations
                         in 10 marzes (provinces) of the country. This will be achieved by installation of Wi-Fi devices on the
                         public buildings in the central locations of rural settlements.

                         The Innovation Infrastructure for IT Sector and Technology Clusters Development component was
                         designed to promote the creation, growth and competitiveness of IT-intensive businesses through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         establishment of favorable environment for knowledge and technology-driven companies. For
                         achieving this goal, the Project proceeds were allocated for rehabilitation of an existing public
                         building in the city of Gyumri to house a Technology Center that would function as a business
                         incubator. After successful completion of this task, the decision was made to replicate it in the town
                         of Vanadzor. After restructuring, this component will finance rehabilitation of an existing public
                         building in Vanadzor, which will also be used by a Technology Center.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Rural broadband component will be implemented in 344 rural locations of 10 marzes (administrative
                         districts) of Armenia: Aragatsotn, Armavir, Shirak, Kotayk, Lori, Gegharkunik, Tavush, Ararat,
                         Vayots Dzor, and Syunik.

                         Premises for one Technology Center are already refurbished in the town of Gyumri, and an existing
                         building will be rehabilitated to house another Technology Center in the town of Vanadzor.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                            BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Originally the Project was rated as environmental Category B due to infrastructure investments
                              planned under its components 1 and 2. Investments under component 1 for creating the National
                              Broadband Backbone and Government Network did not materialize and will be replaced, through
                              the project restructuring, with the establishment of the Rural Broadband entailing the installation
                              of wireless towers in the selected rural settlements. As a result of this change, environmental risks
                              of component 1 will considerably decrease.

                              An existing building was refurbished to provide premises for a Technology Center in the town of
                              Gyumri. This old building was listed among historic assets of Armenia. Design for the
                              rehabilitation of this building was cleared with the national authority for preservation of cultural
                              heritage. A site-specific Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed and implemented
                              over the course of works. Refurbishment is completed to the satisfaction of the client and the
                              Bank. After restructuring, the Project will finance rehabilitation of another building in the town of
                              Vanadzor, were a similar Technology Center will operate. This building is one of several on the
                              campus of the Vanadzor branch of the State Engineering University of Armenia. It is not a historic
                              monument. Renovation of this building had been intended for a long time and years ago its interior
                              was cleared of finishing and appliances requiring replacement however rehabilitation works did
                              not commence due to financial constraints. The University campus is located in the outskirts of
                              town, has ample space, is fenced, and is easily accessible from the main road. Because of the
                              above circumstances, rehabilitation of the building will carry minimal environmental and social


                                                                         Page 3 of 6
                          risks.

                           The Project remains rated as an environmental Category B. No additional safeguard policy is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           triggered. OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats and OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources, triggered for
                           the project at the time of its commencement, will not apply to works to be undertaken after the
                           Project's restructuring
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             Operation of Wi-Fi access points in rural areas, as well as functioning of Gyumri and Vanadzor
                           Technology Centers will increase efficiency of the governance and improve the business
                           environment in Armenia. No long-term negative environmental or social impacts are expected.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Decision to renovate the existing buildings for the purposes of housing Gyumri and Vanadzor
                           Technology Centers was taken over the option of constructing new buildings in order to minimize
                           costs as well as to stay within the existing environmental footprint.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower developed an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which
                           provides an overview of the telecommunications sector in Armenia, describes the legal and
                           institutional context for the Project implementation, lists the main expected environmental and
                           social impacts of the e-Society and digital inclusion infrastructure, and recommends measures for
                           their mitigation. A site-specific simplified Environmental Management Plan checklist was
                           developed for the rehabilitation of premises for Gyumri Technology Center. Both of these
                           documents were disclosed, consulted upon with stakeholders, and finalized at the Project
                           preparation stage. Once the decision was made to finance rehabilitation of premises for another
                           Technology Center in Vanadzor an EMP, similar to the one previously developed by the client and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           cleared by the Bank for the works in Gyumri, has been drafted, disclosed, discussed with the
                           stakeholders, and re-disclosed with the minutes of public consultation attached.

                           Responsibility for the Project implementation lies fully in the Ministry of Economy, which has the
                           overall project coordination role. High-level management of the Project is being carried out by a
                           Project Steering Committee (PSC). Day- to-day management of specific activities under the
                           project is assured by the Enterprise Incubator Foundation (EIF) which is in charge of fostering
                           enterprise innovation, including establishment of the Gyumri and Vanadzor Technology Centers.
                           The Foreign Financed Projects Management Center (FFPMC) is responsible for the financial
                           management, disbursement, and procurement under the Project. The FFPMC, operating under the
                           Ministry of Finance for a number of years, has an extensive experience of contract management
                           under the Bank financed projects. FFPMC and the Ministry of Economy sign civil works contracts
                           on behalf of the borrower and oversee quality of works, including their environmental compliance.
                           The EIF provided excellent technical supervision of works in Gyumri and the Project’s rating on
                           safeguards performance has been Satisfactory up to date. Recently the EIF developed the EMP for
                           rehabilitation works in Vanadzor, and handled its disclosure and public review in a fully adequate
                           manner.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                                                     Page 4 of 6
                            EIF and EKENG are the key stakeholders of the Project, as well as the numerous Governmental,
                           public, and private agencies of Armenia which will benefit from the improved IT services and the
                           e-society technical infrastructure. Residents of over 344 settlements in ten marzes of Armenia will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           benefit from the provision of the Rural Broadband.

                           On July 13 the ESMF for the broadband backbone infrastructure and the simplified EMP
                           (environmental checklist) for the Gyumri Technology Center were disclosed in-country through
                           the Internet and on July 14, 2010 a stakeholder meeting was held to discuss the Project design and
                           its technical implication, including these environmental documents. On July 15, 2010, a discussion
                           of the preliminary design of Gyumri technology center was held in Gyumri municipality, at the
                           office of the municipal chief architect, with participation of all concerned parties. The EMP and
                           ESMF were also posted in the InfoShop.

                           An EMP for Vanadzor Technology Center was prepared once the Project restructuring had been
                           conceived. It was disclosed on April 14, 2014 and a stakeholder consultation meeting was held to
                           discuss it in the town of Vanadzor on April 28, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                            12-Apr-2014
                           Comments: ESMF and EMP for Gyumri Technology Center were disclosed and discussed with
                                         stakholders in July 2010.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         EMP for Vanadzor Technology Center was disclosed in-country on April 12, 2014
                                         and a public consultation meeting was held in the town of Vanadzor on April 28,
                                         2014. Finalized EMP was re-disclosed in-country on May 15, 2014 and sent to the
                                         InfoShop on May 19, 2014.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats

                                                                     Page 5 of 6
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Sandra Sargent
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                            Date: 06-Jun-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                              Date: 08-Jun-2014




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
