                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6883
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P148604
                            Project Name:      Accelerating Universal Access to Early and Effective Tuberculosis Care
                                               (P148604)
                            Task Team          Patrick M. Mullen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                             Estimated   14-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: SASHN                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (30%), Tuberculosis (70%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        532.00              Total Bank Financing:  100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          335.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 100.00
                              The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis & Malaria                                        97.00
                              Total                                                                                       532.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support implementation of India's National Strategic Plan for Tuberculosis Control that aims to
                           expand utilization of quality diagnosis and treatment services for people suffering from tuberculosis.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         The project will support India’s National Strategic Plan for TB Control, comprising three
                         components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. (New strategies to reach more tuberculosis patients with earlier and more effective
                         care in the public and private sectors). This component will support new strategies designed to boost
                         the number of TB patients who receive timely and effective care, including: (i) supporting patients
                         who seek care in the private sector; (ii) expanding urban TB services; (iii) improving ease of access
                         to diagnosis; (iv) leveraging information technology; and (v) improving knowledge of the epidemic
                         to find more cases.

                         Component 2. (Scale-up and improve diagnosis and treatment of drug-resistant tuberculosis). This
                         component will support expansion of multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) diagnosis and treatment
                         services, including: (i) increasing capacity to manage and deliver MDR-TB services; (ii) expanding
                         MDR-TB diagnostic capacity; (iii) improving the quality of MDR-TB care through better diagnosis;
                         and (iv) developing MDR-TB treatment services.

                         Component 3. (Expand public tuberculosis services integrated with the primary health care system).
                         This component will focus on expanding and improving public sector TB services closely integrated
                         with the government primary health care system. The national TB program will become fully aligned
                         with the National Health Mission’s implementation structure within state health systems. This will
                         involve: (i) development of program management capacity; (ii) alignment with primary health care
                         system and expansion of TB service delivery capacity; and (iii) intensification of support to
                         vulnerable and targeted groups, including people infected with HIV, children with TB, tribal and
                         poor populations, and urban poor populations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented country-wide, in the 28 states and 7 union territories of India.
                         Because socially vulnerable, poor and tribal populations, migrants and those living in urban slums
Public Disclosure Copy




                         are more at risk of TB, the TB program will target these vulnerablegroups with suitable outreach
                         strategies. The TB program has taken special measures to support TB services in districts with large
                         tribal and poor populations and plans to expand TB services for the urban poor during the project
                         period. TB diagnostic and treatment services are integrated in the primary health care system and
                         follow medical waste management policies and procedures of the general health system. Treatment
                         of multi-drug resistant TB (MDR-TB) includes inpatient care. This requires airborne infection
                         control measures for the protection of health care staff and other patients. The program will continue
                         to implement its tribal action plan in compliance with OP 4.10.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)
                         Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Environmental and infection control issues
                          BP 4.01                                             associated with tuberculosis stem from clinical
                                                                              and infectious waste materials (primarily sharps
                                                                              including needles and slides and sputum cups)
                                                                              generated from diagnosis and treatment services.


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                                                                            Inpatient treatment of MDR-TB requires airborne
                                                                            infection control measures. These issues are well
                                                                            defined, site-specific and easily mitigated if
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            implemented in a systematic and sustained
                                                                            manner during service delivery activities.
                                                                            However, with inadequate attention and poor
                                                                            management, these issues can pose as a severe
                                                                            public health risk.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The project aims to support equitable provision
                                                                            of diagnosis and treatment services to all sections
                                                                            of the society while reaching out to marginalized
                                                                            and vulnerable groups, who are more vulnerable
                                                                            to the disease due to their health and socio-
                                                                            economic conditions and suffer maximum
                                                                            adverse consequences due to high costs of disease
                                                                            treatment and productivity loss. It is essential to
                                                                            address socio-economic, cultural and health
                                                                            system barriers that affect utilization of
                                                                            diagnostic and treatment services by these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            populations, including in poor/backward/tribal
                                                                            districts and urban slum dwellers. OP 4.10 is
                                                                            triggered in view of the impact on tribal
                                                                            populations and accordingly a Tribal Action Plan
                                                                            is prepared and implemented with supplementary
                                                                            social inclusion measures for other vulnerable
                                                                            groups such as those affected by HIV/AIDS,
                                                                            urban slum dwellers, and others.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 3 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Social: the link between TB and poverty is well known and the highest burden of TB is borne by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the poor and disadvantaged groups of the society characterized as "hard to reach populations" and
                           include the poor - both urban and rural, tribal communities and specifically women. The program
                           is socially inclusive and aims at providing universal access to all those affected in the community
                           with quality diagnosis and treatment. The TB program will aim at positively benefitting tribal
                           groups (equivalent of indigenous people in India) by (i) bridging gaps related to information,
                           access and providers, and (ii) facilitating the tribal community in overcoming socio-economic and
                           cultural barriers to access to and utilization of diagnostic and treatment services. The Operational
                           Policy on Indigenous People (OP/BP 4.10) has been triggered in order to ensure continued special
                           attention to their needs.

                           Environmental Impacts:

                           Environmental and infection control issues associated with TB are related to poor management of
                           clinical and infectious waste [including human/biological waste (sputum), sharps (needles, glass
                           slides etc.) and laboratory waste] generated from service delivery and treatment centers. Inpatient
                           treatment of MDR-TB cases also carries the risk of airborne infection. The issues are well defined,
                           site-specific and easily mitigated if implemented in a systematic and sustained manner during
                           service delivery activities. However, inadequate attention and poor management of infectious
                           waste can pose a severe public health risk due to the infectious nature of the disease.

                           The project has been classified as Category C in accordance with the World Bank Group’s
                           Operational Policy OP 4.01. This implies that the environmental impacts are seen to be negligible
                           and/or effective systems are in place for their sound management. The institutional structures of
                           the Central TB Division and the Government of India are well established for management of
                           safeguards, with improvement in implementation as defined in the revised Biomedical Waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Management (BMWM) Plan. Bank supervision will include review and guidance of
                           implementation of the BMWM Plan.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Social: The key long term impacts expected with regard to the tribal populations are positive in
                           terms of reducing TB incidence amongst these poor and vulnerable communities. No long term
                           adverse impacts are foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N. A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           (a) Borrower’s Measures to address environmental safeguard issues

                           Social: A Social Assessment undertaken in 2011 identified various socio-cultural, economic and
                           health system barriers affecting full utilization of RNTCP services by special populations such as
                           migrants and tribal groups. The SA recommended measures such as strengthening societal and
                           family support systems, improving community awareness to reduce stigma, reducing the economic
                           burden on patients and their families, influencing provider behavior to minimize social distance


                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                         and improving organization of health care services to make biomedical interventions more patient-
                         friendly. Drawing on this, the National Strategic Plan (2012-2017) was prepared, emphasizing
                         “universal access to quality diagnosis and treatment for all TB patients in the community.” The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NSP identifies migrants and tribal groups as special groups and prescribes gender sensitive
                         approaches to provide them with appropriate, accessible, acceptable and affordable RNTCP
                         services.

                         Social Action Plan and Tribal Action Plan: The borrower has prepared a Social Action Plan which
                         outlines measures to ensure universal access to and utilization of TB services in alignment with the
                         National Strategic Plan (2012-2017). The strategy will involve strengthening of referral linkages
                         for provision of services, especially for migrant populations; use of communication approaches
                         specific to geographic areas and social/cultural contexts; modification of service delivery and
                         budgetary norms to make services more affordable and accessible to special groups; sensitization
                         of providers to the needs of special groups through training and retraining; and involvement of
                         local practitioners/NGOs for provision of care, awareness generation etc. The Social Action Plan
                         (including the Tribal Action Plan) is an outcome of free, prior and informed consultations carried
                         out with key stakeholders including the tribal communities during the course of Social Assessment
                         in 2011, national consultation at Delhi on July 23, 2012 to finalize the National Strategic Plan, and
                         follow up consultations held at Delhi on October 24, 2013 and at Phulbani, Odisha (tribal area) on
                         November 4, 2013..

                         The Social Action Plan prepared by the Borrower provides for continued implementation of the
                         Tribal Action Plan (2005) with necessary improvements as per the National Strategic Plan, and in
                         compliance with the Bank Operational Policy 4.10. The Tribal Action Plan emphasizes: (a)
                         strengthening early reporting, (b) enhancing treatment outcomes, and (iii) closer supervision of
                         tribal areas. Specific measures include: increasing case detection and treatment success trends in a
                         sample of pre-defined districts with higher proportion of tribal population; reducing default rates
                         of female patients compared to male patients; promoting locally adapted IEC messages and patient
                         education material in place; and having operational research results to assist in planning and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of RNTCP in the tribal pockets.

                         The Social Action Plan will be carried out by the implementation mechanisms established for
                         RNTCP at national, state, and district levels as a part of the National Health Mission. 13,000
                         Designated Microscopy Centers (DMCs) and 2,600 TB Units are operating across rural and urban
                         areas. A cadre of community health workers, including Accredited Social Health Activists
                         (ASHAs), Community Volunteers, incentivized DOT providers and NGOs link the program with
                         TB patients. The Central TB Division (CTD) of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare leads
                         the program, providing resources, drugs, capacity building support, technical guidance, policy
                         formation, less on sharing and monitoring and evaluation for the program. At the state level, the
                         State TB Cell set up in state health societies monitors the program at the district level. The District
                         TB Center (DTC) operates under the District Health Societies that manage the National Health
                         Mission. DTCs monitor the DMCs and Tuberculosis Us, and supervise TB control activities in
                         designated areas. The Project will address any capacity building requirements at any level as a part
                         of implementation strategy.

                         Grievance Redress: The grievance handling systems established for National Rural Health Mission
                         will address grievances, including any instance of stigma or discrimination in RNTCP. The
                         program has a Patients’ Charter for TB Care, which defines patients’ rights in terms of care,
                         dignity, information, choice, confidence, justice, organization and security provided. The National

                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                         Health Mission has designated Central Public Information Officers and Appellate Authorities to
                         address queries under the Right to Information Act, 2005. The National Health Mission has also
                         prescribed a framework for grievance redress that entails establishment of mechanisms at facility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level, district level and state level to accept, record, respond to and resolve grievances in a
                         structured manner with the support of an unbiased third party—preferably an NGO. RNTCP is
                         working towards establishing helplines at state and national levels.

                         Monitoring and Evaluation: The implementation of the Social Action Plan will be monitored with
                         the help of the monitoring and evaluation system established for RNTCP, which enables collection
                         of implementation data segregated by areas and population groups with performance indicators.
                         Mid-term and end-term evaluations will be carried out to document the more specific social
                         outcomes and lessons learnt for the future. Joint Review Missions of RNTCP will assess
                         performance of the Social Action Plan as a part of overall program monitoring.

                         Environment: The Revised National Tuberculosis Program (RNTCP) is a part of the National
                         Health Mission (NHM), previously known as the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM), and TB
                         diagnostic and treatment services are integrated in the government health system nationwide. As
                         such, TB services subscribe to the Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS) (1) and Infection
                         Management and Environment Plan (IMEP) (2) prescribed by the NHM for all its disease control
                         programs implemented in public health facilities. The RNTCP continues to implement an
                         environmental and biomedical waste management plan adopted in 2005 as part of the previous
                         IDA-financed project. (3) RNTCP is also applying guidelines on airborne infection control in
                         inpatient settings. (4) The TB program is committed to building capacity of providers in
                         environmentally-responsible service delivery. Monitoring mechanisms to review implementation
                         of the IPHS and IMEP are institutionalized by way of ongoing review missions and periodic third
                         party assessments including annual joint missions involving international partners. In 2012, the
                         program did an assessment of biomedical waste management implementation in a sample of states
                         and TB services. The program is committed to revising its policies and plans as required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The CTD has an existing Environmental and Bio-medical Waste Management (BMWM) Plan
                         which was prepared under the earlier Bank supported projects. This Plan is aligned with the
                         Government of India’s Biomedical Waste Management Rules, the Infection Management and
                         Environment Plan (IMEP) and the Indian Public Health Standards (IPHS). Based on an assessment
                         of sample health facilities undertaken in late 2012, the CTD has further revised the BMWM Plan
                         and updated the Action Plan, in line with the activities being undertaken under this project. The
                         revised Action Plan includes strengthening training of health service providers, improved
                         monitoring systems, improved airborne infection control and standardization of health surveillance
                         and procurement of personal protective equipment. Any construction activities of new MDR TB
                         labs and wards will be as per the guidelines for airborne infection control and clearances and
                         quality control measures will be well documented. The proposed IDA financing will not support
                         any construction activities, which will be financed from other sources. The assessment findings
                         and the revised Action Plan were discussed and agreed during a stakeholder consultation held in
                         Delhi on October 24, 2013.

                         1 http://nrhm.gov.in/about-nrhm/guidelines/indian-public-health-standards.html
                         2 http://nrhm.gov.in/about-nrhm/guidelines/nrhm-guidelines/infection-management-and-
                         environment-plan-imep.html
                         3 http://www.tbcindia.nic.in/pdfs/RNTCP%20II%20Env%20plan%2010%20May%202005.pdf



                                                                   Page 6 of 8
                           4 http://www.tbcindia.nic.in/pdfs/
                           Guidelines_on_Airborne_Infection_Control_April2010Provisional.pdf
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders for the project include: the central government and state government health
                           institutions, district level health service providers, private sector health care providers, local
                           bodies, village level CBOs and NGOs, WHO, and other international agencies, and research
                           institutions. Stakeholder consultations were carried out in multiple phases for designing the
                           Program. Consultations were held with affected and served people in four tribal districts of
                           Kandhamal (Odisha), Karbi Anglong (Assam), Adilabad (Andhra Pradesh), and Banswara
                           (Rajasthan); and in four districts with slums at Hyderabad (AP), Bhubaneswar (Odisha) Jaipur
                           (Rajasthan), and Lucknow (UP) during the Social Assessment (2011). A national consultation was
                           held in Delhi on July 23, 2012, to finalize the National Strategic Plan (2012-2017). Two follow up
                           consultations were held to discuss the Social Action Plan: at Delhi on October 24, 2013, and at
                           Phulbani (tribal area), Odisha on November 4, 2013.

                           Disclosure: RNTCP discloses relevant policy guidelines, plans, and status reports on its website
                           http://tbcindia.nic.in/. In addition to this, it implements an Advocacy Communication and Social
                           Mobilization (ACSM) strategy to inform and communicate with the patients and other
                           stakeholders regarding the program, Many of the educative and informative materials are prepared
                           and disseminated in local languages in the implementing states.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            06-Jan-2014
                           Comments: The Environment Management Plan will be disclosed by the Central TB Division on
                                         their website www.tbcindia.org
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      31-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            06-Jan-2014
                           Comments: The Social Action Plan (including Tribal Action Plan) will be disclosed by the
                                         Central TB Division on their website www.tbcindia.org
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Patrick M. Mullen
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Julie McLaughlin (SM)                         Date: 02-Jan-2014




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
