                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1008
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central Asia                      Project ID:    P145634
                            Project Name:      Central Asia Road Links - Tajikistan (P145634)
                            Task Team          Cordula Rastogi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Oct-2014                       Estimated   25-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (40%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (40%), Regional integration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      54.00           Total Bank Financing:                  45.00
                            Financing Gap:            9.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                45.00
                              Total                                                                                      45.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Central Asia Road Links (CARs) program has the overall development objective to increase
                           transport connectivity between neighboring countries in Central Asia along priority cross-border road


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         links and to support improvements in road operations and asset management practices. The program
                         is the result of a collaborative effort initiated by respective governments in the Central Asia region
                         which has been developed as a regional, multi-phase program considered as a regional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transformational project under IDA16 and IDA 17.

                         The project development objective (PDO) of the Second Phase of the Central Asia Road Links
                         Program (CARs-2) is to increase transport connectivity between the Republic of Tajikistan and the
                         Kyrgyz Republic along priority cross-border road links in Sugd Oblast and to support improvements
                         in road operations and asset management practices. The road sections to be financed under CARs-2
                         prioritize connectivity between the Sugd Oblast in Tajikistan and the Osh and Batken Oblasts in the
                         Kyrgyz Republic as they build lateral spurs from the Khujand-Osh axis to the Kyrgyz border.
                         3. Project Description
                         CARs-2 will consist of the following components:
                         Component 1: Rehabilitation of Priority Road Sections in Sugd Oblast (estimated total cost US
                         $51.00 million, out of which IDA financing US$42 million): The component is expected to finance
                         the provision of works and consultants’ services for the rehabilitation of about 85 kilometers of road
                         sections in Sugd Oblast. Those sections will link the Republic of Tajikistan with its neighboring
                         countries and subject to the conclusions and prioritizations of the feasibility studies, potential project
                         road sections include the following: (1) Kuckkak-Kim-Isfara-Guliston (BCP), (2) Kim-Kanibadam-
                         Patar (BCP) and (3) Dehmoi-Proletarsk-Madaniyat (BCP), including a link to the intermodal rail
                         terminal in Proletarsk. The proposed road sections are expected to be built based on SNIP design
                         standards of road category III, with carriage-way width up to 12 m, respectively. Provisional cost
                         estimates include consultant services for construction supervision, as well as physical and price
                         contingency. The rehabilitation and construction works of the priority sections would include:
                         strengthening of road base course in particular/distressed sections, leveling and profiling of the
                         existing layers with binder, including a new asphalt wearing course, drainage rehabilitation, re-pairs/
                         replacement of bridges and structures, and installation of road safety equipment/signs. A road safety
                         audit will be undertaken as part of the design work for the road sections. The project’s preparatory
Public Disclosure Copy




                         studies included investigation of different alternative options as well as the integration with border
                         crossing facilities.

                         Component 2: Improvement of Road Operations and Asset Management Practices (estimated total
                         cost US$2.00 million, financed by IDA). This component is proposed to finance the provision of
                         goods, and consultants’ services for the improvement of road operations and asset management
                         practices. The improvement of road operations will include a review of technical standards, norms
                         and parameters on vehicle (truck) weight and axle load limits and tariffication as well as the
                         development of Government’s strategic plan for the location and operation of axle load control
                         systems (weight in motion). It is envisaged to finance and install weight in motion equipment in
                         several (2-3) strategic locations along the road network. To improve asset management practices in
                         the road sector, the component will provide financing towards the pur-chase of survey equipment
                         (including geo-references) as well as support towards the final de-ployment of a road asset
                         management system within the Economic Forecast Department of the MoT.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Implementation (estimated total cost US$1.00 million,
                         financed by IDA). This component is expected to finance the provision of goods, con-sultants’
                         services, and training, operating costs, including a financial audit to support project co-ordination,
                         implementation, and management. The overall responsibility for the implementation of all activities
                         under the project will lay with the MoT, including fiduciary responsibility for project execution. To


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         support the MoT in all aspects of project implementation, a Project Implementation Group has been
                         established which consists of a team of MoT staff assigned to the project and additional individual
                         consultants.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Land acquisition is expected to be minimized to the extent possible as rehabilitation will be
                         undertaken mainly within the existing right of way of the road, but with the possibility of a short new
                         bypass at Isfara city.
                         Project expected locations include:
                         * Kuchkak-Kim-Isfara-Guliston,
                         * Kim-Kanibadam-Kuchkak,
                         * Dehmoi-Proletarsk-Madaniyat,
                         * Kanibadam-Patar.

                         Rehabilitation will be undertaken mainly within the right of way of the existing road. Around Isfara
                         city, there are two options proposed for the alignment: (i) along the existing road through the city,
                         and (ii) a short bypass around the city through an adjacent agricultural field.

                         Risks are limited to the typical impacts associated with road construction and rehabilitation projects.
                         The severity of potential impacts is moderate and mostly limited to the construction period: (i) air
                         pollution and noise from trucks and other construction machinery, and asphalt plants, (ii) soil
                         disturbance during earthmoving and material (gravel/sand/soil) extraction, and (iii) tree-cutting and
                         loss of vegetation, (iv) generation and disposal of construction and household (from construction
                         camps) solid waste, and (v) construction camp management (which will be temporary with only
                         minor and localized negative effects).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Asli Gurkan (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              OP/BP 4.01 is triggered as the project activities
                          BP 4.01                                              would generate some environmental impact that
                                                                               is typical to road rehabilitation projects. The
                                                                               severity of potential impact is moderate and
                                                                               mostly limited to the construction period: (i) air
                                                                               pollution and noise from trucks and other
                                                                               construction machinery, and asphalt plants, (ii)
                                                                               soil disturbance during earthmoving and material
                                                                               (gravel/sand/soil) extraction, (iii) tree-cutting and
                                                                               loss of vegetation, (iv) generation and dispoal of
                                                                               construction and household (from construction
                                                                               camps) solid waster, and (v) construction camp
                                                                               management (which will be temporary with only
                                                                               minor and localized effects). Road rehabilitation
                                                                               will be undertaken mostly within the existing
                                                                               right of way of the road (with the exception of a



                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                                                                         possible short bypass near Isfara city) and
                                                                         environmental impacts can be mitigated by good
                                                                         construction and housekeeping practices. To
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         address potential environmental impacts the client
                                                                         prepared an EIA and EMP as part of the
                                                                         preparatory studies for the proposed works. The
                                                                         EMF was disclosed by MOT and public hearings
                                                                         were organized in specific project locations
                                                                         before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            Not triggered as the majority of the civil works
                                                                         contains of road rehabilitation within the existing
                                                                         right of way. Based on the site visit by the Project
                                                                         Team, the proposed bypass near Isfara city will be
                                                                         located on areas which do not represent natural
                                                                         habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Not triggered as the project activities will not be
                                                                         conducted in the afforested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            N/A

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            N/A
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Based on the field visit to proposed Project sites,
                         4.12                                            it is likely that some land acquisition impacts will
                                                                         occur. Sites visits, consultations and discussions
                                                                         with officials indicate that likely impacts could
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         include acquisition of land in agricultural use,
                                                                         displacement of roadside vendors, and removal of
                                                                         non-residential structures within the right of way
                                                                         of proposed roads. Land acquisition is expected to
                                                                         be minimized to the extent possible as
                                                                         rehabilitation will be undertaken mainly within
                                                                         the existing right of way of the road, but with the
                                                                         possibility of a short new bypass at Isfara city. A
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework is prepared and
                                                                         will be disclosed prior to appraisal. Site-specific
                                                                         RAPs as required will be prepared during
                                                                         implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            N/A

                         Projects on International        No             N/A
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             N/A. The proposed project does not trigger OP/
                         7.60                                            BP 7.60. Certain road sections to be financed by



                                                                 Page 4 of 7
                                                                                  IDA are in close proximity to the border with the
                                                                                  Kyrgyz Republic. Nevertheless, to ensure close
                                                                                  coordination between the Government of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  Republic of Tajikistan and the Government of the
                                                                                  Kyrgyz Republic, the Government of the
                                                                                  Republic of Tajikistan provided the proposed
                                                                                  alignment to the Government of the Kyrgyz
                                                                                  Republic.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Standard impacts associated with road rehabilitation are expected. No potential large-scale,
                              significant or irreversible impacts were identified.
                              Given the project area's relative proximity to the border between the Republic of Tajikistan and the
                              Kyrgyz Republic, where recent social tensions occurred, the project design will document all
                              measures proposed by the team and the Government to mitigate such risk, including a
                              communications strategy to be agreed upon during appraisal.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to future activities in the project area are
                              expected.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The project road provides national and regional access to the neighbouring Central Asian re-
Public Disclosure Copy




                              publics Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. Poor maintenance has been cited as one of the main factors
                              which had resulted in the present deterioration of some road sections with the resulting extra costs
                              to both regional and national economies. Improved roads and access, therefore, require more
                              emphasis on a sustainable road network maintenance program, as well as road maintenance
                              capacities and skills to achieve and sustain the benefits from the investment. A program must be
                              put in place to ensure that the regional road network does not deteriorate further. Maintenance
                              equipment should therefore be kept functional regardless of circumstances.

                              In view of the above, a “do nothing” or “without project” option is not feasible since economic
                              growth of Tajikistan depends on good road networks. Basically rehabilitation of existing
                              alignments in the ROW improves environmental conditions through reduction of dust emissions.
                              Impacts on the environment from upgrading of existing roads and from construction of new road
                              sections can be mitigated.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              MoT will have overall responsibility for the implementation of all activities under the project,
                              including fiduciary responsibility for project execution. The PIG within the MOTC will be
                              responsible for day-to-day administration of project activities which include, inter alia: (a) the
                              management of designated accounts; (b) financial management and reporting on the overall pro-
                              ject; (c) ensuring the execution of the audit of the project; (d) preparation of quarterly financial and


                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                           bi-annual progress reports; (e) the management of the environmental and social safeguards
                           aspects; and (f) undertaking all procurement and contract management activities for all
                           components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The PIG has been established at the MoT. Other donor-financed projects are being implemented
                           through established PIUs, such as ADB, IsDB, and the EximBank of China. Based on extensive
                           discussions with the government, it was decided that the implementation arrangement chosen for
                           CARs-2 are fully integrated with the existing structure of the MoT.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           MoT, general population, small business, agriculture and trade sectors of the economy.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tajikistan                                                       03-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tajikistan                                                       03-Oct-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Cordula Rastogi
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/       Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                           Date: 14-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
