INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC8369
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jul-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P147009
Project Name:   Jiangxi Farm Produce Distribution System Development (P 147009)
Task Team       Xiaolan Wang
Leader(s):
Estimated        10-May-2016               Estimated     25-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO2                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Rural markets (70%), Rural policies and institutions (10%), Rural services and
infrastructure (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     280.00            Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                       130.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          150.00
0         Total                                                          280.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
10.   The Project Development Objective would be to improve benefits to farm households from
the increased efficiency of selected food distribution systems in Jiangxi.
C. Project Description
The proposed project would support upgrading and modernizing the agro-food marketing system in
Jiangxi to benefit smallholder farmers by increasing the efficiency of specific farm-to-wholesale


﻿market distribution chains. In addition to establishing modem wholesale markets, the project
activities would be designed to address key bottlenecks in each of the distribution chains which are
resulting on poor remuneration and limited participation of farmers. The project would also enable a
higher volume of production from Jiangxi to meet market and official standards for quality and
O
safety. The proposed project would focus on providing infrastructure, developing modern systems (e.
g. food safety management, ICT, market management), and capacity building for key stakeholders in
the main links of the distribution chain from farm to wholesale markets.
The project would be implemented in up to 12 counties in Jiangxi. The initial set of 12 counties were
selected based on the following criteria: (a) the agricultural production system for the commercially
traded commodities involve a large number of small producers; (b) preliminary value chain analyses
were conducted and major bottlenecks in such chains were identified; (c) key players of the agro-
product and market system are mobilized and active in the distribution system from farm to the
wholesale markets which could be supported by the project, and (d) there is scope for a clear focus
on a small number of products (up to three) in order to bring about transformational changes. The
project would support distribution chains for commodities which are commonly sold across most
counties of Jiangxi, (e.g. grains, tea, fruit, vegetables, and fish), enabling some synergies in
interventions, technical support and learning. The final list of counties would be defined during
project preparation based on more detailed socio-economic and value chain analyses.
The project would seek to achieve the development objective through the implementation of the
following components and activities:
Component 1. Strengthening of Farmer's Participation in Market Value Chains (approximately 5%
of project budge)
The objective of this component is to develop producer groups, including cooperatives, to enable
small producers to undertake collective action to improve their product offerings, reduce post-harvest
losses, engage in more value-added activities, and improve their bargaining position vis-d-vis
downstream marketing entities. The project would build capacity to have reliable transportation,
carry out initial processing and grading, develop well-informed marketing plans, and ensure adequate
governance.
O
Examples of such investments and activities are: (i) training and technical assistance to strengthen
a       cooperative management and governance; (ii) provision of small scale equipment for collective
processing, grading and packaging, ii) development of software for market information systems for
farmers, (iii) computer and network connections for cooperatives to improve management systems,
traceability and manage e-commerce applications and other services (iv) vehicles - small trucks for
collection of produce from farmers transportation to markets, (v) sharing the costs associated with
establishing (and sometimes gaining certification for) special designations or labels (e.g. 'green' or
organic products; geographical indicators).
Component 2. Market Infrastructure Development (approximately 84% of project budget)
The objective of this component is to develop efficient wholesale/retail markets. This includes
improved physical structures, equipment, and management systems in order to reduce the waste of
produce, improve quality and safety, and cut down distribution costs. Management systems would
extend beyond facility maintenance and produce flow coordination to also likely include quality and
food safety surveillance, real-time pricing, and the implementation of pilot traceability systems for
selected commodities. Specific functions of each market and associated costs would be decided
through sound feasibility studies and business plans to be developed during the project preparation


﻿process.
Examples of such associated investments and activities include: (i) civil works linked to the
distribution system (e.g. warehouses), (ii) market equipment (e.g. grading, ice-making, refrigeration,
O
U       forklifts), (iii) web-based e-trading system including investment on computer equipment, software
and internet connections, and (iv) introducing risk-based food safety systems, such as HACCP, in the
markets to ensure safe storage and sale of produce and fish.
Component 3. Training and Capacity Building for Farmers, Cooperatives and Market Management
(approximately 5% of project budget)
The objective of this component is to improve the capacity of key players of the agricultural value
chains- farmers, cooperatives/ associations and markets' managers by aligning the roles played by
them in public-private partnerships in enhanced distribution system. Thus, they could most
effectively use the new infrastructure and systems to be developed by the project. Specific training
and capacity building needs would be assessed during project preparation and details of training
plans will be worked out accordingly. Special attention would be given to ensure adequate gender
balance.
Examples of associated investments and activities include: (i) farmer training on product quality,
food safety, e-trading system, (ii) training of managers of farmers' cooperatives on business
management and technical aspects, (iii) training market managers on business practices, and (iv)
development of marketing strategy / brand development, (iv) training on good agriculture and
aquaculture practices.
Component 4. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately 6% of project
budget)
The objective of this component is to manage project resources in accordance with the proposed
project objectives and World Bank procedures. Examples of associated investments and activities
include: (i) project management-training province, municipality, county PMOs (ii) project M&E
system and data collection, (iii) management information system (MIS) design and establishment.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project will be located in up to 12 counties/cities in Jinagxi Province, i.e. Jinggangshan
City, Le'an County, Jingan County, Guixi City, Pengze County, Lichuan County, Huichang County,
Taihe County, Jiujiang City, Anyuan District, Yushan County, andLongnan County.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Project leading groups comprising key line bureaus (e.g., Environment Protection, Agriculture,
Finance and Commerce) have been formed at all government levels. A Provincial Project
Management Office (PPMO) has been established under the Jiangxi Agricultural Bureau. At city/
county level, 12 County/city PMOs have been established at county/city Agricultural Bureau under
the guidance of PPMO. The provincial PMO and local PMO have received safeguards training. The
capacity of PPMO and City/county PMOs will be further strengthened to meet the Bank's
requirement for project safeguards management during project preparation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Feng Ji (GENDR)
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment   Yes         It is confirmed that Environmental Assessment (OP
OP/BP 4.01                               4.01) is triggered. The proposed physical investments
mainly include the construction of up to 12 farm
produce markets in Jiangxi Province (under
Component II). All proposed sites for the markets
are in existing economic development/industry parks.
The markets will include trading buildings,
processing workshops (e.g. classification and
packaging), and service buildings etc. There will be
adverse impacts associated with the markets: (i)
general construction-related impacts such as disposal
of spoil, nuisance of dust, noise, wastewater, and
disturbance to traffic etc.; and (ii) adverse impacts
during operation including disposal of waste and
wastewater generated at the markets, increased
traffic, and fire safety issues etc. As such,
Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) is triggered.
An EMP will be prepared for the project, including
the following:
*      Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) to
address general construction related impacts;
* Specific mitigation measures during design,
construction and operation phase, including: (i)
provision of treatment facilities for wastewater, and
waste generated from the markets; (ii) provision of
adequate traffic management facilities and safety
measures; (iii) treatment and disposal of wastewater
and waste collected form the markets; and (iv)
maintenance of safety facilities and emergency plan
for accidents.
Other mitigation measures will be addressed in
Social and Environmental Instruments, such as (i)
under OP 4.01, a separate Social Assessment will be
conducted;(ii)An Environment and Social
Management Framework will be prepared as part of
the EMP in case there are activities that will not be
know/identified by appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project is mainly in the urban and peri-urban
areas which have been disturbed by intensive human
activities. The project will not convert, degrade or
restore any natural habitats or critical natural
habitats. This policy is not triggered.


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project will not have impacts on the health and
quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare of
people and their level of dependence upon or
interaction with forests, nor aim to bring about
changes in the management, protection, or utilization
of natural forest or plantations.
This policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD          The current proposal does not include any
procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
equipment; nor introduce any new pest management
practices, or expand/alter existing pest management
practices; nor lead to substantially increased
pesticide use and subsequent environmental and
health risks. However, the preparation will include
an assessment of whether the construction and
operation of warehouses will lead/not lead to
increase usage of pesticides to treat post-harvest pest
and diseases. A decision to trigger this OP 4.09 will
be subject to findings, final project design, and
safeguards document preparation.
Physical Cultural Resources   No           The project will not likely affect sites with
OP/BP 4.11                                 archeological, paleontological, historical, religious,
or unique natural values. Chance finds during
construction might occur and relevant clauses will be
included in all construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD          The initial social screening was done and found that
4.10                                       a small number of She and some other minorities live
scattered in villages of Le'an and Longnan counties.
These ethnic minorities all speak mandarin Chinese,
live in a similar way as the majority Han people do
and are socially and economically well integrated
with the majority people, and they do not have
significant cultural characteristics of their minority.
Further screening and investigation will be done to
determine whether or not the Bank OP 4.10 IP policy
is triggered or not. Necessary measures, such as an
IP plan, will be taken if OP 4.10 is eventually
triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The Bank's involuntary resettlement policy will be
BP 4.12                                    triggered as the project has recently acquired or will
acquire land for civil work construction under
component 2 of the project. Each of the up to 12
markets will develop civil works. All project sites are
located in a local industrial park of each project
county or city and the land has been acquired in the
past few years. In general, the civil works will


﻿include construction of up to 12 trade markets for
agricultural products. Each market will consist of a
comprehensive wholesale market, storage
warehouse, logistical hub, quality test lab facilities
for agricultural products, information sharing center
for product distribution and marketing, affiliated
service center such as catering and parking. Due
diligence review for recently acquired land will be
conducted as required. A RPF and or RAP will be
prepared to address additional land acquisition in the
project as needed.
Social Assessment report (SA) and RPF will be
prepared. Other instruments such as DDR and RAP
could be prepared as required in any subproject
which needs a DDR and a RAP based on legacy
issues of DDR findings and additional land
acquisition.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy.
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The safeguards documents (e.g. EMP, RAP) will be submitted to the Bank's team for review in
September 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Xiaolan Wang
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                       Date: 17-Sep-2015
Advisor:
Sector Manager:        Name: lain G. Shuker (SM)                       Date: 24-Sep-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


