                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1078
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                        Project ID:    P147705
                            Project Name:      SME Competitiveness Project (P147705)
                            Task Team          Qahir Dhanani
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Nov-2014                       Estimated   29-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTCDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Vocational training (15%), General industry and trade sector (85%)
                            Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (60%), Other Private Sector
                                              Development (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      46.00           Total Bank Financing:                 40.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   6.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     40.00
                              Total                                                                                     46.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to enhance the competitiveness and capacity of targeted small
                           and medium sized enterprises in Kazakhstan.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1. SME Capacity Building (US$ 15 million): Strengthen government SME support

                                                                       Page 1 of 4
                         programs by enhancing quality and introducing international standards to increase SME
                         competitiveness and enable them greater access to other programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2. SME Linkages in Competitive Sectors (US$ 20 million)

                         Component 2.1 Supplier Development Program: Program to increase supply-chain linkages between
                         SMEs and Large firms in Kazakhstan through facilitation of linkages; focused technical assistance to
                         SMEs; establishment of Supplier Development Office.

                         Component 2.2 Competitive Sectors: Support the development of non-extractive sectors in and
                         around priority geographic areas through institutional capacity strengthening.

                         Component 2.3 Factoring Strategic Assessment: Strategic assessment for supply chain financing
                         (SCF) program to improve access to and terms of credit for SMEs

                         Component 3. Impact Evaluations & Monitoring (US$ 8 million): Deploy rigorous impact
                         evaluations and M&E tools to gain evidence for policy, program design and transparency; citizen
                         engagement through PPDs and a strengthened SME Call Center

                         Component 4. Project Management (US$ 3 million): Operation of the project by a team of resident
                         local and international technical and fiduciary specialists
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate throughout Kazakhstan and will finance SMEs. For the purpose of this
                         project, SMEs are defined as firms with fewer than 250 employees. All private SMEs (private
                         ownership more than 50 percent), irrespective of their sector, will be eligible for participation as sub-
                         beneficiaries.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
                         Natasa Vetma (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The project would not trigger OP 4.12. No


                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            4.12                                              potential beneficiaries can participate in the
                                                                              project if they would need land acquisition for the
                                                                              activities to be supported under this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Rehabilitation and reconstruction (which could
                                                                              involve demolition of no longer suitable structure
                                                                              and construction of a new one) of existing
                                                                              buildings within the same footprint would be
                                                                              permissible.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Safeguards policies are not triggered for this project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                      Page 3 of 4
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Qahir Dhanani
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/      Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)                   Date: 24-Nov-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
