                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1278
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belize                             Project ID:    P130474
                            Project Name:      Management and Protection of Key Biodiversity Areas in Belize (P130474)
                            Task Team          Enos E. Esikuri
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Oct-2013                        Estimated   30-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSEN                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (84%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (16%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Climate change (25%), Land
                                              administration and management (25%), Natural disaster mana gement (15%),
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              Other environment and natural resources management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      22.09           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            4.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          3.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                           6.09
                              Adaptation Fund                                                                             6.00
                              Japan Social Development Fund                                                               3.00
                              Total                                                                                      18.09
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                         The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen natural resource management and
                         biodiversity conservation in Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) of Belize. The Project would achieve
Public Disclosure Copy




                         this by helping to: reduce deforestation rates and fragmentation pressure in targeted KBAs and
                         enhance sustainable forest management practices; improve the protection of Forest Reserves and
                         reduce forest fires; improve local livelihoods through community-based sustainable use of ecosystem
                         goods and services; strengthen legal and administrative frameworks for Protected Areas (PAs);
                         manage Protected Areas (PAs) in the KBAs more effectively; strengthen capacity for compliance
                         monitoring and enforcement of key agencies responsible for the environment and enhance the
                         coordination among Government agencies charged with conservation; enhance effectiveness of the
                         Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) System; and mainstream climate change mitigation and
                         resilience considerations into the National Protected Areas System Plan (NPASP).
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would support the forest protection, climate mitigation and resilience,
                         sustainable forest management, and biodiversity conservation in targeted areas within the Key
                         Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) in Belize. Site conservation is among the most effective means to reduce
                         biodiversity loss. Therefore, it is critical to identify those sites where unique biodiversity must be
                         conserved. To this end, the concept of KBAs was developed by global practitioners seeking to
                         identify and ultimately ensure that networks of globally important sites are safeguarded. This
                         methodology builds on the identification of species-based conservation targets (through the IUCN
                         Red List) and nests within larger-scale conservation approaches. Site selection is driven by the
                         distribution and population of species that require site-level conservation. In 2007, a collaborative
                         effort by the Government of Belize, Belize Tropical Forest Studies, Conservation International, and
                         the Critical Ecosystem Partnership Fund resulted in the definition of the KBAs in Belize as detailed
                         in the report “Establishing a Baseline to Monitor Species and Key Biodiversity Areas in
                         Belize? (Meerman, 2007).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Priority areas for biodiversity protection were identified under the KBAs Assessment
                         (Meerman, 2007) based on a Marxan analysis, with two outputs – the first focused on the presence of
                         globally threatened species as per the IUCN Red List criteria; the second included species of national
                         concern, such as birds that concentrate at highly vulnerable nesting colonies and sub species of
                         national concern such as the scarlet macaw. Ultimately, 39 IUCN-listed species were included in the
                         KBA analysis. The identified highest priority biodiversity areas of global concern in Belize (Global
                         Key Biodiversity Area 1) are adequately covered by the NPAS, occurring within the protected areas
                         of the Maya Mountains Massif. The second highest priority areas are also primarily within the Maya
                         Mountains Massif.

                                  The targeted areas within the KBAs for the proposed Project were chosen through a
                         stakeholder engagement process in addition to a prioritization of terrestrial areas from the 2012
                         rationalization exercise for the protected areas system. Criteria were developed to prioritize PAs
                         within the KBAs based on threats, carbon sequestration potential, management capacity, risk factors,
                         socioeconomic status, and economic values of ecosystem services. The top six sites were chosen
                         through this process to be included in the proposed Project. These areas fall within two critical
                         Management Units: the Northern Lowlands and the Maya Mountains Massif. The project area size
                         will cover a total of 528,317 acres (213,802 hectares), not including the communities surrounding the
                         protected areas that will engage in the proposed Project. Climate change mitigation from avoided
                         deforestation and restoration efforts is a critical aspect of the proposed Project. The carbon


                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         sequestration potential has been estimated for each target site.

                                  Sustainable forest management takes multiple forms within the proposed Project since the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         six priority areas are all managed in different ways. Chiquibul National Park is co-managed by
                         Friends for Conservation and Development (FCD), and currently has a management plan. Spanish
                         Creek Wildlife Sanctuary is co-managed by the Rancho Dolores Environment and Development
                         Group, which has a presence in the park, but no management plan to date. There is a need for
                         increased capacity for park management, administration, and fundraising. Freshwater Creek Forest
                         Reserve recently became co-managed by Corozal Sustainable Future Initiative (CSFI), which also
                         co-manages two other protected areas (Shipstern Nature Reserve and Honey Camp Natural Park).
                         Columbia River Forest Reserve has a strategic management plan. Ya’axche Conservation Trust has
                         partnered with the Forest Department to manage the area. The strategy of this forest reserve is unique
                         because it uses an integrated approach to address agroforestry and sustainable forest management
                         involving surrounding communities. In addition, a core conservation area exists to protect the
                         watershed. Vaca Forest Reserve is co-managed by Friends for Conservation Development (FCD),
                         which provide long term forest licenses for logging. Ya’axche Conservation Trust (YCT) has been
                         identified as a possible co-management organization for Maya Mountain Forest Reserve since they
                         already work with some of the buffer communities and have experience in integrated landscape
                         management.

                                 The proposed Project will support the following four components:

                         Component 1: Supporting Forest Protection and Sustainable Forest Management Activities in Key
                         Biodiversity Areas (US$2.1819 million). This component will support activities in (1) forest
                         protection and (2) sustainable forest management, contributing to reduction of emissions from
                         deforestation and degradation and increase in sequestration of CO2. Forest protection will be
                         achieved through (a) support for review, in view of amendment, of the land tenure legislation that
                         requires land owners to develop or clear forested lands, (b) support for assessment of opportunities
                         and training to promote a REDD+ program to incentivize private land protection and provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainable funding for protected areas, and (c) development of a fire incidence rapid response team
                         to decrease forest fires. Sustainable forest management with local communities in targeted areas will
                         be achieved through (a) rehabilitation of critical areas of high conservation value through
                         community-based activities, incorporating climate change mitigation and resiliency measures, (b)
                         support for sustainable harvesting and marketing of non-timber forest products (NTFPs) and
                         community-based forestry opportunities in target areas, (c) awareness raising on sustainable forest
                         management, and (d) establishment of the sustainable forest management system.

                         Component 2: Promoting Effective Management of Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) (US$2.5979
                         million). Effective management is critical to mitigate threats to the KBAs. This component will
                         support (1) improving management of the KBAs and (2) monitoring and compliance within the
                         KBAs. Effective administration and management of the KBAs will be achieved through (a) support
                         for implementation of recommendations from the recent consultations conducted by the Government
                         of Belize to improve the Protected Areas System (the PA Rationalization Exercise) including
                         establishment of procedures/guidelines and criteria for the declaration, re-alignment and de-
                         reservation of PAs, and implementation of the comprehensive protected areas legislation to integrate
                         all PAs that are currently managed under different acts, (b) support for improvement of protected
                         area management in six target sites, and (c) updating the Protected Areas System Plan with
                         considerations to climate change mitigation and resilience. Monitoring and compliance activities will
                         be supported through (a) improving legal frameworks for protection of biodiversity and forests, (b)

                                                                       Page 3 of 12
                         implementation of monitoring and compliance in the PAs through demarcation of PA boundaries,
                         establishment of a monitoring and compliance unit, and an operational plan for such unit, training
                         and transportation support, and (c) establishing a biodiversity monitoring system for the KBAs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increasing biodiversity monitoring capacity.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Enhanced Enforcement of
                         Environmental Regulations (US$1 million). This component will support enhanced coordination and
                         training among government agencies charged with environmental management. This is critical for
                         the long-term protection of areas for natural resources management, climate change mitigation, and
                         biodiversity conservation. This will be achieved through supporting (1) increased coordination for
                         improved environmental management and development and (2) integration of environmental
                         screening tools and processes. The Project will (a) establish a committee devoted solely to
                         environmental management; (b) provide training and equipment for compliance monitoring. The
                         project will also (a) establish a standardized EIA program and protocol for enhanced environmental
                         screening; (b) improve decision making in the EIA process; and (c) introduce other environmental
                         tools (such as Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEA)) to complement EIA into the
                         environmental screening and clearance process.

                         Component 4: Project management, monitoring and assessment (US$ 305,800). This component will
                         provide technical, administrative, and fiduciary support to the Project. A monitoring and evaluation
                         program will be designed and implemented, which include collection of data and regular updates,
                         stakeholder involvement, and overall Project implementation. The Project Management Unit (PMU)
                         will be established in MFFSD, consisting of Project Manager, Project Officer, staff from the existing
                         units within MFFSD, namely the National Protected Areas Secretariat, the Department of
                         Environment, and Forest Department, and fiduciary staff from PACT. Effort will be made to
                         harmonize the coordination of this project with other existing World Bank/GEF projects.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project would support the forest protection/sustainable forest management and conservation of
                         biodiversity in Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs) in Belize, which fall into roughly 2 large blocks (over
                         250,000 ha) and a number of isolated sites (over 45,000 ha) as follows:

                         Northern Lowlands KBA
                         - Freshwater Creek Forest Reserve (33,393 acres)
                                 Responsible Agency: Forest Department
                                 Co-Manager: Corozal Sustainable Future Initiative (CSFI)
                                 Physical Characteristics: Lowland broad-leaved moist forest, mangrove and littoral forest,
                         wetland. An important component of the North East Biological Corridor. Agricultural incursions
                         continue.

                         - Spanish Creek Wildlife Sanctuary (6,001 acres)
                                 Responsible Agency: Forest Department
                                 Co-Manager: Rancho Dolores Environment and Development Group
                                 Physical Characteristics: Riparian broad leaf forest. Provides connectivity in the Northern
                         Biological Corridor. A potential resource for local tourism.

                         Maya Mountain Massif KBA
                         - Vaca Forest Reserve (34,887 acres)


                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                                Responsible Agency: Forest Department
                                Co-Manager: Friends for Conservation and Development (FCD)
                                Physical Characteristics: Lowland and sub-montane broad leaf forests. Contains an important
Public Disclosure Copy




                         headwater. There is significant agricultural activity including cattle pasture and crop production.

                         - Chiquibul National Park         (264,003 acres)
                                  Responsible Agency: Forest Department
                                  Co-Manager: Friends for Conservation and Development (FCD)
                                  Physical Characteristics: Lowland broad-leaved moist forest, lowland pine forest, shrubland,
                         sub-montane broad-leaved moist forest, sub-montane broad-leaved wet forest, sub-montane pine
                         forest. Contains an important headwater. There are illegal hunting, looting, harvesting of xate, and
                         poaching of birds.

                         - Maya Mountain Forest Reserve            (41,730)
                                 Responsible Agency: Forest Department
                                 Co-Manager: Ya’axche Conservation Trust (YCT) has been identified as a possible co-
                         management organization since they already work with some of the buffer communities.
                                 Physical Characteristics: Lowland and sub-montane broad leaf forest, lowland pine forest,
                         and shrub lands.This east facing side of the Maya Mountains is important for the water security of
                         agricultural areas and communities downstream.

                         - Columbia River Forest Reserve           (148,303)
                                  Responsible Agency: Forest Department
                                  Co-Manager: Ya’axche Conservation Trust (YCT)
                                  Physical Characteristics: Lowland broad-leaved wet forest, shrubland, sub-montane broad-
                         leaved wet forest. There is a high level of incursion for hunting, farming, and natural resource
                         extraction.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kimberly Vilar (LCSSO)
                         Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (LCSEN)
                         Victor Bundi Mosoti (LEGEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Components 1 and 2 include financing of
                         BP 4.01                                             sustainable development activities with local
                                                                             communities to reduce the encroachment pressure
                                                                             on forest resources; community-based activities
                                                                             to support rehabilitation/restoration of critical
                                                                             areas; and targeted livelihood options to enhance
                                                                             the socio-economic existence between protected
                                                                             areas, natural resource management, and local
                                                                             communities. The Project is classified as
                                                                             Category B, as its potential adverse
                                                                             environmental impacts on human populations or
                                                                             environmentally important areas are site-specific,
                                                                             reversible and can be readily mitigated. Since the



                                                                     Page 5 of 12
                                                                         combined exact location and nature of small
                                                                         investments to be financed under the Project will
                                                                         only be determined through a demand-driven
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         process during Project implementation, an
                                                                         Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                         has been prepared and disclosed to conform to the
                                                                         triggered environmental safeguard policies and
                                                                         the applicable national regulations.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes             The Project will help rehabilitate, restore, and
                                                                         protect targeted Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA),
                                                                         which are important to preserve local biodiversity
                                                                         and the quality of water resources. Regarding
                                                                         Project-financed sustainable livelihood activities,
                                                                         the EMF explicitly forbids activities that would
                                                                         lead to conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                         natural habitats or their supporting areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             The Project will support rehabilitation/
                                                                         restoration of critical forested areas (e.g.,
                                                                         watersheds) through community-based activities.
                                                                         Regarding Project-financed sustainable livelihood
                                                                         activities, the EMF explicitly forbids activities
                                                                         that would lead to clearing or degradation of
                                                                         forests or forest ecosystems.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             The Project will not finance chemical pesticides
                                                                         or lead to increased use of other agricultural
                                                                         chemicals. However, pest management can result
                                                                         necessary for eligible sub-projects related with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Project-financed sustainable livelihood activities.
                                                                         In those cases, the Project will promote use of
                                                                         Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as defined
                                                                         and instructed in the OP 4.09. The EMF includes
                                                                         applicable screening guidance for the sub-project
                                                                         level in order to define if a specific Pest
                                                                         Management Plan (PMP) will need to be
                                                                         developed before sub-project approval and
                                                                         implementation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             This policy is triggered since the Project can
                         BP 4.11                                         involve small structural works and Belize has
                                                                         thousands of Mayan Antiquities buried under the
                                                                         forests and chance finds might occur within the
                                                                         Project’s direct intervention areas. Belize has a
                                                                         well-developed program for management of
                                                                         Mayan Antiquities in situ and ex situ. If
                                                                         antiquities are encountered during Project
                                                                         implementation, the Institute of Archaeology will
                                                                         be notified immediately, and as the competent



                                                                 Page 6 of 12
                                                                        authority, it will make the decisions on how any
                                                                        chance find will be managed. Additionally, the
                                                                        EMF explicitly forbids activities that would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        negatively impact any known cultural site. The
                                                                        EMF also mandates that in case of any difference/
                                                                        gap between the national legislation and the Bank
                                                                        safeguard policy, the stricter approach will
                                                                        prevail.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             The Project will engage with different ethnic
                                                                        groups at the site level for the site-specific
                                                                        activities and nationwide for activities that will
                                                                        have system-wide impacts. The indigenous
                                                                        peoples of Belize who could be impacted by the
                                                                        Project are select Maya Mopan and Maya Kekchi
                                                                        communities and Garinagu communities. Other
                                                                        ethnicities that could be impacted are the Creole,
                                                                        Mestizo, and East Indians. An Indigenous
                                                                        People’s Planning Framework (aka more
                                                                        specifically as a Culturally Appropriate
                                                                        Consultation and Participation Protocol) has been
                                                                        prepared and consulted and will be finalized and
                                                                        duly disclosed prior to appraisal in order to
                                                                        establish the guidelines for consulting and
                                                                        engaging with Project-affected communities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             This policy is triggered given that the Project is
                         4.12                                           likely to restrict access to protected areas. These
                                                                        restrictions will affect persons who currently use
                                                                        the resources of the protected areas within which
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        the Project will work, and who, as a result, may
                                                                        have reduced access to the protected areas for
                                                                        their livelihood activities.
                                                                        Therefore, a Process Framework is being
                                                                        finalized and will be duly disclosed prior to
                                                                        appraisal, in order to establish a process by which
                                                                        members of potentially affected communities
                                                                        participate in design of the Project components,
                                                                        determination of measures necessary to achieve
                                                                        resettlement policy objectives, and
                                                                        implementation and monitoring of relevant
                                                                        Project activities.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No              The Project will not support or rely on activities
                                                                        that trigger this policy.
                         Projects on International        No              The Project will not support any of the types of
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                           activities that are envisioned in paragraph 2 of
                                                                        this policy and will therefore not support any
                                                                        activities that may affect the quality or quantity of



                                                                Page 7 of 12
                                                                                water flowing through any International
                                                                                Waterways in Belize. As a result, this policy is
                                                                                not applicable to the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP Yes                 The Project will carry out activities in the
                            7.60                                                Chiquibul, Columbia River, Maya Mountain,
                                                                                Vaca, Spanish Creek and Freshwater Creek
                                                                                protected areas. Of these, Chiquibul, Columbia
                                                                                River, Maya Mountain and Vaca are all in the
                                                                                southern half of the country, which has been
                                                                                determined to be a “disputed area? as per this
                                                                                policy, owing to the long-standing territorial
                                                                                claim over the territory by Guatemala. In
                                                                                accordance with the policy, a memorandum to the
                                                                                Managing Director laying out the nature of the
                                                                                dispute and making recommendations as to how
                                                                                compliance with the policy will be achieved has
                                                                                been prepared in consultation with LEGEN.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project’s development objective focuses on sustainable natural resources management
                              (NRM) and enhancing biodiversity in selected KBAs. Consequently, the main expected
                              environmental impacts are positive, as presented along the Project description. However, as the
                              Project applies an integrated socio-environmental approach to sustainable NRM and biodiversity
                              conservation, a part of the Project-financed conservation efforts target improved local livelihoods
Public Disclosure Copy




                              through community-based sustainable use of ecosystem goods and services that will demand
                              socio-environmental management. Eligible livelihood alternatives that target alleviating socio-
                              economic pressures on the selected KBAs may include, among others, sub-projects on agro-
                              forestry/ecological farming, reforestation of abandoned milpa fields, forest management through
                              controlled burning, small-scale pasture and aquaculture initiatives, and local craft development
                              with residual timber and non-timber forest products. Final sub-project types and exact locations
                              will be defined during Project implementation as per their demand-driven nature.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The Project strives to positive long-term socio-environmental impacts focusing on the still rich
                              biodiversity hosted by Belize through different types of targeted measures that address its greatest
                              threats; illegal logging, looting, hunting, and poaching. Equally, the Project aims at mitigating
                              increasing threats of land and overall environmental degradation primarily associated with on-
                              going expansion of agriculture, housing, and tourism. The embedded awareness rising and
                              capacity building activities target longer-term behavioral changes that will naturally depend both
                              on the overall Project success as well as a number of external factors.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               Not relevant as the Project design has been developed with the objective of promoting


                                                                        Page 8 of 12
                           sustainable NRM on and around and direct conservation of the selected KBAs. The six targeted
                           KBAs were chosen through a stakeholder engagement process in addition to a prioritization of
                           terrestrial areas from a 2012 rationalization exercise on the National Protected Areas System. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           criteria developed and used to prioritize PAs within the KBAs was based on threats, carbon
                           sequestration potential, management capacity, risk factors, socio-economic status, and economic
                           values of ecosystem services provided by each PA.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The GoB used a part of its Project Preparation Grant to contract technical consultants to prepare
                           the necessary safeguard instruments with guidance and review provided by the Bank team’s
                           specialists.

                           Regarding environmental safeguards, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been
                           prepared to (i) analyze the existing local and institutional aspects that constitute the environmental
                           protection framework for implementation of the Project activities and sub-projects; (ii)
                           characterize the selected KBAs that will provide the greatest environmental returns due to reduced
                           pressures on their natural resources; (iii) analyze the environmental management capacities of the
                           key stakeholders; and (iv) provide guiding principles for minimizing and mitigating any potential
                           negative environmental impacts of Project-related interventions.

                           The Project will be hosted by the Ministry of Forestry, Fisheries, and Sustainable Development
                           (MFFSD), where the National Protected Areas Secretariat (NPAS) will house and oversee the
                           Project coordination through a Project Management Unit (PMU) that will benefit of technical
                           support by the Department of Environment (DoE) and Forest Department. None of these bodies
                           have earlier experience on screening for Bank’s safeguards measures. The technical staff to be
                           hired for the PMU will be the main responsible for the Project compliance with the Bank’s
                           safeguards with oversight by the NPAS and technical support by the DoE that has an overall
                           capacity and experience on environmental screening of projects within the framework of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           national legislation. Component 3 includes relevant capacity enhancement as presented under the
                           component description, and the Bank team will provide applicable safeguards training to the
                           responsible MFFSD and Project staff and other relevant stakeholder groups at the Project
                           inception and during implementation on as-needed-basis.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders of the Project will be the national-level governmental institutions, national
                           and international NGOs, and local-level affected communities, including Mayan communities.
                           These stakeholders have been consulted in the preparation of the Indigenous Peoples Planning
                           Framework as well as the Process Framework and Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework
                           prior to appraisal. The IPPF, PF, and RPF are currently being finalized and will be disclosed in-
                           country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. Preparation of the Environmental Management
                           Framework (EMF) also embedded pertinent stakeholder consultations as described in the final
                           document that was disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on October 18, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           17-Oct-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        18-Oct-2013


                                                                      Page 9 of 12
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Belize                                                           18-Oct-2013
                           Comments: The document is available at http://www.doe.gov.bz/index.php/services/publications
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belize                                                           31-Jul-2013
                           Comments: The revised Process Framework will be approved and disclosed through
                                         InfoShopbefore the Appraisal.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Belize                                                           31-Jul-2013
                           Comments: The revised Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework will be approved and disclosed
                                         through InfoShop before the Appraisal.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Belize                                                           18-Oct-2013
                           Comments: The EMF provides applicable guidance for Project implementation.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?


                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                 Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Enos E. Esikuri
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Emilia Battaglini (SM)                      Date: 23-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
