                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1053

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                          Project ID:      P149965
                            Project Name:      Uganda Safety Net Program for Productivity and Inclusion (P149965)
                            Task Team          Endashaw Tadesse Gossa
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          30-Mar-2015                     Estimated        28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       130.00                 Total Bank Financing:      130.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 130.00
                              Total                                                                       130.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the Government of Uganda to expand
                           income-earning opportunities for poor and vulnerable households and put in place the building
                           blocks for a social protection system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will have three components: (i) Labor-intensive public works that will provide
                           employment opportunities for poor and vulnerable households; (ii) Livelihood Investment Support
                         for poor and vulnerable households; and (iii) Institutional support to build the social protection
                         system. The project is currently estimated to be equivalent to US$ 130 million and will operate over
                         a period of four years.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Labor-Intensive Public Works (USD$80 million):
                         The public works component of the project will provide regular, seasonal employment opportunities
                         to the poor and vulnerable households in selected districts through labor-intensive public works. It
                         will also provide direct support to households that are eligible to participate in the project but have
                         no labor capacity. The aim is to provide income-support to poor and vulnerable households in
                         selected districts to smooth their consumption, promote investments in their human and productive
                         capital and strengthen their resilience to shocks. The use of labor-intensive public works to transfer
                         income to households provides an opportunity for the government to address the environmental
                         degradation that is exacerbating the effects of shocks, such as the frequent floods and droughts in the
                         country. In addition, public work component will also provide support to the more predictable shocks
                         the poor and vulnerable households are facing, such as chronically food insecurity, a situation in
                         which households are not able to produce enough for their own consumption. Due to the frequent
                         occurrence of droughts, especially in the northern and western parts of the country, poor and
                         vulnerable households remain chronically food insecure. Chronically food insecure households are
                         not able to produce enough for the family’s consumption and are exposed to food shortages during
                         lean season. The public work component will provide poor and vulnerable households a seasonal
                         transfer and smooth consumption during the lean season.

                         The proposed project will operate within a national framework for public works programs, which the
                         government is putting in place with support from multiple partners. This framework aims to promote
                         the use of common norms and standards for the delivery of labor-intensive public works, such that
                         high rates of coverage can be achieved even when delivery is fragmented across many small
                         initiatives. Within this framework, the project will provide support in a limited number of districts,
                         prioritizing the 55 districts in the north and east of the country that participated in the NUSAF 2. It
                         will also coordinate with the WFP-implemented Cash/Food for Assets program to minimize overlap
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in these areas. Preliminary estimates suggest that this component would provide support to 100,000
                         households per year . Given the aim of integrating the project into the national public works
                         framework and the emerging social protection system more generally, the targeting criteria and
                         methodology will consider the interface of the public works with the SAGE social pension to provide
                         coherent support to poor and vulnerable households in project areas (see paragraph 26 for more on
                         this point).

                         The public works activities will create assets that provide benefits to households and communities.
                         While the exact assets to be created will be identified by communities through a local planning
                         process, these could include the creation or maintenance of rural access roads, tree nurseries,
                         afforestation, construction of different soil and water conservation measures, and flood control
                         structures, rainwater harvesting, rehabilitation and construction of market shelters, rural health
                         facilities, and schools, among others. The project will finance capital and technical inputs for these
                         works, such as masons carpenters, as well as the tools required for the labors to help ensure that the
                         public works are built to a high quality.

                         The labor-intensive public works will be designed to respond to the specific needs of women. A
                         quota will be established to ensure that at least 40 percent of public works participants are women.
                         Quotas will also be put in place to ensure that women are represented on local committees and
                         through the community-planning processes to increase the likelihood that the assets benefit them as
                         well as men. Steps will also be taken to facilitate their participation in the public works, including the
                         provision of childcare at public works sites and procedures to allow pregnant and breast-feeding
                         women to be exempt from the work requirements for a specified period.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The public works component would specifically finance: (a) Wages/transfers for the beneficiaries
                         participating in the public works activities, including direct support to households that are eligible for
                         support but without able-bodied members. The frequency, duration and amount to be transferred will
                         be determined during the preparation process; (b) Equipment, materials and skilled labor to promote
                         the quality of the public works.

                         Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support (US$ 35 million):
                         This component will support the government’s aim to extend livelihood support to poor and
                         vulnerable households to increase the productive assets and incomes of beneficiary households. The
                         focus of this component is to stabilize and improve the existing livelihoods of poor households in
                         farm and in non-farm sectors and subsequently support households to diversifying their livelihoods.
                         As agriculture is the mainstay for a large proportion of the rural poor, the livelihood component will
                         lay special focus on sustainable agriculture and allied activities like animal husbandry, non-timber
                         forest produce, fisheries and value addition to agricultural produce. The experience from the NUSAF
                         1 and 2 has demonstrated the effectiveness of this approach (see paragraph 32). The proposed
                         operation aims to build on this experience to further improve the efficiency, effectiveness and
                         coverage of livelihood activities.

                         More specifically, Livelihood Investment Support component will provide grants to participating
                         households that have completed a set of activities (e.g. have a business plan in place, have
                         participated in training programs and have demonstrated willingness to save). These grants are
                         complemented with business support, which includes training and skills development, coaching and
                         mentoring. Building on the experience of NUSAF 1 and 2, participating households will be
                         encouraged to form groups to access the grants and business support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The livelihood component will have three interventions:
                         a.        Livelihoods Enhancement through value-addition to existing family-based small income
                         generating activities. This will enhance and expand existing livelihoods options and tap new
                         opportunities within the key livelihoods like agriculture, livestock, fisheries and forest produce
                         collection. To this effect, it will provide support to add value to the existing income generating
                         activity and make it more effective and increase its income and profit. This will stabilize and
                         improve the existing livelihoods of poor households;
                         b.        Training and support for self-employment: training, small grant and business support
                         services will be provided to beneficiaries of this component to access gainful self-employment.
                         Experience of NUSAF 2 showed that groups of poor and vulnerable households, particularly those
                         who are in the rural areas, often lack business skills to be able to manage their productive assets
                         effectively to generate income. Through this component, business management skills training will be
                         provided to groups before they can access small grants to increase their productive assets. Business
                         skills training could focus on basic financial, marketing and operations management, including
                         support to developing a business plan; and
                         c.        Small grants to youth (both male and female) groups to support skills training, tools and
                         materials in a vocation of the youth’s choosing. The Youth Opportunities Program (YOP) which was
                         the livelihood support component of the NUSAF 1, provided cash grants to groups to support skills
                         training, tools and materials in a vocation of the youth’s choosing, and enable them to practice their
                         trade individually or as a group. The findings of the impact evaluation of YOP indicated that this
                         approach is highly effective.

                         While this component will operate in the same areas as component one, poor and vulnerable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         households will chose between the two forms of support . At the same time, the project will explore
                         whether the provision of public works and the livelihood support could graduate people out of
                         poverty . This will be carried-out through a pilot that will be rigorously evaluated.

                         Component 3: Institutional support to build the social protection system (US$ 15 million).
                         The aim of this component is to support the government to lay the foundation for the social
                         protection system that is envisioned in the draft Uganda Social Protection Policy. The Ministry of
                         Gender, Labour and Social Development (MGLSD) is responsible for overseeing the social
                         protection sector and has been spearheading the formulation of the USSP. The component will thus
                         support the MGLSD to establish and strengthen systems to promote the harmonization of the direct
                         income support elements of the social protection sector, such as the national framework for public
                         works that was discussed above. It will also invest in the systems and procedures that are required to
                         delivery predictable, multi-annual labor-intensive public works. Finally, it will contribute to the DIS
                         system by building on the success of the governance and accountability mechanism of the NUSAF 2.

                         Given the mandate of OPM to manage the project, and the mandate of the Ministry of Local
                         Government and the communities to implement the project areas, the following activities led by
                         these institutions:
                         a.       To contribute towards laying the foundation for the social protection system in Uganda, the
                         project will support the establishment of the national framework for labor-intensive public works. It
                         will also seek to improve the delivery of labor-intensive public works, specifically focusing on the
                         planning of the public works, the targeting of households, the systems used to pay beneficiaries, and
                         the monitoring and evaluation of the activities, as a means of contributing to strengthening these
                         elements within the social protection sector more broadly. Investments in the targeting and payments
                         systems, in particular, will b e carried-out in a manner that would aim to promote harmonization and
                         lesson learning across the direct income support sub-sector. To this effect, the project will create
Public Disclosure Copy




                         common targeting and payment systems that will avoid overlapping of programs and promote
                         efficiency and effectiveness of DIS intervention. There is little evidence on the effectiveness of
                         targeting systems for direct income support in Uganda, although there are suggestions that simple,
                         transparent systems are more likely to be supported by communities. In general, programs tend to use
                         a mix of categorical and poverty-targeting, although there is a general sense that poverty-targeting is
                         costly and ineffective. As such, there is significant scope to improve the targeting of labor-intensive
                         public works programs, with potential lessons for the sector more generally. In relation to delivery of
                         payments, the component will support the use of Private Sector Payment Service Providers (PSP)
                         which will ensure secure and timely payment of beneficiaries . While there is experience in Uganda
                         with the use of third-party PSPs, to date, these have been used by projects that operate outside of
                         government systems.
                         b.       The project will also establish the foundation to enable the public works program to scale-up
                         in response to shocks, such as drought and floods. Internationally, there is a growing consensus that
                         responding to shocks through an established safety net is more effective than providing humanitarian
                         response. While food aid saves lives, it often arrives too little and too late to allow people to protect
                         their livelihoods. In contrast, increasing the coverage, frequency of transfers or transfer values of a
                         safety net program before the shock occurs has been shown to enable people to protect their
                         livelihoods and assets. Such scalable support thus reinforces the protective function of regular safety
                         net transfers. The proposed operation will use, to the full extent possible, the existing early warning
                         system to inform a response to shocks through the public works in project areas.
                         c.       Concurrently, this component will support the establishment of the systems and procedures
                         that are required to deliver the labor-intensive public works and the livelihood investment support
                         activities. Significant investment in operational systems, procedures and capacity at national and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         local-levels, including the hiring of staff and procurement of vehicles and equipment, will be availed
                         through component 3. It will also require that measures be put in place to mitigate the fiduciary risks
                         arising from the delivery of cash transfers to a large number of beneficiaries. The experience with the
                         NUSAF 2 will inform the detailed activities to be financed under this component. However, care will
                         be taken during the design of the project to reflect on the lessons learned from the administration of
                         the NUSAF 2, which was very effective but also relatively expensive as compared with international
                         experience.

                         Finally, this component will finance the Transparency, Accountability and Anti-Corruption (TAAC)
                         activities that were initiated under the NUSAF 2 project. The objective of the TAAC activities under
                         NUSAF 2, which is implemented by the Inspectorate of Government (IG), has been to strengthen
                         transparency, accountability and anti-corruption efforts in northern Uganda. The NUSAF 2 project is
                         used as an entry point to develop stronger systems for communities and local authorities to promote
                         improved governance in development. To this end, Social Accountability Committees (SAC) were
                         elected at the community-level, as a requirement for a community to receive funding for a NUSAF 2
                         sub-projects in their community. The IG provides, in collaboration wit h Civil Society
                         Organizations, training to SACs to build the capacity of communities to promote transparency and be
                         able to identify corrupt tendency and thereby improve accountability. The SACs are responsible for
                         holding the Community Project Management Committee (CPMC), government officials, and also the
                         private contractor hired for the sub-project, to account. SACs act as the first point of call for any
                         project grievance.

                         The Office of the IG has developed a reasonably effective system to address grievances which
                         encompasses the application of sanctions against local government officials proven to have
                         mismanaged funds or circumvented project procedures. Because the IGG is legally equipped to
                         administer sanctions, their proactive role in enforcing compliance of project regulations appears to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have served as a powerful deterrent to corruption. As a third party monitoring agency, the IGG’s
                         proactive role in training the SAC members, regular monitoring of the project at various levels and
                         enforcing compliance of project regulations have served as a powerful deterrent to corruption. The
                         design of the new operation will incorporate the experience and lessons learned during the
                         implementation of the NUSAF 2 and will continue to use IGG as a third party monitoring.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will provide support in a limited number of districts, prioritizing the 55 districts in the
                         north and east of the country that participated in the NUSAF 2. It will also coordinate with the WFP-
                         implemented Cash/Food for Assets program to minimize overlap in these areas.

                         The project will support interventions designed to improve livelihoods and access to basic socio-
                         economic services in selected districts. The salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard
                         analysis relate to project Component 1: Labor-Intensive Public Works and Component 2: Livelihood
                         Investment Support. Component 1 involves public works which will focus on a variety of asset
                         creation activities, including rural access roads, tree nurseries, afforestation, construction of different
                         soil and water conservation measures, and flood control structures, rainwater harvesting,
                         rehabilitation and construction of market shelters, rural health facilities, and schools, among others.
                         Component 2 will support livelihood investments which may involve Value-addition to existing
                           family-based small income generating activities.
                           The overall environmental and social impacts of the project is expected to be positive through
                           alleviating pressures on the poor that lead to unsustainable exploitation of natural resources and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental degradation. The community sub-projects may involve limited land acquisition and
                           displacement of land-uses and/or livelihoods. Therefore, by their nature, project components 1 and 2
                           may have limited and localized negative environmental and social impacts. For this reason, the
                           project is rated as EA category B. The project ties in the twin goals of the World Bank group of
                           alleviating poverty and promoting shared prosperity.
                           The potential environmental and social impacts can be adequately managed by integrating
                           environmental and social due diligence into the sub-project cycle. Since the multiple CDD sub-
                           projects and locations are not yet known at this time, Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) shall be prepared and disclosed both
                           in-country and at infoshop before project appraisal.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Office of the Prime Minster (OPM) would be the implementing agency of the project and work
                           with a wide range of institutions at central and district levels to deliver the project. Building on the
                           positive experience from NUSAF 2 project implementation, the districts will assign an officer (civil
                           servant) who will be a full-time focal person for the new project and will be supported by the District
                           Environment Officer, District Community Development Officer, and District Engineer, among
                           others. Multi-sectoral Technical Planning Committees (TPC) at the district, sub-county, and at Parish
                           levels will provide support to the project focal person, and his or her team at the district-level, to
                           ensure that the project’s activities are: appropriately appraised, approved and integrated into the
                           budgets and work programs of the respective local governments and line ministry’s technical
                           agencies; and that the appropriate environmental screening and assessment are carried-out for each
                           sub-project and any mitigation measures are adequately implemented. This institutional arrangement
                           essentially reinforces the mainstreaming of the project into the existing structures at the national and
                           local government levels. The actual project activities of planning for the public works activities, the
                           selection of beneficiaries, overseeing the public works activities and providing technical inputs,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monitoring at the district, county, sub-county and village levels would be coordinated by the local
                           government entities.
                           The OPM has been overseeing the implementation of the NUSAF 2 project since 2009. The OPM
                           has been coordinating different stakeholders in the implementation of the project through the
                           Technical Support Team (TST), composed of highly qualified project management specialists
                           including Safeguard Specialist. The TST provided technical support to the OPM and districts
                           implementing the NUSAF 2 project in the day-to-day running of the project operation.
                           The implementing agency therefore has adequate safeguards capacity to undertake environmental
                           and social tasks of proposed project. However, due to staff turnover at the District Local Government
                           Level, there will be need to take stock of the existing capacity during compilation of the ESMF and
                           RPF, so that appropriate capacity building and development measures are put in place.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            Because of the public works and livelihoods support
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       projects there are likely negative environmental and
                                                              social impacts to be generated, though localized and
                                                              readily manageable. Since the specific multiple sub-
                                                              projects and their locations are not yet known,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                              will be prepared to guide implementation of the
                                                              environmental and social aspects. The ESMF shall be
                                                              prepared in a consultative manner, and disclosed
                                                              both in-country and at info-shop before project
                                                              appraisal. Specific safeguard instruments (ESIA,
                                                              ESMPs) shall be prepared during project
                                                              implementation following guidance in the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No    The project shall not support any activities that affect
                                                              natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             TBD   The project is supporting afforestation activities. By
                                                              appraisal, the team will determine if the scale of the
                                                              activities is enough to justify triggering the policy.
                                                              Guidance and mitigation measures for forest
                                                              activities will be included in the ESMF.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes   Under project Component 2 Livelihoods Support, the
                                                              project may support CDDs that involve small scale
                                                              use of pesticides that may be applied to veterinary
                                                              care of animals. A Pest Management Plan shall be
                                                              prepared as part of the ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   The civil works involved in Component 1 of Public
                         OP/BP 4.11                           Works may impact on known and/or unknown PCRs
                                                              and therefore a Chance Finds Procedure will be
                                                              developed as part of the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       TBD   Depending on the criteria developed for selection of
                         4.10                                 project beneficiary districts, this Policy may apply if
                                                              IPs districts are among them.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Because of the likely small scale land acquisition and
                         BP 4.12                              impact on the livelihood of communities, this Policy
                                                              is triggered. Since the multiple CDDs are not yet
                                                              known including their location, a Resettlement
                                                              Policy Framework shall be prepared in a
                                                              Consultative manner, and disclosed both in-country
                                                              and at infoshop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      TBD   The project involves the construction of flood control
                                                              structures for which dam safety provisions may have
                                                              to be prepared. This will be confirmed before
                                                              appraisal.
                         Projects on International      No    The project will not be implemented in International
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 Waterways.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No    N/A
                         BP 7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 19-Mar-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      To be launched in November 2014 and completed and disclosed by March 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Endashaw Tadesse Gossa

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards                             Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                 Date: 25-Nov-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)                                                                       Date: 16-Feb-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
