                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1126
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Sri Lanka                          Project ID:    P153301
                            Project Name:     Climate Change Adaptation Project (P153301)
                            Task Team         Priti Kumar
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         19-Dec-2014                        Estimated   06-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GENDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Biodiversity (25%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Maldives Climate Change Trust Fund                                                        5.00
                              Total                                                                                     5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to demonstrate climate adaptive planning and management through the adoption of a
                           multi-sectoral approach in Addu and Gnaviyani Atolls.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project has been designed along five main components that together are expected to contribute to

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         delivering climate resilient island development in the project areas. The project design builds on the
                         lessons and experiences from the projects implemented under the first phase of the CCTF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Wetlands Conservation. The component will support the establishment of a protected
                         wetland management system for Hithadhoo Island and Fuvahmulah Island, including through: (a) the
                         establishment of Protected Area Management Units in Hithadhoo Island and Fuvahmulah Island; (b)
                         the implementation of zonation and wetlands protection regimes; (b) implementation of an
                         environmental education and communication program; (c) implementation of an eco-tourism facility
                         and program; (d) support for local eco-friendly livelihood activities; (e) support for development of a
                         National Wetlands Management Strategy Plan; (f) development of a Project exit strategy and future
                         sustainability options for protected areas; and (g) carrying out of a feasibility study on the
                         designation of Addu [City] and Fuvahmulah [Island] as biosphere reserves or important bird areas.

                         Component 2: Coral Reef Monitoring. The component will support scaling up of the coral reef
                         monitoring system, including through: (a) ongoing support for newly inducted and existing
                         [Participating Resorts and Dive Centers], and the Protected Area Management Unit in Hithadhoo
                         Island on field data collection and the use of the CoralDatabase; (b) enhancing the functionality and
                         user-friendliness of the CoralDatabase platform; (c) development of policy notes and organization of
                         exchange workshops to enable strategic mainstreaming of the use of the National Coral Reef
                         Monitoring Program; and (d) strategic and technical advisory support.

                         Component 3: Development of an Island Level Integrated SWM System. The component will
                         support institutional capacity building for Addu City Council, Gnaviyani Atoll Council, Fuvahmulah
                         Island Council, and Hithadhoo Island Council in solid waste management planning, including
                         through: (a) carrying out of a strategic options study on solid waste management; (b) implementation
                         of an atoll/island level composting program at island waste management centers in Addu Atoll and
                         Gnaviyani Atoll; (c) capacity building for Island Councils, contractors, and the utility company in
                         Fuvahmulah Island and Hithadhoo Island; and (d) conducting of communications campaigns to
                         encourage community participation in island solid waste management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Mainstreaming Climate Change into Island Development Planning. The component
                         will support the mainstreaming of climate change into island development planning, including
                         through: (a) delivery of a training curriculum on climate change to Atoll Council and Island Council
                         representatives; and (b) provision of Scholarships to Scholarship Recipients.

                         Component 5: Project Management. This component will support project implementation,
                         management, and monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project activities will be primarily carried out tin Fuvahmulah, Hithadhoo and few selected sites
                         in Addu City. Gn. Fuvahmulah (73°24'30"E and 0°16'45"S) and S. Hithadhoo (73°05'37"E and 0°
                         37'06"S) are large islands with significant human populations, wetlandarea, rampant problem of
                         flooding, and where wetlands play an important role in natural drainage and freshwater security.
                         Hithadhoo and Fuvahmulah with a population of 14323 and 11073 (in 2009) are next only to Male.
                         Both the islands have a richer diversity of plants compared to the northern islands. Hithadhoo’s
                         Eidhigali Kilhi, which is part of Addu City has the largest diversity of migratory species of birds in
                         the Maldives. Although these islands are considered large by Maldivian standards (Fuvahmulah with
                         424 hectares and Hithadhoo with 525 hectares), the land available for infrastructure and


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         developmental activities is limited – and consequently, there is a constant pressure for land
                         expansion. Both islands face frequent rainfall-induced flooding attributed to both drainage patterns
                         and to human activities (reclamation of wetlands, agriculture practices, and poor consideration for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         drainage in infrastructure planning). The wetlands in Hithadhoo and Fuvahmulah are among the
                         largest in the country and are significant for biodiversity conservation, freshwater security and flood
                         control.
                         Unlike other atolls of Maldives, Addu city possesses a natural anchorage within the city basin, as the
                         atoll is land-locked with large islands surrounding the atoll. With a registered population of more
                         than 31,000 it is one of the only two atolls of the Maldives belonging to the southern hemisphere and
                         has a land area of 15,000 hectares. The coastal marine ecosystems of the atoll include reef systems,
                         in the north and south of the atoll, as well as in the periphery of the intra atoll basin. In addition
                         strands of mangroves are found around brackish water systems. Also swampy areas inland, with
                         freshwater is common in the atoll. There are seven coral reefs in the Atoll with an area of 72 square
                         kilometers. The atoll consists of coral islands with coralline soil on top of a thin lens of fresh water.
                         The islands in the Atoll are large in comparison to other atolls, but are fewer in number. Most of the
                         Islands have an average of 1-2 meters above mean sea level. The Atoll has the largest brackish fresh
                         water pond in the Maldives and is a mangrove area of high significance, located in the northern tip of
                         the island of Hithadhoo ( Eidhigali Kilhi). The area supports resident and migratory bird populations
                         and plant species of national significance. The sustainable human occupation of the islands can be
                         attributed to these important coastal marine ecosystems and their high biodiversity value.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darshani De Silva (GENDR)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment Yes
                         OP/BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes
                         OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement       Yes
                         OP/BP 4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No

                         Projects on International      No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas     No
                         OP/BP 7.60


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental issues and impacts

                             The overall negative environmental impacts of the project are minimal, as the project is focused on
                             ensuring environmental management of wetland and coral reefs ecosystems in selected sites in
                             Maldives.

                             Activities under the component 1 - wetland protection and conservation such as zoning, fencing,
                             improvements in waste management, and management of access and use of the wetlands will
                             result in reduced environmental degradation. However, it is possible that due to activities under
                             this component, negative impacts such as temporary disturbance to water bird breeding sites and
                             issues related to shifting of solid waste to another location could also take place. Environmental
                             issues may also stem from improper drainage solutions (increased flooding, increase in vector-
                             borne diseases, salinity intrusion, reduced level of fresh water in wetland, poor water quality, etc.).
                             Ecotourism development may also impact the environment due to increased visitation which will
                             give rise to issues such as increase in waste generation, disturbance to fauna and flora, etc.

                             Activities under coral reef monitoring (component 2) are not expected to lead to significant
                             negative environmental impacts. The monitoring process that will be put in place will help in
                             ensuring the wellbeing of the coral reefs through identifying degradation of coral reefs both due to
                             anthropogenic such as breaking of corals, removal of organisms, waste accumulation, etc. and
                             natural causes such as climate variability and take necessary actions in time. Potential issues that
                             may require due diligence include possible damage to corals, their habitat and to the associated
                             organisms from activities/events related to field monitoring such as boat anchoring, oil leakages
Public Disclosure Copy




                             from boats, transect marking and physical monitoring. Safety issues may stem from
                             malfunctioning of equipment, inadequate equipment, diving related accidents, etc.

                             The component 3 – which will include a strategic options study on integrated solid waste
                             management that will assist Island Councils and communities of Fuvahmulah and Addu islands to
                             identify the scope of the current issues related to managing solid waste and identify potential
                             options of addressing the issues which will be environmentally beneficial in the future by
                             minimizing the environmental risks to the marine and terrestrial assets while reducing GHG
                             emissions. Support to the physical and operational improvement to existing island waste
                             management centers will ensure the establishment of practices such as waste segregation,
                             recycling and composting that will reduce the amount and types of waste to be disposed. While
                             physical improvement expected which will likely to be only setting up of compost pads will not
                             have significant environmental impacts. However, improper handling of waste during operations
                             may lead to health and environmental hazards.

                             Components 4 and 5 will not have any negative environmental impacts.

                             Social issues and impacts

                             The ESAMF prepared by the project shows that the social safeguard issues are non-existent.


                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                          Nonetheless, OP 4.12 has been triggered as there could be future chance find of involuntary land
                          taking in the wetland conservation subproject component 1 impacting community adversely as a
                          small percentage of community relies on the wetlands for agriculture and livelihood. A
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared as part of ESAMF in line with the Bank’s OP
                          4.12. However, there could be other social issues such as conflict during beneficiary selection for
                          livelihood options; or in finalization of livelihood options; gender representation in community-led
                          management body; etc.

                          Activities under coral reef monitoring (component 2) are not expected to lead to any negative
                          social impacts.

                           The component 3 – which will include a strategic options study on integrated solid waste
                           management that will assist Island Councils and communities of Fuvahmulah and Addu islands to
                           identify the scope of the current issues related to managing solid waste and identify potential
                           options of addressing the issues which will be environmentally beneficial to the community.
                           However, improper handling of waste during operations may lead to health hazards for the
                           community.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The social and environmental impacts of the project are expected to be positive, beneficial, and
                           aimed towards long term sustainability. The project is also expected to improve the overall socio-
                           economic profile of the community and environmental management of key ecosystems in the
                           Maldives.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None. Since this is a demonstrative project with negligible adverse impact, alternatives have not
                           been considered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           This Climate Change Adaptation (CCA) project is under the second phase of the Maldives Climate
                           Change Trust Fund (CCTF). The project is classified under Safeguards Category "B" primarily to
                           reflect the risks involved in physical activities under the first 3 components. There is an existing
                           Environment and Social Due Diligence (ESDD) report prepared for the Wetland Conservation and
                           Coral Reef Monitoring (WCCM) of CCTF phase 1 and Environment and Social Impact
                           Assessments (ESIAs) for ecotourism activities of Hithadhoo and drainage management activities
                           of Fuvamulah. In addition, an ESDD has been prepared for the Ari Atoll Solid Waste Management
                           (AASWM) project also under the CCTF phase I. Based on the findings of the above reports, the
                           project triggers OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment to ensure any environmental impact
                           associated with project activities are identified in time and mitigated, OP 4.04 – Natural Habitats
                           as project area consists of protected areas and environmentally sensitive areas and OP 4.11 as
                           undocumented and researched ruins of cultural and historical significance could be found in some
                           of these sites.

                          The ESDDs and ESIAs carried out by the client during phase I shows that the social safeguard
                          issues are non-existent. Nonetheless, OP 4.12 has been triggered for a “chance find” as there could
                          be future chance find of involuntary land taking in the wetland conservation component impacting
                          community adversely as a small percentage of community relies on the wetlands for agriculture


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           and livelihood. There could be other social issues such as conflict during beneficiary selection for
                           livelihood options; or in finalization of livelihood options; gender representation in community-led
                           management body; etc. No social safeguards issue is anticipated in coral reef monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           subproject. Since there is no indigenous community in Maldives, the OP 4.10 has not been
                           triggered.

                           In order to identify adverse social and environmental issues related to project activities, client has
                           conducted environmental and social assessment and management framework (ESAMF). The
                           ESAMF study consolidates the previous versions of ESDDs and information generated through
                           ESIAs and will include protocols for screening project activities, guidelines for mitigation of
                           environmental and social risks, and guidance on development of Environmental Management
                           Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) based on the phase I experience, as well as
                           to reflect the new areas of interventions on SWM. The study will also specify a plan for providing
                           basic training in use of the screening protocols and mitigation guidelines. The ESAMF study
                           outputs will also include guidelines based on the existing international best practices for
                           environmental sports diving prevalent in Maldives, including health and safety. The study will also
                           specify a plan for providing basic training in these practices by certified trainers to participating
                           project field partners.

                           The associated cost to implement EMPs and RAPs will be part of the project budget. The project
                           will ensure all works contracts will include the EMP and cost of RAP implementation. The
                           ESAMF provides the guidance for preparation of RAP. The cost of implementing the EMP will be
                           identified as an item in the Bill of Quantities.

                           The Project Management Unit (PMU) in the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MEE) will
                           have an Environment and Social (E&S) Coordinator who will report to the Project Manager and
                           will work closely with the wetlands technical coordinator; solid waste management coordinator
                           and the coral reef monitoring coordinator. The E&S Coordinator will be responsible for overall
                           implementation of ESAMF and will also liaison with other agencies at the island level to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implement safeguards mitigation measures, monitoring and evaluation of implementation and
                           report on compliance and status of performance indicators. In addition, project level coordinators
                           will be appointed in the project islands. The E&S coordinator will orient the island level
                           coordinators in environmental and social issues. The coordinators at island level will also be first
                           level of contact for any grievance / feedback for the community.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In addition to the MEE, there are several ministries, departments and agencies that will be
                           involved in the implementation of the CCA project. These include the Environment Protection
                           Agency (EPA), Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture, Marine Research Center (MRC), Ministry
                           of Tourism (MOT), FENAKA Utility, tourist resorts and the Fuvahmulah Atoll Council,
                           Hithadhoo Island Council. And Addu City Council Communities and NGOs are not well
                           organized on the islands but have shown considerable interest to participate in the project.

                           Public consultations on the project (including environmental and social impacts) were held with
                           affected stakeholders at local and national levels during the preparation of ESAMF. One to one
                           consultations with the community will be carried out during the implementation stage. As part of
                           ESAMF an entitlement framework has been developed. All safeguards related documents were
                           disclosed on November 26, 2014 in-country through the website and on December 5, 2014 in


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           World Bank’s InfoShop. The client will publish a newspaper advertisement requesting public
                           comments on the ESAMF and provide the website address in two newspapers (one in local
                           language and another in English). Once the project commences implementation, the project team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           is expected to have regular consultations with local stakeholders on issues related to environmental
                           and social issues.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Dec-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Maldives                                                         26-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Dec-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Maldives                                                         26-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          property?

                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Priti Kumar
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Valerie Marie Helene Layrol (PMGR) Date: 05-Jan-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
