                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6681

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nicaragua                        Project ID:      P148809
                            Project Name:      Caribbean Coast Food Security Project (P148809)
                            Task Team          Augusto Garcia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Oct-2014                      Estimated        30-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFADR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Agro-industry,
                                               marketing, and trade (20%), Health (10%), Public administrati on- Agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Nutrition and food security
                                               (40%), Rural non-farm income generation (10%), Managin g for development
                                               results (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     33.90                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                 33.90
                              Total                                                                        33.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to improve food and nutritional security in selected
                           food insecure communities of the Caribbean Coast of Nicaragua.
                         The PDO will be achieved through promoting: (i) increased and environmentally sustainable
                         agricultural productivity and market inclusion, (ii) rural non-farm income, (iii) technology and GAP
                         adoption, (iv) food and nutrition education and improved monitoring of malnutrition, (v) formation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of producer associations, and (vi) reinforced public-private partnerships. The project will have
                         particular focus on women, children, and indigenous communities.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project is based on a grant proposal submitted by the GON for funding under the
                         Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP). The proposal was approved by the GAFSP
                         Steering Committee on September 6, 2013 and awarded a grant amount of US$ 33.9 million.

                         Overall design:
                         The project puts forth short, medium- and long-term interventions for rural producers’ integration
                         into agricultural and non-agricultural value chains already being implemented under PRORURAL-I.
                         In the short term, household and community agricultural production models would focus, for
                         example, on fast-cycle crops such as basic grains and vegetables. In the medium term, models would
                         promote additional income through perennial crops and the introduction of top-quality seeds and
                         genetic material, as well as investment in post-harvest storage and agro-processing. Finally, long-
                         term agro-forestry production models aim at ensuring environmental sustainability and promoting
                         locally endemic timber species. These actions will be accompanied by technology development
                         centers (i.e., incubators) and experimental farm construction and retrofitting, which will strengthen
                         regional capacities for researching and generating locally adapted technologies appropriate for
                         tropical rainforest's crops.

                         Component 1: Increased Agricultural Productivity (US$15.1 million): This component will support
                         the PDO by increasing agricultural productivity and rural income based on economic and
                         environmental sustainability. Two main activities include:

                         1. Agricultural technology generation and transfer would improve production yields, strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         public goods provision of strategic and adaptation research, and finance technical assistance to boost
                         agricultural technology generation and transfer, increase production diversification, ensure
                         sustainable natural resource use and build in resilience to the dynamics of climate change.
                         2. GAP capacity building would target knowledge services to rural producers to expand their
                         production and management know-how as an input toward increased productivity. Business and
                         financial management training and workshops would complement these knowledge services.

                         The means of packaging technology transfer and capacity-building for rural producers would be
                         Innovation Development Plans (IDPs). The IDP would pool producer organizations’ contributions
                         (both cash and in-kind) with those of other stakeholders (i.e., private sector) and program funds
                         under a matching grants methodology to finance fixed investment in on-farm innovations. The
                         matching grants to producer organizations would finance up to 90 percent of investment costs under
                         their respective IDPs. Anchor enterprises and financial institutions would be expected to play roles
                         in IDP formulation and implementation, including finance. Private-sector alliances would also be
                         sought through investment promotion via PRONicaragua.

                         Component 2: Non-Farm Rural Livelihoods (US$3.6 million): This component will support the PDO
                         by promoting innovative non-farm small enterprises and building capacities to increase participants’
                         access to labor markets and self-employment opportunities. These activities will be implemented
                         through IDPs similar to those under Component 1. Investments to support the modernization of
                         artisanal fisheries would benefit communities in the RAAN (Tawira, Prinzu, Awala, Prinzu-Auhya)
                         and RAAS (Little Corn Island, Awaltara Lupia Nani).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Investments in Market Inclusion (US$8.4 million): This component would support the
                         PDO by forging market linkages for organized producers, encouraging value-added in agricultural,
                         livestock and fish products. This component aligns with the technology generation, sanitary and
                         phytosanitary surveillance and innovation development financed under component 1. Four main
                         activities are proposed:

                         1.       Food safety value-added would ensure quality standards are met for agricultural, livestock
                         and fish products. Plant health and animal health surveillance investments would support public
                         goods provision toward improved sanitary and phytosanitary levels.
                         2.       Strengthening producer organizations would support the formation of legally constituted
                         producer organizations to improve their competitiveness, management and decision-making
                         capacities.
                         3.       Value added IDPs, similar to those financed under components 1 and 2, would support
                         income diversification for vulnerable populations and young people.
                         4.       Market information and financial services would contribute to a favorable environment that
                         nurtures improved small enterprise performance through equitable access to: (i) market
                         infrastructure; (ii) rural financial services; and (iii) price and market information.

                         Component 4: Reduced Childhood Nutritional Vulnerability (US$4.7 million): This component will
                         support the PDO by reinforcing selected multi-sector activities of the National System of Social
                         Welfare in the target areas. The component will draw on experiences and strategies of MINSA,
                         MIFAN, and MINED in delivering food and nutrition education as well as the school feeding
                         program in the Caribbean Coast. Project activities will support priorities under a broader safety net
                         approach that is culturally adapted to the context of rural and indigenous communities. Activities
                         could include: establishing community school gardens, emphasizing nutritional education, and
                         tapping local farmers produce.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 5: PRORURAL-I Institutional Strengthening (US$2.1 million): This component will
                         support the PDO by improving the effectiveness of PRORURAL-I and its executing institutions in
                         administrative and financial management. This will include supporting PRORURAL-I institutions to
                         increase their current coverage in targeted areas. Improved Government Spending Management
                         would promote the implementation of a result-based budget process for PRORURAL-I. Enhanced
                         analytical capabilities of staff in planning, budgeting and reviewing would improve the quality of
                         sector public spending.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project location is Nicaragua's Caribbean coastal region that includes the North
                         Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAN) and South Atlantic Autonomous Region (RAAS). In terms of
                         surface extension, the project area covers around 85 per cent of the country's protected areas,
                         including for example the Bosawás Biosphere Reserve and Indio Maíz Biological Reserve.
                         Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan peoples living in the project area are expected to benefit from the
                         project activities.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The main implementing agency will be the Ministry of Family Economy (MEFCCA), which was
                           created by Presidential Decree in 2012 on the basis of the previously existing Rural Development
                           Institute (IDR). The MEFCCA is also the main implementing agency of PRORURAL’s National
                           Agro-Industry Program and has extensive experience implementing large rural development projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with financing from International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and Inter-American
                           Development Bank (IADB), as well as bilateral donors. Nonetheless, its experience with World Bank
                           projects is rather recent and reduced; based on one of the components of the Micro, Small, and
                           Medium Enterprise Development Project (P109691). A comprehensive institutional assessment,
                           including capacity assessment related with implementing the Bank safeguard policies, is being
                           carried out by the task team as part of project preparation.

                           The MEFCCA leads the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) and Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (IRF). The MEFCCA collaborates closely with three other implementing agencies: the Ministry of
                           Agriculture and Forests (MAGFOR), Nicaraguan Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA), and
                           Nicaraguan Institute of Fisheries (INPESCA). MAGFOR and INTA have extensive experience with
                           Bank projects and implementing relevant safeguard policies, and all four agencies have an internal
                           environmental unit. All of them have also institutional presence in the Caribbean coastal region, yet
                           limited to certain areas and reduced staff. Given the complexity of the target areas, a complete
                           assessment of incremental institutional capacity needs will be undertaken during preparation, and
                           main identified capacity gaps are expected to be filled by the project.

                           At the preparation mission, the MEFCCA conveyed an inter-institutional technical working group to
                           get in charge of the project's environmental and social safeguards involving the environmental units
                           of MEFCCA, MAGFOR, INTA, and INPESCA. The Bank team discussed the project's socio-
                           environmental management in detail with the group, and the mission produced an advanced draft of
                           the social and environmental ToRs for the GoN to prepare an integrated Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Jason Jacques Paiement (GSURR)
                           Tuuli Johanna Bernardini (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is proposed as Category B as per
                           BP 4.01                                             OP/BP 4.01. No large scale, significant and/or
                                                                               irreversible negative environmental or social
                                                                               impacts are foreseen. Project activities are
                                                                               expected to be mostly small-scale and enhance
                                                                               baseline conditions and proceduresregarding
                                                                               socio-environmental management and
                                                                               sustainability. The IDP financing under
                                                                               components 1‒3 is planned to provide between
                                                                               USD 1,000‒1,500 per beneficiary. IDPs that
                                                                               pool additional sources of funding will be
                                                                               subject to same socio-environmental screening,
                                                                               assessment, and management as IDPs solely
                                                             financed by the project. An ESMF will be
                                                             prepared to guide socio-environmental
                                                             management of these demand-driven IDPs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             focused on enhanced extension services and
                                                             producer training for example in good
                                                             agricultural and manufacturing practices,
                                                             including animal health. IDPs can also entail
                                                             minor investments in productive facilities and
                                                             equipment that will require socio-environmental
                                                             management. The ESMF will include a negative
                                                             list to secure exclusion of any large scale,
                                                             significant and/or irreversible negative
                                                             environmental or social impacts. Particularly, no
                                                             activity that would imply advancing the
                                                             agricultural frontier will be eligible for project
                                                             funding.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The project will promote sustainable use of
                                                             natural resources and positive impacts are
                                                             expected on protected areas through
                                                             participatory identification and development of
                                                             alternative livelihood sources for people who
                                                             depend on protected areas for subsistence.
                                                             Furthermore, the ESMF’s negative list will
                                                             exclude any activity that could lead to
                                                             conversion or degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Taken the project's focus on rural areas and
                                                             demand-driven nature, OP/BP 4.36 will be
                                                             triggered to allow funding for potential forestry-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             related IDPs. Project activities aim at reducing
                                                             pressure to deforest for agriculture and/or
                                                             livestock purposes and promoting agro-forestry.
                                                             Investments are also expected in research and
                                                             generation of locally appropriate and sustainable
                                                             technology packages. Financing of timber
                                                             production or harvesting is not expected, but the
                                                             non-farm income activities could entail small
                                                             investments for manufacture of articles made of
                                                             legally logged wood.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project will finance agricultural activities
                                                             where baseline conditions involve different
                                                             levels of use of agrochemicals. The project will
                                                             promote Integrated Pest/Crop Management
                                                             through INTA’s existing extension services
                                                             which will be strengthened. The ESMF will
                                                             include a list of prohibited agrochemicals. It
                                                             will be determined during the ESMF
                                                                 preparation weather green and blue label
                                                                 pesticides will be eligible for project financing.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project design does not particularly aim at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                 financing activities related with physical
                                                                 cultural resources. However, taken its demand-
                                                                 driven nature and location in primarily
                                                                 indigenous territories, OP/BP 4.11 is triggered
                                                                 to make sure that component 2 on non-farm
                                                                 rural livelihoods will be able to address
                                                                 potential PCR/tourism-related IDPs. The project
                                                                 will only allow positive impacts on PCRs; the
                                                                 ESMF’s negative list will exclude any activity
                                                                 that could lead to their degradation or
                                                                 destruction. The ESMF will also guide for
                                                                 applicable archaeological chance find
                                                                 procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The population of the Caribbean coastal regions
                                                                 of Nicaragua is significantly indigenous and
                                                                 afro-descendent. The Executing Agencies are
                                                                 preparing to hire an independent social
                                                                 consultant who will, among other tasks, prepare
                                                                 an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                                                 (IPPF). The IPPF will include a screening
                                                                 mechanism to identify applicable subprojects, as
                                                                 well as detailed instructions on how to prepare
                                                                 and consult Indigenous Peoples Plans. A draft
                                                                 IPPF will be presented during regional public
                                                                 consultations with potential beneficiaries, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be revised based on feedback received.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Although none of the proposed project activities
                         4.12                                    are expected to require land acquisition or
                                                                 resettlement, the grantee has agreed to prepare a
                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure
                                                                 that any subprojects that could require
                                                                 acquisition of small plots of land will be eligible
                                                                 for project financing as long as these activities
                                                                 are implemented in accordance with the policy
                                                                 principles and procedures established in OP
                                                                 4.12. The same social consultant who will
                                                                 prepare the Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF) will also prepare the RPF. A
                                                                 draft RPF will be presented during regional
                                                                 public consultations with potential beneficiaries,
                                                                 and will be revised based on feedback received.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance any mayor dam and
                                                                                                                                 is not expected to finance IDPs that would
                                                                                                                                 depend on an existing dam.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           The task team will consult with the country
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            lawyer to verify existence of international
                                                                                                                                 waterways within the project area.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             There are no disputed areas within the project
                                 7.60                                                                                            area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 07-Nov-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Consultations in the selected eligible jurisdictions will be completed before appraisal begins and
                                      the ESMF, IPPF, and IRF duly disclosed in country and at the InfoShop before the appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Augusto Garcia

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 20-Oct-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Laurent Msellati (PMGR)                                                                                              Date: 21-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
