                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12256
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2014, 08-Jul-2014, 16-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                             Project ID:    P132873
                            Project Name:      Hebei Rural Renewable Energy Development Project (P132873)
                            Task Team          Jin Liu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          30-Jun-2014                       Estimated   13-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (50%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                               (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Climate change (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       150.78           Total Bank Financing:  71.50
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 79.28
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    71.50
                              Total                                                                                   150.78
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to demonstrate sustainable biogas production
                            and utilization to reduce environmental pollution and supply clean energy in rural areas of Hebei
                            Province.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         China’s economy has experienced remarkable growth over the past several decades, but this growth
                         has been accompanied by an increase in social and environmental challenges. Intensive farming and
                         the expansion of livestock production in the rural areas are considered viable means for creating rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         income and employment and securing food supply. However, the rapid agricultural development
                         poses a threat to the local environment and public health. Every year, around 690 million tons of crop
                         residues are produced by agricultural farming and most of them are used by households as fuel or
                         burned as waste in open fields. This causes significant indoor and outdoor air pollution. The
                         concentrated livestock farms in the rural areas also produce serious pollution due to inappropriate
                         animal manure treatment. The proposed project will support installation and operation of biogas
                         facilities that use crop residues and animal wastes as the feedstock to generate biogas mainly for rural
                         residents cooking. This would be an effective way to reduce pollution and provide clean energy in
                         rural areas.

                         The proposed project would encompass the following two components and main activities:

                         Component 1: Large-scale biogas facilities management and renewable energy supply

                         Under this component the national and international best practice in developing large-scale biogas
                         facilities will be demonstrated. Series biogas facilities will be installed and operated in Hebei to
                         effectively convert agricultural wastes (specifically crop residue and livestock manure) to biogas, to
                         provide stable clean energy to local rural residents. It is expected that annually the project will
                         produce around 42 million m3 of biogas and around 221,700 ton crop residues and 241,600 ton
                         livestock manure will be appropriately treated as feedstock for the biogas production. The biogas will
                         be provided to around 96,100 rural households mainly for cooking energy. The remaining biogas,
                         after supplying the target rural residents, will be upgraded and used as vehicle fuel. An estimated
                         around 7 million m3 of compressed natural gas (CNG) will be produced annually, which will support
                         public transportation in the project counties.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Technical support, project management, and monitoring

                         This component will support technical services, training, monitoring and evaluation, and project
                         management. Specifically, (a) an expert team will be contracted by provincial project management
                         office (PPMO) to provide technical assistance to the project implementation; (b) on each of the
                         subprojects a sample laboratory will be established for day-to-day biogas facilities performance
                         monitoring by analyzing fermenting conditions and testing biogas and slurry; (c) a monitoring
                         system will be established both at subprojects to monitor their individual biogas system operation;
                         and at provincial level to monitor overall project biogas system operation, project performance and
                         its impacts; (d) around 1,800 person/day trainings will be arranged for project technical and
                         management staff at provincial and county levels, in particular for the local technical staff at the
                         subproject implementation units (PIUs) to obtain the skills in operating subprojects; and (e)
                         Operational Manuals for biogas digester operation and biogas digestate application will be developed
                         to guide the Hebei biogas program management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project areas are in rural areas of Hebei Province with vast agricultural land and many concentrated
                         livestock farms. A large amount of crop residue and animal waste are produced, which cause air,
                         water and soil pollution in those areas and appropriate agricultural waste treatments is urgently
                         needed to reduce pollution. The project includes six biogas facilities and they are located in six


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         counties in Hebei, including Anping, Yutian, Zunhua, Linzhang, Chengde, and Laoting Counties. Six
                         provincial and county energy/biogas companies and livestock farms are selected as the project
                         entities/PIUs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
                         Yiren Feng (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment       Yes             The proposed project is classified as Category B
                         OP/BP 4.01                                     according to OP4.01. An Environmental
                                                                        Management Plan (EMP), which has all the elements
                                                                        of EIA has been prepared for the project. The EMP
                                                                        includes Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP)
                                                                        and an Environmental Management Framework
                                                                        (EMF).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No              The project is located in the rural areas with
                                                                        intensive agricultural activities and no natural
                                                                        habitats are in or near the project areas. Excluding or
                                                                        not nearing natural habitats is also set as a criterion
                                                                        for subproject site selection.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No              Feedstock of the biogas facilities will be existing
                                                                        crop residues and livestock manures. The project will
                                                                        not finance any activities related to forests, as well as
                                                                        not use any of forest products as biogas feedstock.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No              The project will only use crop residues from existing
                                                                        farm land, thus no increased agricultural production
                                                                        and no use of pesticides are envisaged as a result of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No              The project is located in the rural areas with
                         OP/BP 4.11                                     intensive agricultural activities. The proposed sites
                                                                        are not in or close to any physical cultural heritage.
                                                                        This policy is not triggered. However, chance finds
                                                                        during construction may occur and relevant clauses
                                                                        will be included in all bidding documents and
                                                                        construction contracts to address this situation.
                                                                        Excluding and not nearing physical cultural heritage
                                                                        is also set as a criterion for subproject site selection.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No              A social assessment was undertaken by the task team
                         4.10                                           and external consulting team. The assessment
                                                                        findings confirmed that there is no ethnic minority
                                                                        community in the proposed project sites. In the
                                                                        proposed project localities, only a few Hui and Man
                                                                        people live scattered with Han people, but they are
                                                                        well integrated with local majority Han communities
                                                                        for very long time, as well as intermingled with
                                                                        mainstream society. These ethnic minorities do not


                                                                    Page 3 of 9
                                                                            fit the definition of the Bank IP. Therefore, the Bank
                                                                            OP/BP 4.10 is not applicable to this project.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/    Yes             The project will finance the construction of biogas
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.12                                         facilities and biogas supply pipeline networks in
                                                                            project counties. The land acquisition is needed for
                                                                            three biogas facilities. Some temporary land
                                                                            occupation for the biogas pipe network and proposed
                                                                            4 CNG station sets might need additional land
                                                                            acquisition. The Bank OP 4.12 involuntary
                                                                            resettlement policy is triggered.

                                                                            A consolidated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for
                                                                            the three subprojects and a separate RAP for each of
                                                                            the subprojects that need to acquire new land were
                                                                            prepared. In addition, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                            Framework (RPF) was also prepared for potential
                                                                            land acquisition that might be identified during the
                                                                            project implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No              The project will not finance nor will any of its
                                                                            activities depend on a dam as defined under the
                                                                            policy.
                            Projects on International      No               The policy is not triggered as the project does not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            involve trans-boundary rivers.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No               The policy is not triggered as the project does not
                            BP 7.60                                         involve any disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project was originally designed to include two batches of subprojects, for which the
                              first batch would utilize USD 71.5 million in IBRD loan and the second batch would utilize USD
                              28.5 million in IBRD loan, for a total of USD 100 million in IBRD loan. As it was intended that
                              the second batch of subprojects would be identified and prepared under a framework approach
                              during project implementation, the Environmental Assessment (EA) and Social Assessment (SA)
                              conducted during project preparation focused on the first batch of subprojects. However, in the
                              later stages of project preparation, the project agency decided to downsize the overall project and
                              only include the appraised first batch of subprojects which would utilize USD 71.5 million of
                              IBRD loan. The provisions made for identification, preparation and appraisal of a second batch of
                              subprojects were therefore cancelled. The final EA and SA documentation prepared under the
                              project are therefore fully consistent with the final scope of the project.

                             The EA and SA have not identified any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
                             impacts. The project is designed to demonstrate sustainable biogas production and utilization to
                             improve the environment and supply clean energy in rural areas. It will mainly generate positive
                             environmental and social impacts, such as reducing land and water pollution, indoor and outdoor


                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                           air pollution and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. It will also contribute to the improvement of
                           farm land soil nutrient and agricultural product quality by supplying bio-fertilizer to replace
                           chemical fertilizers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered as some negative and short-term construction and
                           long-term operational impacts may result from project implementation. During the construction
                           period of the facilities, small civil works will lead to limited negative impacts on ambient air,
                           water, and acoustic environments and create solid waste. These negative impacts will be small in
                           size, short-term, temporary and site-specific. During the operation phase of the facilities long-term
                           impacts will exist, including the disposal of livestock waste, the need for wastewater treatment,
                           and other impacts associated with the operation and maintenance of biogas facilities and
                           distribution pipelines. The proposed mitigation measures have been integrated into the project
                           design.

                           OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered as land acquisition is needed for some project sites.
                           The project will finance the construction of six biogas facilities, biogas supply pipeline networks
                           in all the project counties, and four biogas CNG stations in Laoting, Zunhua and Anping Counties.
                           Three of the six proposed subprojects (Laoting, Linzhang, and Chengde) will totally acquire 215
                           mu (about 15 ha) land for construction of these biogas facilities. The total number of affected
                           people will be 203 in 45 households due to land acquisition. The remaining three subprojects
                           (Yutian, Zunhua, and Anping) have existing land available for the civil works construction of
                           biogas facilities under the project. In addition, during the project implementation, the construction
                           of CNG station sets and temporary land occupation for the pipe network might need additional
                           land acquisition. The consultations have been conducted in the project areas with the affected rural
                           households and other stockholders, and relevant assessment work has been done with the detailed
                           mitigation measures agreed and arranged.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will support biogas production and utilization by effectively converting agriculture
                           wastes, specifically crop residue and livestock manure, to biogas. It will reduce ground water
                           pollution caused by current inappropriate livestock manure treatment inconcentrated livestock
                           farms and air pollution caused by burning crop residue in open field. It will also bring benefits to
                           rural residents by increasing access to clean and easy-to-use energy to replace the use of coal and
                           crop residue as cooking fuel, which will reduce indoor air pollutions. The reduction of indoor and
                           outdoor pollution will contribute to the improvement of local people’s health and living
                           environment. In addition, the digestate/ organic fertilizer produced by the project, which is rich in
                           nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and micronutrients, will replace chemical fertilizers to reduce
                           soil pollution and increase the quality and safety of agricultural products. As a result, the project
                           will bring multiple social, economic and environmental benefits in the promotion of rural waste
                           management, renewable energy supply, and green agricultural development.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           During the feasibility study phase, the environmental assessment team worked closely with the
                           PPMO, PIUs and project designers to compare and evaluate alternatives. The EMP identified,
                           evaluated and compared various options for biogas facility locations, pipeline alignments, and
                           technological processes. The optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of social
                           and environmental impacts (or for having the least adverse impacts), as well as other technology
                           and financial considerations. A “no project” scenario was also considered.

                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). An EMP, including an ECOP and EMF, was prepared by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the Hebei Jingmiao Environmental Consulting Ltd Co. It was prepared in accordance with the
                           domestic and Bank requirements and covers the project area of influence.

                          To enhancethe positive and long-term environmental benefits of the project, mitigation measures
                          have been integrated into the project design in construction and operation phases respectively. The
                          potential adverse environmental and social impacts are thoroughly addressed, which are detailed in
                          the EMP. Bank review has concluded that these adverse environmental and social impacts can be
                          adequately avoided and mitigated with good management practice and mitigation measures, as
                          developed in the EMP. All mitigation measures related to contractors will be included in the
                          bidding documents and the corresponding contracts. The EMF was prepared as an annex to the
                          EMP with clearly defined objectives, procedures, institutional framework, and implementation
                          arrangements for identifying and managing potential environmental impacts from proposed biogas
                          facilities. It is requested to be used to guide the environmental assessment for any potential project
                          adjustments and additional technical design during the project implementation.

                          The potential risks associated with the biogas plants and gas pipelines have been identified as fire
                          and explosion. A parallel safety assessment has been conducted as part of the project preparation
                          to cope with these potential risks. This includes the institutional arrangements, mitigation
                          measures and management system, emergency planning and response, as well as training and
                          monitoring plans.

                          Environmental management responsibilities are built into the overall project management
                          structure, with dedicated management staff to be responsible for the EMP implementation.
                          Detailed environmental monitoring program and training plan were prepared as parts of the EMP.
                          The monitoring plan details the environmental monitoring requirement during the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                          construction and operational phases, including parameters to be monitored such as the quality of
                          air, wastewater, solid waste and noise, as well as monitoring arrangements. The environmental
                          monitoring plan and training plan are integrated into the project’s overall M&E and training plans
                          with adequate budget allocated.

                          OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. A project social assessment was conducted in the proposed
                          project areas. Invited by the project entities, very experienced sociologist consultants from China
                          Resettlement Center of Hehai University took leader of the project SA exercise, in cooperation
                          with the project staff and the local authorities. Through extensive consultation with project
                          stakeholders in particular the farmers living in the project areas, the project SA report was
                          prepared to inform the project design the critical social factors that would affect or be affected by
                          the project, and recommend appropriate measures to minimize potential social risks that could be
                          brought about by the project, as well as the actions that should be taken to mitigate the identified
                          risks during the project implementation.

                          In particular, for each of the three subprojects involving land acquisition, a RAP has been
                          prepared, along with a consolidated RAP. A RPF has also been prepared to guide any potential
                          land acquisition, as a small volume of extra land needs could not be determined during the project
                          preparation period in terms of specific locations, routes and sizes for biogas supply pipe networks
                          and the proposed CNG station sets. The RAPs have set comprehensive mitigation measures,


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                          grievance redress mechanism, monitoring and evaluation plan, institutional arrangements and
                          capacity building plan. They will be strictly implemented during project implementation,
                          following Chinese government laws and regulations and complying with the Bank OP/BP4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                          policy. The implementation of RAPs and RPF will be regularly monitored both internally and
                          externally throughout the project implementation period.

                          The PPMO will take overall responsibility for coordinating and overseeing the implementation of
                          the RAPs, while each PIU will take its respective responsibility for the implementation of its own
                          RAP, including implementing the resettlement plan, monitoring the implementation of the
                          mitigation measures together with related local authorities and stakeholders, and promoting good
                          practice in resettlement an d social development. The PPMO will monitor overall land acquisition
                          activities and other action plans set in the SA report, and, as necessary, take remedial action. The
                          PPMO will also contract an external consulting institute for independent monitoring and
                          evaluation of the implementation of the project RAPs (including the RPF). Dedicated social staff
                          at the PPMO and each of PIUs have been assigned to coordinate social safeguards work together
                          with the relevant local government departments.

                           Institutional Assessment. A Project Leading Group headed by a vice-governor and consisting of
                           members from key line departments such as the Hebei Provincial Finance Department,
                           Development and Reform Commission, Agriculture Department and Energy Department has been
                           established at the provincial level to provide overall guidance and coordination to the project
                           preparation and implementation. The PPMO and PIUs have also been established with adequate
                           staff to be responsible for the project design and implementation, including social and
                           environmental safeguards, procurement and financial management. The staff in PPMO and PIU
                           have rich experience in Government biogas program management. However, their experience in
                           implementing the Bank safeguards policy is limited. The Bank task team has assisted clients in
                           improving their capacity during the project preparation by providing more hands-on support to
                           PPMO and PIU through frequent short missions and intensive trainings on Bank project
                           management, including safeguards; and those assistances will be continually provided during
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project implementation to improve the PMO's capacity in properly implementing the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key project stakeholders are local governments, individual rural residents (households), village
                           groups and communities in the project areas, as well as the PIUs.

                          Public consultations with various stakeholders of the project, including expert consultations,
                          questionnaires, meetings, and interviews, were conducted for both environment and social
                          assessment processes. The consulted people cover different gender, socioeconomic and
                          educational backgrounds, and occupations. The majority of those consulted people expressed
                          strong support to the project.

                          For instance, led by the project SA team, an extensive project information dissemination and
                          consultation campaign was conducted, along with intensive socio-economic survey fieldwork in
                          the areas where land acquisition is needed. Within 12 selected sample villages of the 6 project
                          counties: (a) 33 meetings were held with the farmers affected by land acquisition, with the
                          potential biogas users, and with the crop residue suppliers; 330 farmers (around 30% of which
                          were women) attended the meetings; (b) 768 people from the villages were interviews, while
                          another 800 local households filled out questionnaire. In addition, 26 meetings with other


                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                           stakeholders, including local governmental agencies and PIUs, were also held. The SA identified
                           that the project will bring significant benefits to rural residents by increasing access to clean
                           energy and reducing pollution from traditional livestock manure treatment and direct burning of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           crop residue. The visited households expressed their interest, enthusiasm, and support for the
                           project and fully understood the potential risks and opportunities associated with the project.

                           The project design has incorporated countermeasures to address the concerns and requests raised
                           by those consulted, such as in the aspects of safety measures of biogas use, the cost of installation
                           of biogas use facility, training needs for biogas use, and emergency planning and response.

                           Hebei Province has a minority population of 2.63 million, accounting for 3.9% of its total
                           population. The ethnic minority groups mainly include Man, Hui, Mongolian, Zhuang, Korean,
                           Miao, Tujia, Buyi, Yi, Yao and Bai. During project preparation, the social assessment was
                           undertaken and found a small number of Hui and Man ethnic minority people live scattered with
                           Han people in the subproject sites. Among them, only five Man people will be affected by the
                           project in terms of land acquisition. Those ethnic minority people live mixed-in with the local
                           majority population without significant ethnic characteristics. They speak Mandarin Chinese, have
                           a life style similar to local majority Han people, and have been well integrated with the local
                           majority Han people for a long time. They do not fit the definition of the Bank IP term. It is
                           concluded that the Bank OP/BP 4.10 is not applicable to this project.

                           In accordance with Bank disclosure policy, prior to project appraisal, the safeguards documents,
                           including the EMP, RAP, and SA report were made available on May 15, 2014 at the PPMO, the
                           PIUs and the Agriculture Departments of participating counties, as well as on the Websites of the
                           Hebei Agriculture Department at http://www.he.xinhuanet.com/zfwq/xny/. All safeguard
                           documents were also disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop on June 9, 2014 and the subsequent
                           versions of EMP and RAP on June 16, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Jun-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            15-May-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            15-May-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jin Liu
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                            Date: 16-Feb-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
