                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA6930
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                            Project ID:    P131592
                            Project Name:      SREP-Supported Extended Biogas Project (P131592)
                            Task Team          Mohua Mukherjee
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Dec-2013                      Estimated   18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDE                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Decentralization (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (70%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         32.00                Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 8.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                             8.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                      16.00
                              Total                                                                                   32.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to promote medium and large scale biogas energy generation
                           with private sector partnership.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         Nepal is modernizing and updating its Biogas sector which has been confined to household size
                         digesters up to now. The new Biogas sector will support medium and large biogas digester
                         construction and operation projects (above 12 m3) using large volumes of organic waste from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commercial sources (e.g. cattle farms, poultry farms, slaughterhouses, fruit processing firms, pig
                         farms, hotels, restaurants etc), as well as municipal sources of organic waste, and institutional
                         sources (e.g. army barracks, police training camps, hospitals, schools, university campuses, prisons,
                         monastery/temple complexes etc). Some community applications will also be supported, particularly
                         those with major gender co-benefits.

                         Government support will be provided through NRREP and SREP in conformity with paragraph 8.3.2
                         of the new policy of February 2013 referenced here : http://www.aepc.gov.np/docs/resource/
                         rescenter/20130818060043_RE%20Subsidy%20Policy%202013%20-%20English.pdf

                         SREP support will allow AEPC to invite project applicants and project developers who want to
                         undertake large biogas development projects with local or imported technology, and who are
                         prepared to contribute to a detailed technical and commercial study to thoroughly prepare their
                         project. If the pre-feasibility study and the Integrity Due Diligence check is satisfactory, successful
                         applicants will be assisted with cost-sharing consultancy support to complete a high quality detailed
                         study on technical and commercial feasibility, and will be required to comply with the
                         Environmental and Social Framework prepared by AEPC.

                         SREP supported projects will demonstrate commercial viability and sustainability, and will be able to
                         attract private and public co-financing. Projects will be monitored on volume of biogas produced (or
                         electricity generated), and amount of investment mobilized.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         N.A. Environmental Management Framework and Social Management Framework have been
                         prepared by AEPC since the project locations are not known at present and will be determined on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         basis of successful applications received from anywhere in Nepal.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes               Triggered because of potential pollutions (water,
                          BP 4.01                                              air/ odour, land) and health & safety risks.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes               Bio-mass collection from forest could affect
                                                                               natural habitat. Possibility of water bodies
                                                                               pollution may not be ruled out in AEPC
                                                                               investments beyond the proposed project for
                                                                               which client intend to use the same framework.
                                                                               The ESMF provides the guidelines for the
                                                                               mitigation of impacts on Natural Habitat.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  Yes               Bio-mass collection from forest could impact
                                                                               forest and forest resources. The ESMF will



                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                                                                                 provide the guidelines for the mitigation of
                                                                                 impacts on forest.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No               Use of pesticides is not envisaged.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes              Possibility of local cultural sites near the
                            BP 4.11                                              subprojects may not be ruled out. The ESMF will
                                                                                 provide the guidelines for the mitigation of
                                                                                 impacts on PCR.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              The policy has been triggered as there could be
                                                                                 presence of indigenous community in the project
                                                                                 area. In case indigenous community is identified
                                                                                 during the screening process, social assessment
                                                                                 will be carried out and VCDP will be prepared.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              The policy has been triggered as there could be
                            4.12                                                 involuntary land taking only in the case of
                                                                                 municipal project sponsors. In event of
                                                                                 involuntary land taking, relocation of PAPs, or
                                                                                 loss of livelihood, appropriate safeguard
                                                                                 documents will be prepared in line with agreed
                                                                                 SMF. However, the project will avoid funding
                                                                                 sub-projects which create situations of
                                                                                 involuntary land taking.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               Project does not support construction of dam or
                                                                                 embankment.
                            Projects on International        No                   Unlikely to affect any international water
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 bodies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   Not located in disputed area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Management of wastes is one of the major social and environmental issues in cities and emerging
                              towns of Nepal. The project therefore is expected to create conducive market mechanism and
                              deliver pilot project for municipal and commercial waste to energy. Though the exact activities
                              under the proposed project will be identified and prioritized during the further stages of the project
                              design and implementation, it is expected that the activities proposed are likely to be small and
                              will not cause any significant adverse social on the community from land acquisition and
                              resettlement. The land acquisition is highly unlikely and discouraged under the project. The key
                              issues of concern in the management of social impacts, which will be relevant to the project, are;
                              (i) National program’s lack of focus on vulnerable community (for example, no separate plan for
                              indigenous and other vulnerable community and limited application of vulnerable community
                              development plan); (ii) Nepalese law do not allow assistance to squatters and encroachers for the
                              restoration of livelihoods and replacement cost of their impacted properties; (iii) the treatment of
                              social issues are non-exclusive (for example, social issues are subsumed under environmental

                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                           screening, assessment and documentation process; and (iv) Grievance redress mechanism is non-
                           existent at the operational level leaving the formal legal system as the only avenue available to any
                           aggrieved person. The environmental impacts envisaged includes contamination of water bodies,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           air pollution, spread of disease, foul odor, occupational health & safety risks, land pollution, and
                           GHG emission. These impacts are likely to be localized around the subproject (waste to energy)
                           activity.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Not Applicable.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Screening will carried out for every sub project. If the screening result for any sub project shows
                           significant adverse impact such as loss of land, resettlement or loss of livelihood, such projects
                           will not be taken up under the project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to mitigate any adverse impact, project has prepared a social management framework
                           (SMF). The framework approach was adopted since project locations will depend on successful
                           applications through the portal from all over Nepal. The draft SMF and EMF were discussed with
                           the potential developers and community in two rounds of consultations during October 27- 31,
                           2013. The feedback from the consultations was incorporated during the finalization of SMF and
                           EMF. The SMF and EMF have been prepared assuming that in future private investments in
                           biomass-based off-grid energy will also qualify for AEPC support (but not with SREP funding
                           from the present project). This is beyond the requirements of the current project, which is only
                           supporting biogas, but the learning process has been important for AEPC and for consultants who
                           will assist investors with preparation of project proposals. The wider-than-currently-required
                           scope of the SMF and EMF is very positive.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Each developer, early in the subproject proposal preparation and together with technical and
                           economic screening, prepares environmental and social screening of proposed site and activity
                           based on the screening checklist and formats in the EMF and SMF: the screening reports will be
                           reviewed, field verified and cleared by the Social and Environmental Officer/ focal person. Such
                           an early stage of screening, inter alia, will be helpful in selection of better site from social and
                           environmental considerations.

                           The SMF includes Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), a framework for Vulnerable
                           Community Development (VCDF), gender development (GDF) and community consultation and
                           disclosure (CCDF). The SMF also includes institutional arrangement for implementation. The
                           SMF prepared for the project encompasses social procedures, practices, mitigation measures and
                           analytical approaches applicable to the project. The SMF covers national and international legal
                           frameworks that are applicable to the project, potential adverse social impacts, consultation
                           requirement; compensation and assistance; and treatment of vulnerable community. The SMF is
                           comprehensive in its scope with respect to the project activities and is consistent with the
                           principles and attributes of OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and OP/BP 4.10 on
                           Indigenous Peoples.

                           AEPC has prepared EMF in order to manage environmental aspects of the project. EMF has


                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                          identified potential environmental impacts/ risks associated with the type of the activities
                          envisaged under the project, and has also suggests general mitigation measures. Each subproject
                          will have to be screened for potential risks and mitigation plan including an EMP needs to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                          prepared for specific condition. EMF also requires environmental monitoring during
                          implementation by AEPC ESMF Officer as well by an independent agency.

                           AEPC is already implementing World Bank funded Micro Hydro project and is well aware of
                           Bank’s safeguard requirements. The recent independent evaluation of implementation of
                           safeguard measures shows satisfactory results. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) established
                           within the AEPC will be responsible for the overall coordination, planning and implementation of
                           social and community development activities, environmental oversight as well as activities
                           proposed under SMF and EMF. AEPC has already hired an ESMF officer who will be working
                           exclusively for the project. The ESMF Officer will provide social safeguard and environmental
                           oversight to the project. The ESMF officer will carry out the project management functions (in
                           accordance with the World Bank and the GON’s social safeguard guidelines), and to build the
                           capacity of the AEPC/PCU in these areas.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The consultations were carried out to develop community/stakeholder’s ownership and support for
                           the project, and integrate and address their concerns through suitable measures in the project
                           design. The consultations with stakeholder on draft SMF and EMF were held in Pokhara,
                           Bharatpur and Dolakha during October 27- 31, 2013. Major concerns expressed by the
                           stakeholders during the consultation have been summarized in SMF.

                          Public consultations and information dissemination, which ensures public understanding of the
                          project’s impacts and allows the vulnerable population—including scavengers, to express their
                          voices, have been included in the framework. The process outlined in SMF will ensure that
                          vulnerable communities in the project areas are likely to be supported are informed, consulted, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          mobilized to participate in the WTEP and/or its sub-projects, as applicable.

                          The public and community organizations consulted include (i) waste management services
                          providers, waste scavengers, community people residing at the vicinity of the proposed project
                          sites, non-governmental organizations working in municipal waste management, employee and
                          labor organizations of the municipality etc (ii) community based organizations and local NGOs.
                          The SMF also outlines mechanism for continued consultation during implementation of the
                          project. EMF outlines the consultations required during the environmental screening, assessment,
                          as well as during monitoring.

                          Disclosure: The safeguard documents (SMF including RPF, VCDF and GDF) and EMF were
                          disclosed in country on December 13, 2013 and were disclosed in Bank’s Infoshop on December
                          16, 2013. The executive summary of the safeguard documents is being translated in local
                          language and will be disclosed in country. Hard copies of the safeguards documents have been
                          placed at the project office. A copy will also be placed at the developer’s project office and
                          concerned municipality or VDC. During finalization of each investment, investment and site
                          specific safeguard documents, such as an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and RAP, if
                          necessary, will be prepared. These safeguard documents, as and when prepared, will be disclosed
                          in AEPC website and facility site office.



                                                                    Page 5 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            13-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            13-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            13-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         EMF provides guidelines on designing mitigation measures for impact on physical cultural
                         resources.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?

                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Mohua Mukherjee
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)   Date: 19-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)        Date: 20-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Page 8 of 8
