INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSAl 163
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mozambique                 Project ID:  P146602
Parent       P111592
Project ID:
Project Name: Additional Financing for Mozambique Higher Education Science and
Technology Project (P146602)
Parent Project Higher Education Science and Technology (P111592)
Name:
Task Team       Ana Ruth Menezes
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Mar-2015                Estimated    28-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (80%), Vocational training (20%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     45.00             Total Bank Financing:   45.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                45.00
Total                                                                      45.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 6


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) increase the number and raise the quality of graduates at
the undergraduate and graduate levels; and (b) strengthen the national research capacities to
produce research outputs of relevance to the Country's strategic economic sectors.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The objectives of the Project are to: (a) increase the number and raise the quality of graduates at
the undergraduate and graduate levels; (b) strengthen the national research capacities to produce
research outputs of relevance to the Recipient's strategic economic sectors; and (c) strengthen the
institutional framework for TVET.
3. Project Description
The project supports three main components: (a) Strengthening system governance, quality, and
management; (b) improving teaching, learning, and research through the provision of competitive
funds; and (c) targeting scholarships for equity and competitiveness.
Component A will support the development and capacity building of system oversight and quality
assurance institutions, the implementation of key quality assurance policies, and piloting and
financing reform.
Component B will provide institutional and individual grants to public institutions or loans to private
institutions to improve the quality of teaching, learning, and applied research.
Component C will finance undergraduate scholarships for poor but academically qualified students,
particularly from provincial areas, and also support institutional staff development with scholarships
for postgraduate study in national priority disciplines
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will finance the construction of a Distance Learning Resource Center (DLRC) in near
Chimoio in Manica Province under Component A. The project supports both supply side and demand
side interventions aiming at improving the quality and quantity of undergraduate and graduate
students and improving the national research capacity and output in Mozambique. The Distance
Learning Resource Center will be built on a piece of clean and vacant public land in near Chimoio in
the Manica Province. The Social Safeguard mission visited the site from September 11 to 12, 2009
and confirmed that OP4.12 will not be triggered as no one will be affected by the project and there is
no land tenure issues as the Chimoio City Council has issues a Land Title dated on September 10 to
the Provincial Education Directorate to whom the land was given by the same district city council
services in 2005. Since then, the 4 Ha area of land, which in fact stands as an isolated island as it is
surrounded on all parts by an 1 Im-wide road, was kept clean and out of reach from local
communities for the sake of the students.
All tertiary level institutions and the students, faculty and management within the institutions are
potential beneficiaries of the project. The undergraduate scholarship program in particular target
students from rural poor backgrounds from the provinces to attend universities.
The HEST was classified as Category B, and triggered Operational Policy OP/BP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment) owing to the construction and rehabilitation of the Distance Education
Resource Center in Manica province. No new land was acquired for major construction and no
resettlement is expected and therefore OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) was not triggered.
Page 2 of 6


﻿Under the proposed new AF, no new safeguards policies will be triggered, and will remain as a
Category B project hence continuing using the existing ESMF along with the ESIA prepared by the
government under the parent-project that includes an ESMP; all of which were deemed satisfactory
by the Bank. The ESMP providing the basic steps to be followed to ensure safeguards compliance
throughout the project life-cycle. Two dedicated safeguards specialists were hired by the Ministry of
Education to monitor and report on the status of safeguards compliance based on the
recommendations prepared thought the safeguards instrument for the project. Lessons learned from
such a technical support will be factored in the implementation of the proposed AF under the newly
restructured ministry of Science and technology, higher education and technology professional.
Safeguards compliance will be further dealt with under the new AF by a technical support from
World Bank Safeguards specialists. In the case of TVET, the environmental and social screening
process as outlined in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) adequately
addresses any potential negative impacts of future rehabilitation activities, and therefore, project
alternatives did not have to be considered.
Furthermore, Project Coordination Units has had many years of experience with the World Bank
projects and are familiarized with World Bank safeguards policies implementation and supervision.
Additionally, a technical capacity building program was carried out through three regional
workshops of 3-days each to a variety of stakeholders with the aim of improving the understanding
of World Bank Safeguards policies as well as their implementation. The results of the
recommendations acquired through these 3 regional workshops (south, center and north) held
between May and June, 2014 were visible on the ground. During TVET supervision mission carried
out in November, 2014 the team was pleased by the level of competency in applying safeguards
instruments demonstrated by all stakeholders. The series of workshops were also used to update the
environmental and social clauses (ESC) included in the leaflet for contractors' contracts. Capacity
building is expected to continue as implementation of the AF develops.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava (GSURR)
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Overall, the environmental and social impacts of the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                project are expected to be positive. Although no
construction activity is expected the AF will maintain its
initial category B and will use the same ESMF and ESIA
along with its ESMP prepared by the Government under
the parent-project. The later provide a detailed
institutional arrangement mechanism, a monitoring and
evaluation mechanism, a conflict resolution/grievance
redress mechanism, as well an estimated budget to allow
safe and adequate implementation of its core safeguards
recommendations. These safeguard documents have been
successfully applied and monitored by the Project
Implementing Agency in close guidance by and
supervision of World Bank safeguards specialists. In
Page 3 of 6


﻿addition, series of 3 back-to-back regional workshops
have already been carried out to ensure that all relevant
stakeholders have an equal understanding of safeguards
and a good grasp in the application of safeguards
instruments prepared under this project. The WB
Safeguards Specialists will continue supporting the
Implementing Agency to ensure continuous safeguards
compliance.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          A field visit carried out by WB Senior Social Safeguards
OP/BP 4.12                           specialist in 2009 confirmed that no land tenure issues
were expected and that no land acquisition or physical
displacement has taken place as a direct result of the
construction of the Distance Learning Center.
Consequently, OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered; and since this
proposed AF will follow the same footprint of its parent-
project, it will therefore retain the same classification as a
Category B project, which requires an EA under which all
other social aspects, but social safeguards, will be
assessed and adequate mitigation measures put in place to
minimize the potential negative social impacts. This was
adequately reflected under the ESIA/ESMP that was
vetted by the Bank then. The WB Safeguards Specialists
will continue supporting the Implementing Agency to
ensure continuous safeguards compliance.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 4 of 6


﻿The borrower had prepared under the parent-project an ESIA along with an ESMP that provides
the basic steps to be followed to ensure social and environmental safeguards compliance
throughout the duration of the project. In addition, two dedicated safeguards specialists
(environmental & social) were recruited by the former ministry of education and they were already
monitoring and reporting on the status of safeguards compliance based on the recommendations
prepared through the safeguards instrument for the project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Client has prepared and publicly disclosed the ESIA together with the ESMP of the parent-
project and through the recruitment of two safeguards specialists under the Ministry then have
been enforcing compliance with safeguards procedures. In addition, contract clauses binds the
contractor to implement the needed safeguard procedures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The ultimate beneficiary communities remain the same as regards to the defined criteria in the
project. Under the parent project, all safeguards instruments prepared then included an extensive
public consultation and participation of stakeholders. As an iterative process, this will be pursued
and sustained throughout the implementation of the project lifecycle.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               03-Aug-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                            14-Aug-2009
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA
report?
Page 5 of 6


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ana Ruth Menezes
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (PMGR)           Date: 01-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


