                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA1117

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tanzania                          Project ID:    P151124
                                                       Parent         P096302
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     TZ Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (P151124)
   Parent Project    Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (P096302)
   Name:
   Task Team         Mamadou Barry
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         02-Feb-2015                       Estimated   23-Apr-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GEEDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Other Mining and Extractive Industries (74%), Public administration- Energy
                     and mining (26%)
   Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (65%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                     support (18%), Other Private Sector Development (11%), Admi nistrative and
                     civil service reform (4%), Participation and civic engagement (2%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:               45.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      5.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                            45.00
     Total                                                                                  50.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?


                                             Page 1 of 9
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To strengthen the Governments capacity to manage the mineral sector to improve the
   socioeconomic impacts of large and small-scale mining for Tanzania and Tanzanians and enhance
   private local and foreign investment.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The Additional Financing retains the original PDO, and scales up activities aimed at improving
benefits for Tanzania and Tanzanians. The Additional Financing addresses challenges encountered
in the original project, such as: difficulty in identifying suitable geological environment for artisanal
miners, inadequate training and demonstration sites for small-scale miners, and lack of knowledge in
value addition (faceting, carving and jewelry), marketing and financial access.

Component A: Improve the Benefits of the Mineral Sector for Tanzania by addressing Small-scale
and Artisanal Mining, linkage of the mineral sector with local economies and development of human
resource for the mineral sector. Activities under this component focus on capacity building, whether
to government or small-scale miners as the beneficiaries.

Component A.1             Centers of Excellence
The establishment of Centers of Excellence in mining hot spots throughout the country serve as
catalysts for the technical, financial, environmental and social transformation of ASM. Seven centers
have been identified based on the importance of ASM operations, their potential to become viable
and environmental sound growth poles for local small- and medium-scale mining enterprises, and the
degree to which environmental and social risks could be managed. All areas are already delineated
by the government, in the footprint of formal artisanal mines and government centers. No extension
of land or social impacts are triggered as a result. This sub-component combines on-site training in
existing Zonal Mine Offices (ZMO) with on-site demonstration activities in established mines owned
by the government agency, STAMICO. The Demonstration sites will model environmentally-sound
processing techniques, with emphasis on alternatives to mercury use. The ZMOs are in: Musoma,
Songea, Mbeya, Geita, Mwanza, Kahama, Singita and Mpanda. Support through the Project to the
ZMOs will include: (i) the extension of existing office facilities to create space for classrooms,
conference rooms, information centers, workshops; (ii) the provision of demonstration materials; (iii)
the preparation and dissemination of training manuals; and (iv) the training of trainers.
Demonstrating sites are in: Buhemba, Mbesa (Tunduru), Chunya (Itumbi), Rwamgasa, Keyrwa,
Katente, Nachingweya, and Kaparamsenga. These demonstrating sites will benefit from the Project
with upgrading of existing processing technology, as follows: mercury-free processing; mercury
abatement treatments; and carbon separation for VAT leaching. The purpose of the demonstrating
site is to provide small-scale miners, who benefit from training conducted in the ZMO, with hands-
on experience in technology use.

Component A.2           Geological Ground Works
No further airborne survey work is to be conducted. Rather, the requested AF will support targeted


                                              Page 2 of 9
geological ground works in ASM areas that benefited from airborne surveys under the original
Project. These are on government lands that are unoccupied. The purpose is to provide small-scale
miners with geological information that will guide improved mine development on the existing
Primary Mining Licenses. By further confirming geological prospectivity, the government can better
assist Primary Mining License (PML) holders to develop model small-scale mines conforming to
international best practice and national ASM regulations. The Geological Survey of Tanzania (GST)
will work directly on sampling and testing in this target area, and will provide the PML holders with
basic training on data interpretation. GST will perform works under this sub-component. Areas
targeted correspond with the seven mining zones under Component A.1.

Component A.3             Small Grants to Small-Scale Miners
The requested AF scales up the current Small Grants Program under the Project, extending
geographic eligibility to all seven zones mentioned in Component A.1. Small grant activities allow
miners to upgrade technology on sites, to undergo training on specific mine skills, and to undertake
organizational and business development training. A 30% quota for women beneficiaries in the Small
Grants Program is retained, as was in the original Project. The management of the Small Grant
Program will draw on the financial services of the Tanzania Investment Bank Ltd. who handles
procurement and fiduciary aspects of the Small Grants Program under a contract with the Ministry of
Energy and Minerals.

Component A.4            Value Addition
The main beneficiary of this sub-component is the Tanzania Gemological Center (TGC). The aim is
to support the transformation of TGC into a regional hub for training and marketing of gemstones.
The activities supported include: (i) training and support to enable Tanzanians to work independently
in value added activities and become investors in this sector; (ii) piloting initiatives for “fair trade” in
ASM products; (iii) financing some costs related to the Tanzania International Gem Show which
draws together gemstone traders and international buyers to showcase Tanzanian products for export
into the world's gem markets; and (iv) assisting to TGC to build strategic partnership for capacity
building and marketing with world-class gem training and marketing centers in Asia and America.

Component A.5 Integrating Mining Community Development Priorities into Local Government
Planning
The main beneficiary is local government in the seven districts covered by the Additional Financing.
The objective is to scale up of the linkages program between mining and the local economy through
the following activities: : (a) assessing budgetary structures and mainstreaming mining into strategic
planning at the District level; (b) developing policies and procedures for local government provision
of social services Artisanal and Small-scale Mining areas; (c) developing and delivering of
alternative livelihood skills training; and (d) assessment of local content opportunities and
preparation of local procurement strategies aimed at enabling entrepreneurs to provide gods and
services to large and medium scale mines.

Component B: Strengthen Governance and Transparency in the Mineral Sector. Activities under this
component focus on improving government policies and systems with respect to transparency.

Sub-Component B.1: Addressing regulatory gaps

Several institutions will benefit from this sub-component aimed at addressing regulatory gaps and
strengthen the legal framework. The Ministry of Energy and Minerals will complete a number of
outstanding regulatory gaps, namely: (i) its mine closure policy and Environmental Protection Plan

                                               Page 3 of 9
for ASM; (ii) data integration using the platform of the new online licensing system, (iii)
strengthening the mine inspection procedures; (iv) preparing the implementation regulations on
explosives, and (v) preparing the implementation of the regulations on value addition.

Sub-Component B.2: Improving transparency

This Sub-component reinforces ongoing extractive sector transparency initiatives aimed at improving
sector governance. The following activities will be supported: (i) the Tanzania Mineral Audit
Agency (TMAA) and Tanzania Revenue Authority (TRA) will work to integrate ASM operations
into the tax revenue collection model; (ii) The Tanzanian EITI National Committee will conduct a
value chain audit/beneficial ownership on ASM in order to mainstream ASM into the revenue
reporting procedures of the EITI process; (iii) further extractive sector data integration to incorporate
overlay of ASM, EITI, TRA, TMAA da ta all in one portal using the flexi-cadaster system as
platform; (iv) national survey of ASM and its classification to inform the government ASM support
strategy; (v) establishment of a mine inspection tracking and management system.

Component C: Stimulate Mineral Sector Investment. No new activities are anticipated under this
Component.


The Government of Tanzania will provide US$5 million of parallel co-financing, under components
B (US$1.5 million) and D (US$1.5 million), and provide a contingency of US$2 million.


Grievance Redress: Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by
specific country policies supported as prior actions or tranche release conditions under a World Bank
Development Policy Operation may submit complaints to the responsible country authorities,
appropriate local/national grievance redress mechanisms, or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service
(GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address
pertinent concerns.

Affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent
Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-
compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns
have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an
opportunity to respond.

For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress
Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.
inspectionpanel.org
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Additional Financing focuses on seven of the ten mining zones previously delineated by the
government. Activities are focused in these areas but with further distinction made between the
following:

The Zonal Mine Officers which will carry out training to small-scale miners and benefit from minor


                                              Page 4 of 9
upgradation of buildings are in: Musoma, Songea, Mbeya, Geita, Mwanza, Kahama, Mtwara and
Mpanda.

The Demonstrating sites where new appropriate and mercury free technology are to be implanted and
tested are in: Buhemba, Mbesa (Tunduru), Chunya (Itumbi), Rwamgasa, Keyrwa, Katente,
Nyachengewa and Kaparamsenga.

Given that these locations are found in the existing footprint of artisanal mines and government
lands, there is no further acquisition of lands or social impacts anticipated.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental               Yes            The project aims to improve environmental and social
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      aspects of ASM through improved technologies, training
                                           and better monitoring through the formal licensing
                                           system. While the project does not invest in increasing the
                                           scale and scope of mining, there could be environmental
                                           and social impacts derived from activities related to civil
                                           works, establishment of mineral processing demo centers
                                           and activities of small-scale mine operators. The Project
                                           has developed an Environmental and Social Management
                                           Framework (ESMF) which details the processes and
                                           mechanisms to ensure that all potential environmental
                                           impacts are identified, assessed and mitigated
                                           appropriately. ESMPs, as and when necessary, will be
                                           prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to any civil
                                           works commencing.
Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The project activities are not expected to impact any
4.04                                       natural habitats. However, the ESMF defines necessary
                                           action to be taken if any of the activities to be funded
                                           under the sub-grants have any potential impacts on natural
                                           habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The project activities are not expected to additionally
                                           impact forest land than already being done under the
                                           license and permits. However, the ESMF defines
                                           necessary action to be taken if any of the activities to be
                                           funded under the sub-grants have larger impacts on
                                           forests and forested land and the mining license includes
                                           requirements for revegetation after closure of small mines.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 It is not envisaged to procure or use any pesticides under
                                           the project.
Physical Cultural           No             The project is not expected to impact on physical cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                       resources. However, chance finds procedures are
                                           described in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             According to the ESMF there are no known IPs in the 7


                                             Page 5 of 9
   BP 4.10                                   sites selected under the AF. In addition, the activities
                                             under the AF are confined to the existing mines and there
                                             will not be any new mines funded under this project. The
                                             interventions are primarily for improve artisan mining in
                                             the existing locations. If during the project
                                             implementation, it becomes clear that there are groups
                                             that meet the policy criteria, World Bank and the
                                             Government of Tanzania will address the issue and
                                             submit a Tier-1 Restructuring to the Executive Directors
                                             for their approval.
   Involuntary Resettlement Yes              Involuntary resettlements are not anticipated under the
   OP/BP 4.12                                Project's Additional Financing. The limited civil work for
                                             the expansion of the zonal offices will be done within the
                                             existing footprint of the zonal centers. The targeted
                                             geological ground works in ASM areas are on
                                             government lands that are unoccupied. However should
                                             the possibility of resettlement arise during implementation
                                             and as a result of the Project's activities, the Client has
                                             prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework, which will be
                                             the basis for any site specific Resettlement Action Plan
                                             (RAP) if needed.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            N/A
   4.37
   Projects on International   No            N/A
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No            N/A
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     While the project consists of technical assistance activities and does not involve direct investment
     in mining activities, there could be environmental and social impacts derived from some activities
     related to minor civil works, processing units and the small grants assistance component. The key
     environmental issues are related to discharge of tailings and contaminated effluents, emission of
     air pollutants, improper handling of chemicals and mined materials (ore and waste rocks),
     improper handling of Mercury in gold processing and health and safety concerns. Such impacts
     can have long-term and irreversible consequences if not well managed.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     Mining activities by their very nature typically have environmental footprints in terms of land
     degradation, pollution of soil, water and air and occupational health impacts if proper measures are
     not taken. Mercury pollution from ASGM activities can bioaccumulate and biomagnify and cause
     longer term environmental and health impacts. The project activities focused on mercury-free
     technologies or better mercury management will mitigate these risks.


                                               Page 6 of 9
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The project has prepared an ESMF which provides due diligence measures and mechanisms to
  ensure that all potential environmental and social impacts are well identified and addressed.
  Recommendations from the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), produced
  under the parent project, have been taken into consideration when designing activities under the
  AF, including awareness and skills raising training, and monitoring and enforcement. The Project's
  ESMF has been updated and revised to include mechanisms to ensure that all potential
  environmental impacts are identified, assessed and mitigated appropriately. Furthermore the
  ESMF includes: (i) stringent requirements completion and submission of Environmental
  Protection Plans, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments and Plans; (ii) guidelines for civil
  works and templates for ESMPs; (iii) measures which project will implement for mercury
  management and occupational health and safety; (iv) coordination institutional mechanism with
  other departments for enforcement and monitoring; and (v) a budget for implementation.
  The revised ESMF was prepared in line with consultations with stakeholders at the national and
  local levels including government ministries/agencies, mining companies, other private sector
  actors, artisanal miners, NGOs and communities affected by mining operations. For civil works
  and small grants, the ESMF details stringent requirements in terms of planning, definition of
  potential impacts and mitigation measures and a monitoring program.
  The Project has also updated the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), though does not
  anticipate any land acquisition will be or impact on livelihood will occur as a result of the AF. The
  original Project had developed an RPF to mitigate potential negative impacts from the geological
  airborne survey work to be conducted near protected forest areas. Given that the targets areas are
  in existing artisanal mine footprint areas, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were not developed.
  Should the geographic locations of the Additional Financing expand after the Project has
  commenced implementation, the World Bank will require the government to first carry out social
  and environmental assessments in the new proposed areas to determine whether resettlement
  policies and procedures are triggered. If that is the case, the RPF will apply alongside the
  development of specific RAPs for new sites.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The ESMF was disclosed in country and consulted with a wide range of stakeholders, including
  Ministries of finance, Local government, Land, Vice Presidency – Environment, Deputy Attorney
  General and, Geological Survey of Tanzania. At the site-specific level, the Environmental
  Management Committee (EMC) at the local government level, the Environmental Management
  Officers (EMO) of the LGRAs and the communities of miners will discuss the environmental and
  social screening and plans.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                          10-Mar-2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                       13-Mar-2015
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          ////
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                             Page 7 of 9
"In country" Disclosure
  Tanzania                                                         13-Mar-2015
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Tanzania                                                         13-Mar-2015
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?


                                            Page 8 of 9
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mamadou Barry
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                              Date:
   Practice Manager/    Name:                                             Date:
   Manager:




                                             Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
