                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC5958

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Serbia                          Project ID:        P147050
                            Project Name:      Real Estate Management Project (P147050)
                            Task Team          Gavin P. Adlington
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Mar-2014                     Estimated          24-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEN                           Lending            Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (40%), Law and justice (30%), Information
                                               technology (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Land administration and management (25%), Personal and property rights
                                               (25%), e-Government (25%), Municipal finance (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                     Total Bank Financing:         50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        50.00
                              Total                                                                        50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To improve the efficiency, transparency and reliability of Serbia’s real property management systems
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will be structured around the five following components:
                         Component A – Valuation, Taxation, and Public Real Estate Management (US$2.05m) will support
                         the establishment of a more efficient and transparent real property valuation and taxation system.
                         Public real property management will also be improved. This result will be achieved through three
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subcomponents: A.1. Real Property Valuation Infrastructure (US$0.45m) will focus on the adoption
                         of internationally-recognized real property valuation standards, the introduction of valuers’ codes of
                         ethics and conduct, and improvements in the quality of the education for valuers; A.2. Real Property
                         Taxation (US$1.1m) will support the design and piloting of a mass valuation system for residential
                         and commercial real properties; and A.3. Public Real Property Management (US$0.5m) will finance
                         the creation of a unit, within the Ministry of Finance, responsible for promoting good practices and
                         executing a training program.

                         Component B – Planning and Permitting (US$4.0m) will help improve the planning and permitting
                         process. Activities required to achieve this objective will be structured around three subcomponents:
                         B.1. Planning Laws and Regulations (US$0.2m) will integrate contemporary planning principles in
                         the existing planning laws and finance the preparation of guidelines and rule books; B.2. Planning
                         Institutions and Capacity (US$0.8m) will finance the provision of planning equipments, hardware,
                         software, and training courses in selected Local Government Units and within the Ministry of
                         Construction and Planning; B.3. Planning and Permitting Process (US$3.0m) will finance the
                         preparation of planning manuals, improvements in planning curriculum, a training program, a public
                         awareness campaign, the preparation of urban plans in selected LGUs, and the creation of building
                         permit one-stop-shops.

                         Component C – Real Property Information (US$25m) will pursue the work initiated under the Real
                         Estate Cadastre Project. It will be structured around five subcomponents: C.1. REC Information
                         System (US$13.5m) will finance the execution of RGA’s ICT strategy, which includes the
                         development of a new IT system and the upgrading of its hardware; C.2. National Spatial Data
                         Infrastructure (US$1.5m) will support RGA’s efforts to establish such an infrastructure in Serbia;
                         C.3. ICT Business Model (US$0.7m) will finance the conception of a sustainable management model
                         for RGA’s ICT department; C.4. National Archive Center (US$7.2m) will finance the construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a centralized archive building; C.5. Data Quality and Standards (US$2.25m) will help RGA improve
                         the quality of REC data through the introduction of incentives for citizens to report data
                         inconsistencies and the introduction of data cleaning procedures.

                         Component D – RGA Institutional Development (US$15m) will also pursue the work initiated under
                         the Real Estate Cadastre Project. It will comprise five subcomponents: D.1. National Reference
                         Infrastructure (US$2.52m) will help develop the geodesic infrastructure required to produce accurate
                         real property data, including the AGROS, leveling, and gravimetric networks; D.2. Digital Mapping
                         Program (US$4.33m) will help RGA complete its cadastral map digitization work; D.3. Services
                         Improvements (US$1.0m) will help improve the workflows in RGA offices and reduce the backlog
                         of registration requests accumulated in major cities; D.4. Corporate and Business Planning (US
                         $1.5m) will finance the preparation a corporate and business plan for RGA; and D.5. REC
                         Improvements (US$4.5m) will finance the production of new orthophotomaps and the development
                         of a record of all buildings for inclusion in the REC.

                         Component E – Project Management (US$3m) will finance the establishment of a Project
                         Implementation Unit (PIU) within the RGA to manage the project and provide fiduciary oversight.
                         The large PIU will be staffed with experts capable of coordinating and supervising the activities
                         dealing with property valuation and taxation, planning and permitting, ICT and training. A
                         monitoring and evaluation specialist will also be hired to monitor project progress and coordinate
                               studies to assess the impact of the project on such things as real estate market activity, gender equity,
                               and social inclusion.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                               analysis (if known)
                               Nationwide. It is expected that a new archive building will be constructed in Zemun.

                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                               The implementing agency have experience with both new construction and refurbishment under a
                               prior Bank funded project and are aware of the environmental safeguard requirements.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Jorge E. Villegas (ECSSO)
                               Nikola Ille (ECSEN)
                               Tomoko Unaki (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           A new building is expected to be constructed in
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         Zenum as an archive for paper documents and
                                                                                                                                 as a disaster recovery center for the computer
                                                                                                                                 networks.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Jan-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      To be discussed during the first preparation mission in November 2013 and the EMP to be
                                      finalized and disclosed by the end of January 2014.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Gavin P. Adlington
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)   Date: 18-Nov-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)     Date: 18-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
