                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7406
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                            Project ID:    P145618
                            Project Name:      MEXICO Sustainable Energy Technologies Development for Climate Change
                                               (P145618)
                            Task Team          Todd M. Johnson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Apr-2014                          Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSEG                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Climate change
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         16.88              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                         16.88
                              Total                                                                                     16.88
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project's Development Objective is to improve the institutional capacity of advanced clean
                           energy (ACE) technology institutions (both public and private) in Mexico, foster the


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         commercialization of ACE technologies by providing financial incentives to the private sector, and in
                         the process reduce GHG emissions.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Regional Needs Assessments (RNAs) and Clean Energy Regional Investment Plans
                         (CERIPs). (Funding: GEF US$4.58 million; SENER US$90 million)

                         The objectives of Component 1 are: (i) conduct RNAs to assess the capacity of academic and
                         research institutions, private enterprises, and sub-national government entities across Mexico to
                         develop and commercialize ACE technologies; (ii) prepare the CERIPs that aim to boost institutional
                         capabilities to produce clean energy technologies in order to broaden the currently concentrated
                         energy R&D market in Mexico; and (iii) identify promising initiatives that can be considered for
                         financial support by the ACE Grant Fund competition (Component 2) or the FSE Fund.

                         The RNAs will be prepared for all States in Mexico by sub-region. For each region, specialized
                         consultants will: (i) survey and map the resources and capacities (human, technical, infrastructure,
                         financial) of Mexican universities, research institutions, and clean energy enterprises; (ii) identify the
                         ACE technology needs of private sector enterprises in strategic sectors; (iii) identify each region’s
                         comparative advantage in S&T sectors and in the clean energy value chain; (iv) review the capacities
                         of sub-national government entities to implement policy and regulation conducive to the
                         dissemination of clean energy technologies; (v) assess existing regional and national financing
                         sources, and (vi) identify financial, regulatory, and policy barriers.

                         The key output of the regional needs assessments will be a set of CERIPs that will: (i) identify the
                         investments and strategic actions (curriculum changes, the creation of new incentives, policy
                         reforms) recommended and agreed to have strong potential over the medium-term to boost human
                         capital in S&T and entrepreneurial (finance, business administration, strategy) disciplines critical to
                         commercialize ACE technologies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The follow-up investments identified by the CERIPs will be financed by SENER through their US
                         $90 million parallel financing contribution. SENER will seek to leverage its CERIP investments by
                         seeking co-financing from other government stakeholders (local and state governments, other federal
                         agencies). The CERIP is intended to bring these entities together towards implementing a coherent
                         strategy that can advance clean energy technology development and commercialization. The plan is
                         that the RNAs will begin in 2014 and be completed within a year, after which the implementation of
                         the CERIPs would take place from 2015-2018.

                         Component 2.1: ACE Fund Matching Grant Competition (Funding: GEF US$10.50 million; private
                         sector enterprises: US$1.85 million). Through a grant competition and open call for proposals, the
                         ACE Grant Fund Competition will provide grants to private sector enterprises for: (i) Proof-of-
                         concept stage development of ACE technologies; and (ii) Collaborative Clean Energy
                         Commercialization (CCEC) targeting industry-academia collaboration for ACE technologies. In both
                         cases, the grants will target those ACE technologies with strong commercialization potential, and
                         grants will not be provided to academic and research institutions, which have other sources of
                         support including the FSE Fund. All applicants will be required to contribute 15 percent of the total
                         project cost as matching co-financing. The terms, eligibility criteria, maximum grant size, application
                         procedures, procurement rules and processes, monitoring criteria, and other features of both the
                         proof-of-concept and the CCEC grant are included in the Project Operational Manual (POM). Where
                         possible, the ACE Fund will look for ways to leverage its investment by identifying potential co-


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         financing by private financiers and/or commercial banks, other sectoral funds, or the FSE.

                         Component 2.1 seeks to fill a void in the current public and private financing landscape for early-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stage technology commercialization in Mexico, and to incentivize industry-academia technology
                         development collaboration through a pilot grant program. The ACE Fund will focus on specific
                         technology areas for development where there is both regional demand and a comparative advantage
                         for Mexico. For example, among the technical areas that are a priority for Mexico are energy
                         efficiency, geothermal, wind, biomass, and solar energy technologies. Over time, the technology
                         focus will be further narrowed and refined by the results of the analysis carried out in Component 1,
                         and promising ideas will be recommended for participation in the ACE Fund competition.

                         The selection of grantees under the ACE Fund will be done by an Investment Committee chaired by
                         SENER and composed of individuals with strong expertise in early-stage technology
                         commercialization, venture capital, applied research, ACE technologies, and concept-to-market
                         strategy. The Investment Committee is expected to meet on a bi-annual basis to vote on grant awards.
                         Applicants not accepted for a matching grant will receive detailed feedback and may be
                         recommended for TA if the Investment Committee believes this could accelerate ACE technology
                         commercialization. Following the implementation of the ACE Fund awards, the Investment
                         Committee members will be allowed to finance promising ACE technologies in subsequent
                         commercialization stages. Such investments will be open to any financier, and rules to guard against
                         a real or perceived conflict of interest are detailed in the POM.

                         Component 2.2: Technical Assistance (Funding GEF: US$1 million; Private sector enterprises: US
                         $111,000). Winning proposals from Component 2.1 will receive “on-boarding” technical assistance
                         (TA) as part of their overall grant package and as a condition of their award. TA will cover topics
                         such as business plans, IP protection and monetization, marketing strategies, access to finance, and
                         safeguards. In addition, the Investment Committee will have the authority to allocate small (less than
                         US$10,000) TA awards to proposals which were short-listed but which do not receive a matching
                         grant from the ACE Fund (Component 2.1). Such TA will be awarded where it is believed that such
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance alone could advance the commercialization of ACE technologies. TA recipients will be
                         required to co-finance 10 percent of the costs of the TA award.
                         Component 3: Project Management. (Funding: GEF US$0.80 million: SENER US$2 million).

                         The Project will utilize and strengthen the existing Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within SENER
                         to coordinate and manage the Project. The additional workload of the project is expected to require
                         the addition of four new team members:: a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist,
                         and two project managers, one for Component 1 and another for Component 2. Additional support
                         for screening grant applications under Component 2 will be provided by SENER personnel or sub-
                         contractors. SENER has agreed to provide an equivalent of US$2 million in cash or in-kind support
                         to project management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will feature a competitive grant program eligible to qualified Mexican applicants. At this
                         point it is not known where such technology developers and entrepreneurs will be located. The
                         project will provide grants to start-up clean energy technology companies, and the size of grants
                         (varied, but on average less than US$500,000 and no more than $2 million) will limit the physical
                         impacts of the prototype technologies. No sub-projects will be financed that could adversely affect



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         indigenous peoples, natural habitats, physical cultural resources and forests or that could cause
                         involuntary resettlement as per OP 4.12.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Alonso Zarzar Casis (LCSSO)
                         Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The early stage of commercial development and
                         BP 4.01                                               the small scale of the technologies supported are
                                                                               not expected to result in significant negative
                                                                               environmental impacts, but minor impacts will be
                                                                               avoided or minimized with the use of an ESMF.

                                                                               It is important to note that since there will be an
                                                                               exclusion list of subprojects and no category A
                                                                               subprojects will be supported, the potential
                                                                               subprojects will fall into either B or C categories.
                                                                               All sub projects will be subject to screening by
                                                                               SENER. This screening process will be supported
                                                                               by an ESMF that will be developed by a
                                                                               consultant hired by SENER to be applied by
                                                                               proponents when they submit to SENER their
                                                                               subprojects for evaluation and possible funding.
                                                                               This consultant will also train SENERs
                                                                               designated personnel in the use and follow up of
                                                                               this ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               This ESMF will determine, if any, the legal,
                                                                               environmental and social requirements that may
                                                                               apply to the subprojects, and compliance actions,
                                                                               if any, that will be mandatory for project funding.
                                                                               Additionally the ESMF will have a specific
                                                                               section to estimate the scope and magnitude of
                                                                               expected environmental and social concerns if the
                                                                               subproject is to scale up in the future (cradle to
                                                                               grave). The team environmental and social
                                                                               specialists will supervise the proper application of
                                                                               this ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not finance any activities that
                                                                               impact natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project will not finance any activities that
                                                                               impact forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09              No               No sub-projects that require the purchase or
                                                                               significant use of pesticides will be supported.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               No sub-projects that may impact physical cultural
                         BP 4.11                                               resources will be supported.


                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The ESMF will screen out sub-projects that
                                                                                infringe upon the rights of indigenous peoples,
                                                                                including territorial and intellectual property
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                rights. It is highly unlikely that indigenous
                                                                                peoples will seek benefits from the Project in
                                                                                ways that would merit specific outreach
                                                                                approaches or design adjustments to
                                                                                accommodate the needs of these communities.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The Project will not finance any activities that
                            4.12                                                will require the involuntary taking of land that
                                                                                result in physical displacement, loss of assets or
                                                                                access to assets or economic displacement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project will not finance the construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams nor will finance
                                                                                activities that rely on the operations of existing
                                                                                dams.
                            Projects on International           No              The Project will not finance any activities that
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                impact international waterways as defined under
                                                                                the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The Project will not finance any projects in
                            7.60                                                disputed areas as defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The subprojects are expected to fall into mostly C and some in B categories, and will be subject to
                              a screening and follow up process based on a specifically developed Environmental and Social
                              Management Framework (ESMF) which will guarantee the compliance of bank safeguards and
                              national legislation. No potential large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are expected.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Due to the type of projects expected and due to the fact that exclusion list applies, most of the
                              subprojects will be category C and a low percentage will be category B and these will be subject to
                              follow up by SENER and Bank according to the application of the ESMF developed for this
                              purpose with Bank approval. No indirect or long term impacts are expected.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N.A.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The monitoring of the prerequisites on environmental impacts resolutions are guaranteed by the
                              Federal Environmental Protection Agency (PROFEPA) which depends directly upon the
                              SEMARNAT and enforces the environmental legislation for which it has specialized offices in
                              every state. PROFEPA is a 20 year old organization with a noble and effective entrustment, but

                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           with very limited resources for operation.

                           The existing SENER PIU has some capacity to manage social and environmental safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           issues, as it is currently implementing a large number of infrastructure-intensive Projects in the
                           energy sector, such as solar farms for remote communities, as well as wind farms. Since the
                           proposed Project will not finance infrastructure projects, the Bank will provide training to key
                           personnel at SENER, the PIU, and on the investment committee in the proper application of the
                           safeguards instrument for the proposed Project. Additional environmental and/or social consultants
                           will be hired as needed for the Project who are found to be acceptable to the Bank. Personnel will
                           be required to fulfill the following objectives:
                           •        screen potential subprojects for environmental and social risks and impacts
                           •        ensure that sub-borrowers carry out an environmental and social assessment for their
                           respective subproject
                           •        verify that subprojects comply with local laws and are consistent with Bank Safeguards
                           Policies

                           The safeguards instrument will be an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                           The ESMF is being prepared by SENER, with support from World Bank environmental and social
                           specialists. In practice, the ESMF will be a screening tool to help key personnel to identify which
                           projects to exclude, and for approved projects with some perceived environmental and or social
                           risks, how to manage them.

                           Social: The Project will not finance any sub-projects that impact the rights of indigenous peoples,
                           including their territorial and intellectual property rights. Sub-projects to be financed will be
                           technologies related to energy efficiency and renewable energy that will not use indigenous
                           intellectual property. Rather, the intellectual property is expected to derive from R&D activities in
                           inter alia, the life sciences, industrial and mechanical engineering, thermodynamics, and geology.
                           In addition, sub-projects will not be financed in the territories of indigenous peoples. As such, the
                           risk that sub-projects financed by the ACE Fund infringe upon the territorial and intellectual
Public Disclosure Copy




                           property rights of indigenous peoples are expected to be minimal.

                           Moreover, it is not very likely that members of indigenous communities, or cooperative
                           organizations, will seek to benefit from the Project by preparing proposals for the ACE Fund. Sub-
                           projects will be selected for support that produce innovation in the advanced clean energy
                           technology sector. As such, it is highly unlikely that indigenous communities will benefit directly
                           from sub-projects in ways that would merit specific outreach approaches or design adjustments to
                           accommodate the needs of these communities.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Under Component 2, the key stakeholders will be private enterprises across Mexico. These
                           institutions will be the key stakeholders in the consultation process since they will have to be
                           aware of the ESMF application and follow up by SENER and the World Bank. Consultation and
                           disclosure of the safeguard policies that apply in the Project will take place during the provision of
                           technical assistance services at the beginning of grant implementation. The ESMF will be
                           disclosed at SENER´s web page and in World Bank´s Infoshop after consultation and before
                           appraisal.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Apr-2014
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Todd M. Johnson
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (SM)                Date: 15-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
