                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8584

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Peru                             Project ID:      P148932
                            Project Name:       Sustainable Forest Management in Atalaya, Ucayali. (P148932)
                            Task Team           Gerardo Segura Warnholtz
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-May-2015                      Estimated        28-Aug-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GENDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Land administration and management (50%), Climate change (25%), Indigenous
                                                peoples (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     17.60                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           5.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                  12.60
                              Total                                                                         12.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The High Level Objective of Peru’s Forest Investment Plan (PIP), which is expected to generate a
                           transformative impact within the next 10-15 years, is to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
                           produced by deforestation and forest degradation, and enhance carbon reserves in sustainable forest
                           landscapes, thereby helping to reach the national target of “Declining net emissions to equivalent to
                           zero in the category of Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry by . 2021”. To achieve this
                           objective the PIP is expected to generate two types of co-benefits: (i) reduce poverty of indigenous
                         communities and other local populations, under a gender equality approach, by increasing income
                         form management of sustainable forest landscapes and productive agroforestry mosaics; and (ii)
                         reduce the loss of biodiversity and maintenance of forest ecosystem services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project Development Objective is to improve the capacity of forest communities and
                         government agencies to manage forest resources sustainably, strengthen forest tenure rights and
                         enhance forest governance leading to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation and forest
                         degradation in the Atalaya Province.
                         C. Project Description
                         Project Objectives:

                         The High Level Objective of Peru’s Forest Investment Plan (PIP), which is expected to generate a
                         transformative impact within the next 10-15 years, is to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
                         produced by deforestation and forest degradation, and enhance carbon reserves in sustainable forest
                         landscapes, thereby helping to reach the national target of “Declining net emissions to equivalent to
                         zero in the category of Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry by . 2021”. To achieve this
                         objective the PIP is expected to generate two types of co-benefits: (i) reduce poverty of indigenous
                         communities and other local populations, under a gender equality approach, by increasing income
                         form management of sustainable forest landscapes and productive agroforestry mosaics; and (ii)
                         reduce the loss of biodiversity and maintenance of forest ecosystem services.

                         The Project Development Objective is to improve the capacity of forest communities and
                         government agencies to manage forest resources sustainably, strengthen forest tenure rights and
                         enhance forest governance leading to reduce GHG emissions from deforestation and forest
                         degradation in the Atalaya Province


                         Project Description:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Strengthening of forest tenure/use rights and forestland use planning (US$2.0M grant;
                         US$2.6M loan) . The objective of this component is to work with national (e.g. Ministry of
                         Agriculture [MINAGRI], Property Registry Agency [SUNARP]) and sub-regional governments (e.g.
                         Regional and Municipal land regularization and forestry agencies), indigenous and other forest
                         dependent communities and their organizations to: (i) support local efforts to secure forest land
                         ownership and use rights (e.g. community “reconocimiento”, registration, land titling, legal
                         demarcation, regularization, and allocation of additional forest lands to indigenous communities);
                         and (ii) conduct a broad and inclusive land use zoning and planning process aimed at building a low
                         carbon emissions strategy at landscape scale. These interventions would also contribute to create the
                         necessary institutional capacities to make land use planning processes inclusive, operational, and
                         foster sustainable forest management leading to reduce deforestation and forest degradation rates in
                         Atalaya’s productive landscapes.

                         Component 2. Support forest governance and law enforcement (US$1.0M grant; US$1.6M loan).
                         This component will support current efforts of the Peruvian government to decentralize key forest
                         sector activities by assisting regional and sub-regional forest authorities (e.g. Ucayali Regional
                         Environmental Authority [ARAU], Executive Forestry Agency of Atalaya [Direccion Ejecutiva
                         Forestal de Atalaya], and Supervisory Body for Forest and Wildlife Resources [OSINFOR]) and
                         other local government agencies in improving forest law enforcement and governance through: (i)
                         Strengthening sub-national government agencies in-charge of forest law enforcement and
                         streamlining regulatory approval processes for forest management plans, annual harvesting
                         operational plans, and forest and transportation permits; (ii) strengthen the operation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coordination of the community forestry units within OSINFOR and the Forestry Executive Direction
                         of Atalaya; (iii) strengthen the capacity and local governance practices of indigenous federations/
                         organizations (e.g. Federación de Comunidades Nativas de la Provincia de Atalaya [FECONAPA],
                         Coordinadora Regional de los Pueblos Indígenas de AIDESEP en Atalaya [CORPIAA], its
                         federations, the Union Regional de los Pueblos Indígenas de la Amoazonía de la Provincia de
                         Atalaya [URPIA]), and OIRA (Regional Indigenous Organization of Atalaya - Organización
                         Indígena Regional de Atalaya) to understand conventional forest control administrative and
                         regulatory processes; (iv) Through Veedurías Forestales Communitarias and other community-based
                         institutions, support strategic and fair alliances between indigenous community and private forestry
                         industry to ensure sound environment practices, fair forest products benefit sharing and prevent
                         illegal logging; and (v) sponsor a landscape-based forest stakeholder dialogue though existing local
                         institutions and participation platforms (e.g. Mesa Indígena REDD+ of Atalaya and the Forest and
                         Wildlife Management Committees) to ensure government and civil society transparency and
                         accountability.

                         Component 3. Sustainable community-based forest management (CBFM) (US$1.0M grant; US
                         $2.2M loan). To strengthen the technical and managerial capacities of indigenous communities to
                         improve sustainable forest management practices; promote and assist in the identification of new
                         market opportunities and establishment of productive alliances with “anchor” private sector
                         enterprises, leading to develop value chains for their timber and non-timber forest products; and
                         reduce the negative environmental impact of productive forestry activities along the supply chain of
                         forest products. The component will focus on supporting: (i) small scale community-based
                         commercial forestry operations based on sound sustainability principles; (ii) productive strategic
                         alliances between community enterprises and private forest companies; and (iii) best management
                         practices and third-party certification in community forestry operations (e.g. low impact logging,
                         improved logging road construction, reduced-emissions timber processing).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4. Project management, monitoring and evaluation (US$1.8M grant). This component
                         will support MINAM’s capacity for the technical execution and administration of project proceeds,
                         including: (i) ) establishing of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) based in Atalaya, and to include a
                         Project coordinator and a 4-6 technical/fiduciary team; (ii) designing and implementing a
                         Stakeholder Involvement Plan (PIA), to include a differentiated approach for indigenous peoples, a
                         communications campaign, and will be consistent with Peru’s new consultation laws and regulations;
                         (iii) performs fiduciary and safeguard responsibilities; and (iv) establishes a robust monitoring and
                         evaluation strategy, consistent and possibly nested within other monitoring systems currently being
                         designed by MINAM (e.g. MRV for REDD+, and other systems to assess LULUCF).
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project is located in Atalaya province, Department of Ucayali, in the Peruvian Amazon. The
                         area is located at the boundary between the Highland and Lowland Rainforest areas, comprising the
                         upper Ucayali river basin and the lower Urubamba river basin respectively, with a physiography that
                         is in transition between high hills, low hills and alluvial plains that are mostly covered by primary
                         tropical forests rich in high commercial value forest species. The Project area is considered a
                         biodiversity hotspot but is threatened by high rates of deforestation, the advancing agricultural
                         frontier and the potential for social conflict over uncertain land rights and use of natural resources.
                           The Department of Ucayali, and its capital Pucallpa, is also Peru’s main sawn wood producing area
                           and there are large forest concessions and 50 indigenous communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In terms of social capital, the province of Atalaya has a total population of 47,285 (INE 2009). This
                           includes a large rural population (34, 662 or 68%) and a smaller urban population (12,663 or 32%).
                           The indigenous population is estimated at 28,117 or 62% of the total population and they will be the
                           main beneficiaries for this Project. They represent three Amazonian indigenous peoples (Asheninka,
                           Yine and Asheninca) and live in approximately 50 communities that include more than one million
                           hectares of forests. Indigenous peoples are represented by a network of regional indigenous
                           organizations such as OIRA (Regional Indigenous Organization of Atalaya - Organización Indígena
                           Regional de Atalaya), URPIA (Regional Union of Indigenous Peoples of Atalaya - Unión Regional
                           de Pueblos Indígenas de Atalaya) and are also members of the national organization, AIDESEP
                           (Asociación Interétnica para el Desarrollo de la Selva del Perú - Inter-EthnicAssociation for Forest
                           Development in Peru). Other important stakeholders that have been identified include: i) Ribereño
                           communities (traditional Amazonian communities that are of indigenous descent but do not currently
                           self-identify as indigenous); ii) Colonos (people from the Andes that have continuously migrated to
                           the Amazon since the 60s and 70s looking for agricultural land); iii) forest concessionaires and
                           producers; iv) agricultural producers and traders; v) sub-national governments. Forest
                           concessionaires and agricultural producers are also represented by several regional organizations
                           such as ABACO (Forest Concessionaires' Association of Atalaya - Asociación de Concesionarios
                           Forestales de Atalaya), APFA (Forest Producers' Association of Atalaya - Asociación de Productores
                           Forestales de Atalaya) and APAAU (Agroforestry Producers' Association of Upper Ucayali -
                           Asociación de Productores Agroforestales de Alto Ucayali).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Responsibility for safeguard compliance including screening and implementation of the safeguard
                           instruments will rest with the Ministry of Environment’s National Forest Conservation Program
                           (PNCB). The PNCB team has significant experience in forest management but will need to be
                           strengthened in order to provide adequate supervision for the implementation of the measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                           outlined in the safeguard instruments (ESMF, RF) as well as the particular activities related to
                           Indigenous peoples that will be mainstreamed into the project design and the Project’s OM. The
                           PNCB team will need to identify dedicated staff or appoint staff and/or consultants that have
                           adequate capacity or that will receive specific training so that they can undertake safeguard
                           screening, scoping and general safeguard policy compliance throughout Project implementation.
                           Training needs and mechanisms to ensure safeguard compliance will be identified during project
                           preparation and will be carried out once the Project is approved and the safeguards team is identified.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
                           Kristyna Bishop (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             This project is classified as Category B given
                           BP 4.01                                              that the proposed investments are not likely to
                                                                                result in significant negative impacts on human
                                                                                populations and/or environmentally important
                                                             areas. The project is likely to result in positive
                                                             impacts for forest conservation. Operational
                                                             Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             is triggered given that investments, although
                                                             small in nature, will be carried out in the
                                                             Peruvian Amazon region, a sensitive
                                                             biodiversity hotspot already experiencing
                                                             processes of environmental degradation and
                                                             natural resources depletion. An Environmental
                                                             and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                             will be prepared as required by OP/BP 4.01 in
                                                             order to screen, identify, avoid and mitigate the
                                                             potential negative environmental and social
                                                             impacts associated with lines of activities to be
                                                             supported by this project. . This ESMF will
                                                             include environmental and social aspects related
                                                             to community forestry in the Peruvian Amazon
                                                             region as well as critical natural habitats
                                                             sustained by these forests. This EMSF will
                                                             guide the preparation of the Operational Manual
                                                             where specific operational procedures will be
                                                             established to screen, assess, mitigate and
                                                             monitor environmental and social impacts. The
                                                             EMSF will be consulted and disclosed prior to
                                                             appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered given that the project
                                                             activities are directed towards forestry
                                                             management and conservation, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             biodiversity values (use and non-use) to ensure
                                                             that all projects proposed for DGM financing
                                                             take into account the conservation of
                                                             biodiversity and critical natural habitats, as well
                                                             as the numerous environmental and ecosystem
                                                             services that natural habitats in the Peruvian
                                                             Amazon region provide in the larger context.
                                                             The ESMF will address issues related to natural
                                                             habitats (e.g. flora and fauna), ecosystem
                                                             services (e.g. hydrological services) and
                                                             potential impacts of the proposed projects.
                                                             Specifically, the ESMF will have appropriate
                                                             screening criteria to ensure that impacts on
                                                             natural and critical natural habitats are properly
                                                             evaluated. In addition, the ESMF will make
                                                             clear that no project activities which involve the
                                                             significant conversion of natural habitats will be
                                                             financed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   This policy was triggered given that project
                                                                 activities area likely to have positive impacts on
                                                                 forest management in indigenous lands and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 territories as a result of implementing
                                                                 community forestry activities (reducing
                                                                 deforestation and forest degradation).. However,
                                                                 due to the nature of some interventions, some
                                                                 investments may represent risks to forest,
                                                                 environmental resources (e.g. biodiversity),
                                                                 health and safety. Screening mechanisms will be
                                                                 incorporated into the ESMF to ensure that any
                                                                 small scale impacts on forests and forest
                                                                 dwellers will be mitigated through measures
                                                                 defined as part of the broader approach on
                                                                 natural habitats.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This policy could be triggered depending on the
                                                                 final scope and nature of the community
                                                                 forestry sub-projects. Reforestation activities,
                                                                 for instance, could trigger this policy depending
                                                                 on the methods selected to manage pests. The
                                                                 ESMF will include screening mechanism to
                                                                 evaluate the likely use of pesticides and, if used,
                                                                 will include measures to mitigate associated
                                                                 environmental impacts on health and natural
                                                                 habitats.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   This policy should remain as TBD until the final
                         BP 4.11                                 location of interventions is identified. Though it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 is not anticipated that the project will have
                                                                 negative impacts on any sites with presence of
                                                                 cultural physical resources, however this policy
                                                                 will be triggered if investments which may
                                                                 affect physical cultural resources are eligible for
                                                                 financing. If triggered, the ESMF will include
                                                                 provisions regarding how to protect known PCR
                                                                 and how to address chance finds. If such
                                                                 investments that might affect PCR are not
                                                                 eligible for financing then this policy will not be
                                                                 triggered and the screening mechanism under
                                                                 the ESMF will be used to screen out such
                                                                 investment applications.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is being triggered as there are
                                                                 indigenous peoples that meet the four criteria in
                                                                 the Project area. Given that indigenous peoples
                                                                 represent the majority in Atalaya, they will be
                                                                 the main beneficiaries for project activities and
                                                                 investments. As a result, the Project design and
                                                                OM will incorporate safeguard measures
                                                                relating to OP 4.10 and there will be a process
                                                                of free and informed consultation leading to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                broad community support for the Project prior
                                                                to appraisal. A social assessment will be
                                                                undertaken during preparation in order to clearly
                                                                define the beneficiary communities, social
                                                                organizations and decision making processes
                                                                and recommendations for any adaptations
                                                                required (language, format, timeline) during
                                                                implementation
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   This policy is being triggered as it is anticipated
                         4.12                                   that there may be third party interests in some of
                                                                the lands that might be titled using Project
                                                                resources. A land tenure study and social
                                                                assessment will be undertaken during
                                                                preparation in order to provide more
                                                                information regarding the nature and scope of
                                                                these overlaps as well as provide inputs for the
                                                                preparation of the Resettlement Framework.
                                                                When possible, land titling that requires
                                                                acquisition of land or physical resettlement will
                                                                be avoided and the team will discuss the
                                                                possibility of making outstanding land tenure
                                                                conflicts an exclusion criteria. In terms of the
                                                                sustainable management activities that will be
                                                                financed by the Project, it is also anticipated that
                                                                there might be negative impacts on livelihoods
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                as a result of enforcement of existing
                                                                regulations or improving current land use
                                                                practices. The potential scale and scope of these
                                                                negative impacts will also be explored in the
                                                                land tenure study and social assessment and
                                                                measures to minimize or mitigate any impacts
                                                                will be included in the Resettlement Framework
                                                                and ESMF
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    This safeguard policy was not triggered because
                                                                the project will not support the construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                investments which rely on existing dams.
                         Projects on International        No    This safeguard policy was not triggered because
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   the project will not support activities which
                                                                affect international waterways
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    This safeguard policy was not triggered because
                         7.60                                   the project will not support activities in disputed
                                                                areas.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Mar-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A land tenure study and social assessment will be carried out during preparation in order to inform
                                      Project design and the preparation of the ESMF and the Resettlement Framework. These studies
                                      will be accompanied by a process of free, prior and informed consultation with the indigenous
                                      peoples in the Project area in order to ensure their broad community support for the Project design
                                      and activities and to ensure that their inputs are incorporated prior to appraisal. Results of the land
                                      tenure study and the social assessment will also be mainstreamed in the Project OM and provide
                                      key inputs for the safeguard capacity building training.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Gerardo Segura Warnholtz

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 21-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                                                                                                Date: 22-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
