                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2033
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                               Project ID:    P132505
                            Project Name:      Cusco Transport Improvement Project (P132505)
                            Task Team          Mauricio Cuellar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                        Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSTR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (60%), General transportation sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (55%), Other urban development
                                              (15%), Infrastructure services for private sector devel opment (15%), Municipal
                                              governance and institution building (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     152.60           Total Bank Financing:                 120.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   32.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     120.00
                              Total                                                                                     152.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall PDO is to improve mobility in the east-west corridor of Cusco Provincial Municipality.

                           This objective will be achieved by: (i) the capacity expansion and completion of the dual


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         carriageway section of the East-West Via Expresa Avenue, and (ii) strengthening the capacity of the
                         CPM in the definition and implementation of mobility policies.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Cusco Transport Improvement Project would achieve the above mentioned objective through the
                         implementation of four components: Total cost is US$ 152.6 million, of which the World Bank will
                         finance US$120 million (detailed description in Project Appraisal Document, Annex 2).

                         Component 1: Integral Improvement of the Via Expresa Avenue of Cusco Provincial Municipality -
                         CPM

                         (a)      (i) Carrying out of final detailed design studies for the completion of the construction of the
                         Via Expresa Avenue; and (ii) based on the final detailed designs mentioned in (i) herein, carrying out
                         of civil works which comprise of approximately 6.4 km of a divided roadway with four local access
                         lanes and four lanes for a total width of 50 meters for purposes of improving connectivity and
                         permeability in the surrounding urban road network for pedestrians, bicycle users and motorized
                         vehicles.

                         (b)      Carrying out of supervision activities of the design and civil works referred to in (a)(i) and
                         (ii) above.

                         (c)      Provision and installation of traffic lights and a control system compatible with CPM’s
                         current traffic light control system.

                         Component 2: Improvement of Mobility in the Cusco Provincial Municipality

                         (a)      Provision of support for the development and improvement of a mobility plan in the
                         historical center of the city of Cusco, paying special attention to the protection and exaltation of its
                         condition as World Heritage Site, and focused on the improvement of mobility for users of public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and non-motorized transport modes, and reducing traffic congestion caused by inefficient use of
                         vehicles in the historic city center.

                         (b)      Strengthening CPM’s traffic authorities capacity for the implementation of public transport
                         and traffic regulation plans, mobility planning, financing and acquisition of transport models,
                         hardware, planning software and monitoring systems, as well as the provision of training for CPM’s
                         technical transport planning personnel.

                         (c)      Designing and implementing pedestrian and biking paths circuits in peri-urban areas to
                         foster the use of bicycles and other non-motorized modes of transport, including the construction of
                         a biking path in the Via Expresa Avenue and the development of a bicycle path network plan.

                         (d)      (i) provision of support to CPM’s infrastructure office to strengthen its capacity to prepare a
                         urban road network maintenance management strategy, including annual plans (aimed at enhancing
                         the condition of the existing roadways), and their budgets and to implement said plans based on
                         results; and (ii) provision of support to CPM on transport infrastructure works in the greater
                         metropolitan area of the CPM, including the provision of software and hardware to enhance
                         management capacities and to better control the condition of the roadways and to monitor the state of
                         the road network.



                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         Component 3:     Institutional Strengthening and Monitoring and Evaluation

                         (a)      Strengthening of the institutional capacity of PER Plan COPESCO and the PCU in order to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhance their institutional capabilities required for the successful implementation of Project
                         activities, including Project technical support on procurement, safeguards, and financial management
                         requirements (including audits).

                         (b)     Provision of support for the carrying out of monitoring activities as well as mid-term and
                         impact evaluation surveys in order to evaluate the Project’s impacts, including social impacts and
                         livelihood improvements for low-income groups, women, the disabled and other vulnerable segments
                         of society.

                         Component 4: Project Management: Strengthening of the institutional capacity of PER Plan
                         COPESCO for the oversight and supervision of Project activities, through the provision of goods,
                         consultants’ services and operating costs.

                         The Project is classified as Category B under OP/BP 4.01. This classification is based upon the
                         temporary and non-significant nature of most of its anticipated impacts. The proposed project will
                         finance part of Cusco’s Via Expresa Avenue, which already has completed some portions and the
                         remainders are under construction. The right of way (RoW) for the complete road already exists and
                         is well delimited. The Avenue will run through areas already highly impacted by man, mostly open
                         and unused, and areas that have accumulated construction debris and waste, or limited vegetation. Its
                         entirety will take place within a heavily urbanized context. Within the RoW, there are no significant
                         or important natural habitats, forests, or environmental protected areas. Depending on the final
                         design of the Avenue, some portions or the junction connecting the Avenue and the Via de
                         Evitamiento road might require some construction near or around the Huatanay River, which is
                         presently a highly polluted river. The Via Expresa Avenue is not near the historic core, and no
                         archaeological sites or other physical cultural resources are expected to be impacted by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The main negative project impacts will be the typical ones associated with construction within an
                         urban context. They include traffic disturbances, noise, vibrations, dust or slope destabilization. All
                         these impacts can be readily mitigated. The project will also have significant positive impacts, such
                         as increased driving security, or reduced travel times with consequent reduction in traffic emissions.

                         Among other safeguard policies, the project triggers OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment) and
                         OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement). The Expressway is going to be constructed using a design-build
                         contract approach which means that, at the time of writing this document, it is not possible to define
                         all of the final road design characteristics. Nevertheless, the alignment of the expressway and its
                         main characteristics are sufficiently defined to allow for the preparation of Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment --ESIA, its corresponding Environmental and Social Management Plan -ESMP,
                         and a Resettlement Action Plan -RAP, based on the best information available. As part of the design-
                         build contract to be carried out during implementation, limited additional analytical work will be
                         carried out to inform a review and update of the existing ESIA, ESMP and RAP in order to reflect
                         the final design decisions. The final design details are not expected to significantly change the nature
                         of the environmental or social risk or conclusions of the ESIA however some incremental changes to
                         the management actions required under each of these documents may be needed. The Bank and the
                         counterpart have agreed on the required steps to complete this analysis and, in the event that any
                         revisions are made to safeguards documents, they will be re-disclosed to the public. In addition, the
                         borrower has defined a clear consultation strategy with all relevant stakeholders during the

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         implementation period of the project. The project Loan Agreement has stipulated requirements for
                         the completion of this work which would ensure that no civil works can commence before the
                         remaining environmental and resettlement work is completed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project also triggers OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). This policy is triggered because
                         the project is implemented in a city declared World Heritage Site by UNESCO. However, project
                         activities are not expected to have any direct impact on physical cultural resources, and will entail
                         positive indirect impacts (less congestion within the city). The ESIA however includes clear
                         provisions on the eventuality of chance findings, as dictated by the Ministerio de Cultura of Peru.
                         Activities under Component 2, which provide technical assistance for improved circulation and
                         better public transportation and maintenance programs within the city, will have to comply with best
                         practices on physical cultural resources management and follow Bank guidelines.

                         A number of consultations around the Via Expresa Avenue have taken place during 2012 and 2013.
                         A wide variety of actors have been involved throughout the consultations, including the Municipal
                         Districts, Regional Government, Ministry of Finance, General Directorate of Investment Policies,
                         and several other public and private institutions. A technical coordination group was established, and
                         has met periodically to review progress and next steps. Feedback received mentioned the need of
                         appropriate rain drainage infrastructure, adequate articulation with adjacent roads, and adequate
                         slope stabilization on some road sections. All these considerations will have to be included in the
                         final ESIA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Cusco Province, Peru

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jose Vicente Zevallos (LCSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Daniel Mira-Salama (LCSEN)
                         Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (LCSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The project is classified as Category B under OP
                          BP 4.01                                            4.01, due to its potential adverse environmental
                                                                             and social impacts, which are not expected to be
                                                                             significant, permanent or irreversible. The
                                                                             majority of these impacts can be readily
                                                                             mitigated. The Via Expresa Avenue is expected
                                                                             to have the typical negative impacts associated
                                                                             with standard road construction practices within
                                                                             an urban environment. However, overall, the
                                                                             project will generate an improvement on
                                                                             environmental conditions within the city, thanks
                                                                             to the reduction in travel time and congestion,
                                                                             that will be translated into less emissions, less
                                                                             noise and reduced heavy traffic circulation near
                                                                             the city center, where the main physical cultural



                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                                                                    attractions are located.
                                                                    Based on the most up to date, accurate
                                                                    information on the design and alignment of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    road, the borrower has prepared an
                                                                    Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                    (ESIA). Since the final design of the Via Expresa
                                                                    Avenue is still not known, and will be prepared
                                                                    during project implementation as part of a design-
                                                                    build contract, a revised ESIA will be submitted
                                                                    to the Bank during implementation, reflecting any
                                                                    changes that the design might have undergone.
                                                                    The ESIA prepared to date contains an
                                                                    appropriate level of analysis of baselines, types
                                                                    and intensity of impacts, and identifies a number
                                                                    of mitigation measures, through a detailed
                                                                    management plan. The plan includes a chapter on
                                                                    grievance redress mechanisms as well as other
                                                                    mitigation programs.

                                                                    Regarding the bypass road that is currently being
                                                                    constructed in Cusco, and which will connect
                                                                    with the Via Expresa Avenue financed by this
                                                                    project, the Bank team conducted due diligence
                                                                    with the review of their environmental
                                                                    management plan, and made some suggestions in
                                                                    order to improve it and ensure coordination.

                                                                    Under Components 2 and 3, technical assistance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    and training will be provided. This will include
                                                                    considerations to minimizing environmental and
                                                                    social impacts during road rehabilitation,
                                                                    maintenance, mobility plans and others. There
                                                                    will also be elements targeted towards
                                                                    strengthening of environmental and social
                                                                    oversight by the Region of Cusco.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No            No Project components are expected to directly
                                                                    or indirectly cause any significant conversion of
                                                                    or loss to any existing natural habitats. Moreover,
                                                                    the project does not involve any works within
                                                                    areas of significant or important natural habitats,
                                                                    forests, or environmental protected areas. The
                                                                    construction of the Via Expresa Avenue is within
                                                                    an urban environment, and specifically a right-of-
                                                                    way area that has been highly impacted by man.
                                                                    Depending on the final designs, there might be
                                                                    some construction required in or around the river,
                                                                    which will not affect its water quantity or quality.



                                                            Page 5 of 10
                                                                         Should this be the case, good practices on river
                                                                         bed works and appropriate road drainage will
                                                                         have to be applied. These provisions have already
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         been preliminarily addressed on the EIAS
                                                                         prepared by the borrower.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project will not have any impact on forested
                                                                         areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             No utilization, promotion or acquisition of
                                                                         pesticides is foreseen during road construction
                                                                         under the project. However, under the ESIA
                                                                         prepared by the borrower, there is a sub-program
                                                                         to remove rodents and remove pests before the
                                                                         onset of works. As described on OP/BP 4.01, the
                                                                         ESIA will include provisions related to good
                                                                         practices in storage, application, personal
                                                                         protection, labeling, or best types of substances to
                                                                         be applied.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            This policy is triggered because the project is
                         BP 4.11                                         implemented on a city declared World Heritage
                                                                         Site by UNESCO. However, project activities are
                                                                         not expected to have any direct impact on
                                                                         physical cultural resources (PCR), and will entail
                                                                         positive indirect impacts on them given the
                                                                         improved transportation and less congestion
                                                                         within the city of Cusco. The Via Expresa
                                                                         Avenue does not go through or near any known
                                                                         PCR, however, the ESIA prepared by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         borrower already includes clear steps in case of
                                                                         chance findings, as dictated by Peru's Ministry of
                                                                         Culture.

                                                                         Activities in Components 2 and 3, which provide
                                                                         technical assistance for improved circulation,
                                                                         better public transportation and maintenance
                                                                         programs within the city, will have to comply
                                                                         with best practices on PCR management and
                                                                         follow Bank guidelines. The Cusco region has a
                                                                         tradition of working within these environments,
                                                                         and close coordination with and oversight by the
                                                                         Ministry of Culture is maintained.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              The project does not affect communities of
                                                                         indigenous peoples as characterized in OP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Land acquisition for the project will result in
                         4.12                                            physical and economic displacement. Most of the
                                                                         planned civil works will take place within
                                                                         existing rights of way. However, land acquisition



                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                                 will be required at specific locations, such as the
                                                                                 Ovalo Libertadores and the Versalles
                                                                                 Interchange. Land acquisition will affect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 property owners, as well as occupants of informal
                                                                                 housing and business structures. In addition, the
                                                                                 planned civil works will displace informal
                                                                                 activities in a few locations.

                                                                                 A resettlement plan has been prepared to address
                                                                                 the adverse impact of land acquisition. The plan
                                                                                 is based on the Project’s feasibility study and is
                                                                                 currently being revised to take into account
                                                                                 comments provided by the Bank. The plan will
                                                                                 need to be updated when the final designs
                                                                                 become available. The Bank will give the No
                                                                                 Objection to the final designs after it has
                                                                                 reviewed and approved the updated resettlement
                                                                                 plan. The entitlements of affected persons and the
                                                                                 expected outcomes of the various programs
                                                                                 included in the plan will not vary, but the exact
                                                                                 area of impact of the project at certain locations
                                                                                 (particularly at the Versalles Interchange) is
                                                                                 likely to change. Therefore, Project impacts at
                                                                                 these locations will need to be reassessed taking
                                                                                 into account the final designs and in consultation
                                                                                 with affected persons.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                 The project does not support the construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 investments which rely on the services of existing
                                                                                 dams.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project will deliver important benefits to the inhabitants of the Cusco region. The investments
                              in the Via Expresa Avenue and the Improvement of Mobility in the Center of Cusco components
                              will satisfy important needs for mobility of the city of Cusco, particularly for people living in the
                              districts of Wanchaq, San Sebastián and San Jerónimo. The Via Expresa Avenue will reduce
                              traffic, pollution and travel times. The improvement of mobility infrastructure and services will
                              promote economic integration and expand economic opportunities for local people.




                                                                         Page 7 of 10
                           The project is expected to have the negative impacts associated with construction within an urban
                           context. These impacts include increased noise levels due to the operation of machinery, emission
                           of dust, vibrations or traffic disturbances. These impacts all have a temporary nature, and there are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mitigation measures to minimize their significance. Positive impacts will be long term, such as
                           reduction in travel times with subsequent reduction in vehicle emissions, or increased driving
                           security.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The civil works that will be carried out as part of the Project require land acquisition and,
                           therefore, could have adverse impacts. The construction of the Via Expresa Avenue also involves
                           the usage of accumulation of materials, quarries and campsites which may interfere with current
                           activities in the area of influence of the project.

                           The city of Cusco is also undertaking the construction of a bypass road. This bypass road will be
                           inter-connected to the Via Expresa Avenue. Although the combined effect of both roads is
                           anticipated to greatly reduce travel times, and significantly alleviate the circulation of heavy
                           vehicles within the city center – with the consequent positive impacts – there might be temporary,
                           negative accumulated impacts, such as traffic disturbances or noise disturbances. Coordination and
                           communication between the two initiatives is already ongoing to ensure the minimization of
                           potential negative impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           For decades, Via Expresa Avenue was envisioned in Urban Plans as an expressway (thus its name)
                           but was never developed properly. At present, Via Expresa is mainly a dual carriageway unpaved
                           and underutilized road. The current initiative to develop the Via Expresa as an urban boulevard
                           departs from the original 1970 expressway plans mainly since the urban sprawl of Cusco has
                           resulted in dense urbanization of the road’s area of influence. For example, urbanization has left
                           the city airport locked in the middle of the urban landscape of Cusco, which is part of the reasons
Public Disclosure Copy




                           why the airport is being transferred out of the city. Different construction alternatives have been
                           considered, such as elevated or underground crossings between the Via Expresa and traversal
                           roads. Different design speed alternatives for the road are also being analyzed. Greater speeds
                           bring greater reduction on travel times, but they also encompass greater impacts (noise, barrier
                           effect, likely greater excavation needs). A road with an appropriate speed for an urban context
                           (around 50km/h) might be the best alternative, since it promotes universal utilization and
                           integration, reduced accident risk or reduced noise and emission levels, for example.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Given that the final design of the Via Expresa Avenue will be prepared during project
                           implementation (as part of a design-build contract), the borrower has prepared an Environmental
                           and Social Impact Assessment based on the feasibility study. This ESIA already identifies the
                           main expected impacts, and includes an environmental and social management plan to mitigate
                           them. The borrower also held consultations and socialization of project activities, together with its
                           anticipated social and environmental impacts (the last events took place on February, March and
                           June 2013, as reflected in the ESIA). The borrower has laid out a plan to increase communication
                           and feedback mechanisms as project moves into implementation. As part of the design-build
                           contract, the borrower will include provisions in the terms of reference in order to update the
                           existing ESIA wherever required.


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                           The project will also support the borrower in increasing their capacity to manage and supervise
                           environmental and social safeguards. In this way, the project includes provisions to provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                           technical assistance to COPESCO and their implementing unit in management and supervision of
                           civil works. COPESCO’s safeguards team is also going to be strengthened with additional
                           experienced staff.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A number of consultations on the Project, focusing on different technical, environmental and
                           social issues, have been taking place throughout project preparation during 2012 and 2013. A wide
                           variety of actors have been involved throughout the consultations, including the Municipal
                           Districts, Regional Government, Ministry of Finance, General Directorate of Investment Policies,
                           and several other public and private institutions. Representatives from different neighborhoods,
                           and from civil associations, also took part. A technical coordination group was established, and
                           has met periodically to review progress and next steps.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      28-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                             02-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The Environmental Assessment has been published locally by the client in PER Plan
                                         COPESCO's webpage. Link: http://www.copesco.gob.pe/proyIV_proder.html
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                             03-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The Resettlement Action Plan (Plan de Accion de Compensacion y Reasentamientos
                                         Involuntarios, PACRI) has been published locally by the client in PER Plan
                                         COPESCO's webpage. Link: http://www.copesco.gob.pe/proyIV_proder.html
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?



                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Mauricio Cuellar
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 06-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Aurelio Menendez (SM)                             Date: 06-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
