                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA1179

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
  1. Basic Project Data
   Country:         Mozambique                          Project ID:    P150956
                                                        Parent         P083325
                                                        Project ID:
  Project Name:      MZ-Additional Financing for Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance
                     Program - Ph-2 (AF3) (P150956)
  Parent Project     Mozambique -Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program -
  Name:              Phase II (P083325)
  Task Team       Kulwinder Singh Rao
  Leader(s):
  Estimated       20-Jan-2015                           Estimated   22-Apr-2015
  Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
  Managing Unit: GTIDR                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
  Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
  Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (70%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                    development (30%)
  Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
  8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
  Financing (In USD Million)
  Total Project Cost:      76.10           Total Bank Financing:                   73.60
  Financing Gap:            0.00

     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         2.50
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                  73.60
     Total                                                                                        76.10
  Environmental B - Partial Assessment
  Category:
  Is this a     No
  Repeater
  project?


                                               Page 1 of 9
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The primary objective of the overall Roads and Bridges Management and Maintenance Program
   (RBMMP), is to stimulate growth and contribute to poverty reduction through improved road
   infrastructure, better sector policies, and enhanced roads sector management. More specifically by
   (i) improving the coverage and conditions of roads and bridges in the territory of the Recipient;
   (ii) strengthening the Recipient's institutional capacity to manage and administer the road sector;
   (iii) establishing financing mechanisms for road maintenance; (iv) promoting the use of local
   resources in roads construction and management; and (v) improving road transport safety. The
   project development objective of this phase of the APL is to improve access of the population to
   all-season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of the classified road network.
   The indicators to assess the achievement of the PDO are (i) the percentage of classified roads in
   good and fair condition, and (ii) the percentage of the rural population within 2 km of an all
   season road. Intermediate outcomes have been defined as follows: (a) improved road sector
   management capacity; (b) enhanced execution of the road maintenance program; and (c) timely
   and cost-effective implementation of the IDA financed rehabilitation and upgrading of sections of
   the National Road N1.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The project development objective of this phase of the APL is to improve access of the population
   to all-season roads through maintenance, rehabilitation and upgrading of the classified road
   network.
 3. Project Description
There are no changes in the Project Development Objective (PDO) and its design/scope.
The proposed additional financing to the Phase 2 of the Road and Bridges Management and
Maintenance Project (RBMMP2) fills the financing gap associated with the implementation of
medium and long-term technical solutions for restoration and rehabilitation of the regionally and
nationally important disrupted road sections affected by Limpopo River basin floods in January 2013.

RBMMP2 has the following six parts:

Part A, Overheads: This component supports the Project Implementing Entity, Fundo de Estradas
(Road Fund, or RF), and the Administração Nacional de Estradas (National Road Administration, or
ANE), at national and provincial level through the provision of goods, technical assistance, and
operating costs. The following activities were covered under this component: (i) outsourcing of the
services of ANE at the provincial level during its transformation to a road agency; (ii) axle load
control measures; (iii) road safety measures; (iv) the preparation of local government policy and
strategy; (v) TA, training and equipment for ANE, RF, Flood Response Team, and the planning unit
at Ministry of Transport and Communications (MOTC); (vi) Road Safety program (vii) preparation
of design and bidding documents for the outer years of the program; (viii) various studies needed for
the continuation of the program. Estimated allocation is: US$23.30 million. This component is 100
percent IDA financed.

Part B, Maintenance: The road maintenance program on paved and unpaved classified road network.
Estimated allocation is about US$36.83 million. This component is 100 percent IDA financed. All
these works are complete.



                                             Page 2 of 9
Part C, Investments: This component includes costs of upgrading works on the national network. The
rehabilitation and upgrading works on N1 from Maputo to Maxixe (Jardim Benefica and Xai-Xai to
Chissibuca sections) that were not financed under phase one of the APL due to cost increases, are
covered in this sub-component. Estimated allocation is US$86.94 million. This component is 100
percent IDA financed. All the planned works are complete.

Part D, Emergency related works in Limpopo River Basin: The 2013 floods had severely damaged
about 18 stretches of road and bridges, including three on the main national road (EN1). To repair the
damaged road network in Gaza province, the emergency works are categorized into two major
groups.
i. The first category involves the relatively smaller urgent works planned to restore a modicum of
connectivity over the network. Estimated allocation is US$15.0 million. This component is financed
by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) via the Global Facility for Disaster
Risk Reduction (GFDRR), which is administered by IDA. These works are substantially complete.
ii. The second category involves more complicated and intensive works related to substantive
medium- and long-term technical solutions that will be more resilient to future floods and minimize
the adverse consequences of flooding on the road network. These are being prepared under design
and build methodology using an Output and Performance Based (OPRC) type of contract that
transfers the majority of the risks to the contracting party. Estimated allocation is US$149.0 million,
of which US$106.5 million is IDA financing.

Part E, Pilot Program for Climate Resilient Road Infrastructure: The Pilot Program for Climate
Resilience (PPCR), part of the Climate Investment Funds, supported two AF2 activities at a cost of
US$ 15.75 million. This component is funded by the Climate Investment Funds which are
administered by IDA.
i. Preparation of National Design and Construction Standards for classified paved and unpaved
road network. New standards are intended to ensure that future design, construction and maintenance
standards enhance the climate resilience of road investments country-wide.
ii. Piloting of improved road designs for unclassified roads and development of improved local
arrangements for their maintenance with the objective of building longer-term resilience to climatic
risks. Currently, procurement of services for these two activities is ongoing, albeit at a slower pace
than planned.

Part F, Immediate Response Contingency Fund: This component establishes an immediate response
mechanism to facilitate access to rapid financing for disaster response in the aftermath of a natural
disaster. It establishes a zero-budget Immediate Response Contingency Fund that could be triggered
in the event of a natural disaster through formal declaration of a national or regional state of
emergency, or upon a formal request from the Government in the wake of a disaster. No costs are
currently allocated to this component.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
   (if known)
The Limpopo flood plane in Gaza Province, Mozambique.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Eden Gabriel Vieira Dava (GSURR)
John Bryant Collier (GENDR)


                                             Page 3 of 9
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment       Yes         Just as its parent-project, AF3 is a category B project
OP/BP 4.01                                 because of the specific low impact nature of its
                                           foreseen civil works, which are likely to have a low
                                           impact on the biophysical environment for selected
                                           road sections and bridges. The Borrower updated the
                                           Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                           (ESIA)/ Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                           (ESMP) of the parent project for the earlier AF2 in
                                           order to better capture specificities of the targeted
                                           roads and bridges. The ESIA/ESMP was recently
                                           updated, and since this AF will add no new activity
                                           and no additional negative impact is foreseen, the
                                           latter will remain viable and will require no public re-
                                           disclosure.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No

Forests OP/BP 4.36             No

Pest Management OP 4.09        No

Physical Cultural Resources    Yes         The ESIA/ESMP has already included appropriate
OP/BP 4.11                                 "Chance-find" mechanisms to ensure mitigation of
                                           any new discovery of Physical Cultural Resources
                                           during project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No          The proposed restoration works (reconstruction/
BP 4.12                                    rehabilitation) are not expected to require the
                                           physical resettlement of Project Affected Persons
                                           (PAP), nor will they result in massive loss of crops,
                                           assets, or livelihoods. Though unlikely, there might
                                           be insignificant encroachment in portions of
                                           surrounding farmlands, the width of the existing
                                           right-of-way is sufficient enough (by law, 15 m on
                                           each side of the road) to allow the easy movement of
                                           machineries during the construction/ rehabilitation
                                           activities. An RPF has been prepared for the parent
                                           project and will guide the preparation of any RAPs,
                                           should they be required.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No

Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                        Page 4 of 9
  Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
  BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
    and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The proposed project (AF) has triggered three safeguards policies, namely OP/BP 4.01
    (Environmental Assessment), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) and OP/BP 4.12
    (Involuntary Resettlement); however, as the proposed investment entails only rehabilitation of
    existing roads, no large scale or irreversible impacts are anticipated. The proposed investment is
    typical of Category B projects, just like its parent-project. The impacts of the proposed major
    restoration works are spread throughout the Limpopo flood plane in the Gaza province and are
    estimated to have low negative impacts and be site specific, both in the construction/rehabilitation
    phase and over the life of the roads’ and bridges’ operational phases, but these impacts can be
    reduced by the application of appropriate mitigation and support measures. Overall, these negative
    impacts are far outweighed by the positive social impacts of restoring the road network and
    facilitating easy and affordable movement for local communities and businesses.

    The environmental and social management measures proposed in the updated Environmental and
    Social Management Plan (ESMP) are generally straightforward. The majority of the measures
    relate directly to sound operating practices both during the construction/rehabilitation phase and
    subsequently over the operational life of the roads and bridges.

    There may be cases where encroachment on the wayleave requires compensation and resettlement,
    though this is to be confirmed.

    The proposed restoration works (reconstruction/rehabilitation) are not expected to require the
    physical resettlement of Project Affected Persons (PAPs), nor will it result in massive loss of
    crops, assets, or livelihoods. Though unlikely, there might be insignificant encroachment in
    portions of surrounding farmlands; the width of the existing right-of-way is sufficient enough (by
    law, 15 m on each side of the road) to allow the easy move of machineries during the construction/
    rehabilitation activities. To ensure timely and adequate compliance with OP/BP 4.12 core
    requirements, the Borrower has updated the 2006 RPF, and appropriate budget has been provided
    in the project to ensure that, if required, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), is prepared, consulted
    upon, and disclosed during the course of project implementation.
  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
    in the project area:
    No significant negative environmental or social impacts are expected to result as a consequence of
    the road works; rather, the medium and long term social and environmental impacts of the
    restoration works are positive, since the implementation of the project will result in the
    improvement of the living conditions of the population settled along the roads and the entire




                                               Page 5 of 9
  district in general, thus contributing to poverty reduction.

  Moreover, travel time to trading centers and basic socioeconomic services will be shortened, and
  there will be improved access to markets to sell agricultural products. The upgrading of the road
  will result in efficient traffic flow with savings in both time and cost, resulting in improved
  communication.

  Restored road works will increase/ease access to schools and colleges, as well as other basic social
  and economic services. Restoration of the road works will result in reduction in accidents along the
  road and minimize the use of unsafe off-road routes. Women play an important role in agriculture
  throughout the country. However, the lack of a functioning road network makes it harder for
  women to access markets for their products. This is anticipated to change tangibly with the
  rehabilitation of the road networks, allowing women to free more time that could be further
  devoted to improve the livelihood and conditions of households and, ultimately, the targeted
  communities.
  Despite the above benefits resulting from road rehabilitation, certain negative impacts that must be
  safeguarded both in the construction phase / rehabilitation, as well as the operation phase of the
  road.

  With the improvement of the road conditions, travel time can be reduced by increasing the traffic
  speeds potentially resulting in increased numbers of road accidents in neighboring communities,
  particularly in nearby schools, markets, community centers and hospitals.
  Thus, it becomes necessary to minimize the increase in the number of road accidents, not only
  through road signs, but also throughout community involvement through awareness raising
  campaigns on road safety.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Without the restoration of this vital transport network, the social impacts on the PAP will be
  immense, restricting their ability to undertake commercial and agricultural practices, as well as
  limiting access to schools, hospitals, commercial centers, police stations, government offices, and
  other institutions. In addition, the impassability of the roads is leading to increased mortality and
  morbidity due to increased road accidents, and the necessity to utilize off-road routes.

  There is therefore no alternative to the project that would fulfill the immediate need to provide
  access to transport networks to the local affected populations.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.




                                               Page 6 of 9
 Environmental and social management for all road works will be undertaken through the
 implementation of a consolidated Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will
 follow World Bank Operational Policies and guidelines, the ESMF/ESIA prepared for RBMMP1
 in 2006 and updated for the last AF in 2013, and the environmental and social management
 requirements delineated in the Environmental and Social Guidelines for Road Works in
 Mozambique, prepared for ANE in September 2006. This document contains the Environmental
 and Social Management requirements for road rehabilitation and periodic maintenance projects in
 Mozambique. The guidelines are also compliant with the requirements of the World Bank
 Operational Policy OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment).

  The consolidated ESMP covers all necessary steps to mitigate negative impacts. These include but
 are not restricted measures during construction to: a) mitigate risks of erosion and sedimentation
 around watercourses; b) restrict water and soil contamination on work sites and around work
 camps (including littering and waste disposal); c) restrict generation of dust during construction; d)
 reduce risk of fire, cutting of trees for firewood, and trapping by construction workers; e)
 implement HIV/AIDS awareness programs f) ensure sustainable water management at worksites
 and construction camps; g) ensure use of “chance find? procedures under OP/BP 4.11 (Physical
 Cultural Resources); and h) minimize risks of accidents and ensure occupational safety and
 security of workers on construction sites. The borrower, ANE, has successfully completed
 environmental and social safeguards implementation on both RBMMP 1 and 2, and has in-house
 staff that are well versed in Bank operational safeguards policies with proven experience on Bank
 financed operations. Provision has been made under this AF to further support the capacity
 building of the team on Safeguards.

 This AF3 will cover two basic types of civil works that will encompass two approaches to
 safeguards mitigation:

 1)    For the regular maintenance, implementation of the Environment and Social Clauses (ESC)
 contained in the ESMP will be systematically included as a requirement in each civil works
 contract. Additionally, supervision and reporting on the adequate implementation of the ESCs, and
 thus of the ESMP, will be required of the Resident Engineer contracted to supervise the works.

  2)     For the more complicated “build back better? works and the proposed climate resilient roads
  infrastructure (both of which will be undertaken on existing roads and will not involve new
  construction), the design contractor will also prepare a site specific Environmental and Social
  Impacts Assessment (ESIA) that would include an ESMP, based on the initial ESMF/ESMP, for
  implementation as the works are being carried out. Supervision and reporting on the
  implementation of the ESMPs will be required of the Resident Engineer contracted to supervise the
  works.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.




                                             Page 7 of 9
  Key stakeholders are the communities living along the road, in close vicinity to the road, as well as
  other potential road users. The former as well as some of the latter have been consulted about the
  proposed road works and are strongly vociferous in their wish that civil works commence as soon
  as possible, in order to resume normal life and restore their livelihoods. A grievance redress
  mechanism is detailed in the consolidated ESMP which will be/has been disclosed in country and
  in the InfoShop, prior to appraisal. The framework document (ESMF) was initially disclosed, in
  2006 last re-disclosed in 2013 at the time of the most recent AF for RBMMP2. Since the new AF
  brings no changes whatsoever and further negative impacts are not anticipated, therefore the latest
  ESIA/ESMP will remain viable and no further public re-disclosure will be necessary.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-Jan-2014
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                       09-Jan-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
 Mozambique                                                           06-Dec-2013
 Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
  Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
  report?
  If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
  Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
  Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
  in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
  Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
  World Bank's Infoshop?




                                             Page 8 of 9
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kulwinder Singh Rao

  Approved By
  Regional Safeguards      Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (                    Date: 12-Feb-2015
  Advisor:
  Practice Manager/        Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (PMGR)                Date: 12-Feb-2015
  Manager:




                                             Page 9 of 9
