                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                               CONCEPT STAGE

o
                  a                                                     Report No.: ISDSC1O47

3   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2015
    Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2015
    I. BASIC INFORMATION
      A. Basic Project Data

       Country:           Senegal                         Project ID:       P146469
       Project Name:      Senegal Growth and Export Development (P 146469)
       Task Team          Jean Michel Noel Marchat
       Leader(s):
       Estimated       10-Jun-2015                        Estimated         29-Oct-2015
       Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
       Managing Unit: GTCDR                               Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                          Instrument:
       Sector(s):         Other domestic and international trade (75%), SME Finance (25%)
       Theme(s):          Export development and competitiveness (40%), Trade facilitation and market
                          access (40%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%)
       Financing (In USD Million)
       Total Project Cost:          50.00               Total Bank Financing:          50.00
       Financing Gap:                0.00
U
          Financing Source                                                            Amount
          BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
          International Development Association (IDA)                                  50.00
.         Total                                                                        50.00
       Environmental      A - Full Assessment
       Category:
       Is this a          No
       Repeater
       project?

      B. Project Objectives
      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to develop exports and improve Senegal's investment
      climate.
      C. Project Description
      C. Project Description
      The proposed project would consist of three operational components:
    Component 1. Supporting export development.
    The objective of this component is to help SMEs increase and diversify exports. This should favor
O
    overall growth, increase forex earnings, and has a strong potential for job creation, a key concern of
    GoS.

    Sub-component 1.1: Business Plan Competition (BPC). The Project will finance the i) organization
    of a BPC aimed at assisting entrepreneurs in launching innovative new businesses with an export
    potential and ii) the one time equity grant provided to winners. Implementation would involve: (a)
    organizing an information campaign to raise awareness and invite proposals for new business ideas;
    (b) selecting the most promising business concepts; (c) providing them with support in the drafting of
    business plans and provision of required training in the areas of business planning and
    entrepreneurship; (d) selection of winners, (e) provision of seed capital (one time equity) to some of
    them; and (f) technical advice and mentoring to awardees to launch their business.

    The competition will be for Senegalese having viable new business ideas. The grant award ceremony
    would be held every year for 5 years. In order to strongly encourage women's participation, two
    editions may be exclusively for young women.

    Sub-component 1.2: Export Market Access Fund (EMAF). The proposed Senegalese Export Market
    Access Fund (EMAF) will be a matching grant fund. EMAF will help firms define and implement a
    strategy of access to export market. The grant would cover - on a temporary basis - a portion of costs
    related to business development services required to enable enterprises to enter export markets. This
    component will help Senegalese firms boost growth, employment and income through new export
    initiatives, and the diversification of markets and products. All firms exporting goods and services,
    indirectly or directly, can participate in the program. EMAF will specifically provide non-
    reimbursable co-financing of (i) 50 percent for 70 individual firms and (iii) 10 professional
    associations. It would draw lessons from past experiences and also have some key design element to
    ensure success (a public-private partnership for a demand driven scheme (first come first served
    basis), a sharing of costs and risks, the provision of TA to firms when needed, the financial autonomy
    of the fund and the responsiveness of a team). The grant would also finance EMAF management,
    acquisition of equipment and technical support in the preparation of export plans, sponsorship of
    implementation workshops and training seminars, monitoring and impact evaluation, and specific
    training programs.

    Component 2: Improve tourism development.
    The objective of this component is to support tourism which is an export sector that can help boost
    overall growth, increase forex earnings, and has a strong potential for job creation that could
    especially benefit less skilled workers.

    Sub-Component 2.1: Market and Product Development. To reduce the effects of seasonality on
    tourism and maximize receipts per visitor, this subcomponent would support product diversification
    and effective promotion of the Senegal Destination.

    The project would support the following activities:

            Support the development of Integrated Destination Development Plans in selected regions
    (Saly, Delta du Saloum, Tambacounda Kedougou-Niokolo Koba, Casamance, St Louis) to unveil the
    tourism potential of each region, with specific measureable targets that maximize economic, social
    and cultural benefits for visitors and residents and minimize negative impacts;
             Provide technical assistance to review the master plans and related investor incentives to
    make sure they enhance sites value, address sustainability issues, are attractive for investors
O
    interested in quality accommodations and services, and incorporate local communities in the tourism
    product.
             Technical assistance to stimulate internal air traffic and support to organize a yearly national
    transportation and tourism forum focused on expanding internal air, road and maritime access to
    tourist destinations.

    The project would also support the promotion of the Senegal Destination through:

    *        The development and implementation of national, site-specific and segment specific
    marketing strategies including an increased effort on social media marketing;
    *        Assistance for investor missions and the development of a Senegal tourism web portal to
    showcase Senegal;
    *        Organization of a large market show and a road show to attract investors once master plans
    and investor packages are revised;
    *        Assistance to the Ministry of Tourism to finalize a hotel quality classification system,
    establish tourist services and proper information centers in tourist sites, town halls and other logical
    locations for visitors;
    *        Assistance for regional cooperation in tourism marketing.

    Sub-component 2.2: Redevelopment of Saly tourism area. The proposed sub-component would help
    counter current erosion and restore the attractiveness of the site of Saly through renovation of
    beaches and rehabilitation/construction of related erosion mitigation infrastructures. The sub-
    component would also support designing and implementing an operation and maintenance system for
    beaches protection investments as well as strengthening the integrated coastal management
    mechanism.

    Beach restoration options: At Saly, the shoreline (7.5 km) is currently in strong recession, a situation
    which is threatening the hotel activities and infrastructures, the second homes and the village of Saly.
    Coastal erosion speed is very high in the region (about 6 m/year in the most exposed areas). By 2080,
    with just the forecast sea level rise, 60% of the current beaches could disappear. Concurrently, this
    tourist site has seen a very strong urban evolution, which is likely to continue in density (+15% of
    artificialized surfaces at the 2080 horizon) . Such an evolution has become a critical issue since the
    development of the tourist resort in the 1980s led to a strong increase in land occupation, especially
    along the shore. Today, several groin-type structures and longitudinal works made of riprap or
    gabions have been built mainly by the innkeepers for emergency protection most of the time without
    prior suitable technical studies. These small works have contributed to aggravate the erosion
    phenomenon in some part of the shoreline due to the perturbation of the sea dynamic and non-
    adoption of mitigation measures.

    To help addressing the threat to Saly, a WB study in 2013 has pre-identified a range of restoration
    and protection options combining sand recharging, groins or breakwaters. The preparation studies
    would help selecting the optimal option to be supported under the proposed project. Operation and
    maintenance system (1% of investment cost estimated by the WB study) will be also defined and
    made operational.
             Beach Maintenance and recharging option: (i) Massive sand recharging on needed littoral
    areas; (ii) Reprofiling of recharged beaches; or (iii) Rehabilitation of existing infrastructures;
               Protection by heavy-weight maritime infrastructures option: (i) solution 1 (Construction of
      groins in needed sectors or recharging between lockers); (ii) solution 2 (Rehabilitation of existing
      submerged breakwaters or recharging between lockers); (iii) solution 3 (Construction of new
      breakwaters or recharging between lockers);
O
               Creation of artificial beaches adaptation measures option: (i) Breakwater Toe; (ii) Lateral
      groins; (iii) Backfiling.

      The final chosen option will give priority to combined technical measures with non-incidental
      negative effects beyond the protected areas as well as to simplified protection systems for an easy
      operation and maintenance. Detailed studies to be conducted during the project preparation phase,
      including the environmental and social assessment will provide all the needed elements to select the
      appropriate solution(s)/options.

      Component 3: Improving the business environment.
      Senegal's business environment has well known limitations, as reported by older Investment Climate
      Assessments (2005, 2009) and yearly publications such as Doing business or the Global
      Competitiveness Report. The GoS, within the framework of the "Plan Senegal Emergent", is trying
      to address these. The project would help this agenda by supporting efforts to improve business
      services to firms and administrative support they receive. Specifically, the project would finance the
      development of single windows in regions (on the model of the Dakar one) to allow for easier firm
      start up and better administrative services to exporters.
      D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
      analysis (if known)
      Saly- Portudal and related seafront beaches

      E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
      Work should be led by APIX which is highly experienced in infrastructure works and with world
      bank procedures.
      F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
      Yacouba Konate (GSURR)

    II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
      Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
      Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project is classified A because of the coastal
      OP/BP 4.01                                      shoreline protection infrastructures to finance under
                                                      component 2.2. Disregarding the protection option
                                                      that will be approved, the project will induce
                                                      exacerbation of erosion, in areas beyond the western
                                                      point of the 7.5 km to protect. In theory, rocky
                                                      infrastructure may be of positive impact on some
                                                      marine species that are subservient to such habitat;
                                                      however, it would be important to know better about
                                                      any disturbance such construction could introduce to
                                                      existing niches in the project zone. The
                                                      environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA)
                                                      to prepare will, among other, indicate the best option
                                         of protection and the mitigation measures associated
                                         to its potential negative impacts. This ESIA, and a
                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), will be
o
                                         prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-country
                                         and at the Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal.
    Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes   The nearby sea is a natural habitat as of the definition
                                         under this policy. The description of the receiving
                                         environment will provide details on the marine
                                         environment focusing on species that could be at
                                         threat because of the project, and provide appropriate
                                         mitigation measures through the environmental and
                                         social management plan (ESMP).
    Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The project will not finance activities related to
                                         forest exploitation, harvesting, direct or indirect
                                         forest degradation, and increase access to forest.
    Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The project will not finance acquisition transport,
                                         distribution, storage or use of pesticides or similar
                                         chemicals that could threaten environmental and
                                         human health.
    Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   This policy is triggered because of the nature of civil
    OP/BP 4.11                           works that will be financed under component 2.2. To
                                         prevent involuntary destruction of cultural wealth
                                         during exploitation of quarry and sand pits, a chance
                                         find procedure will be detailed as part of the ESMP
                                         and slotted in inserted in enterprise contracts.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    There are no indigenous people in the project area.
    4.10
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The project is not expected to induce temporary
    BP 4.12                              displacement of socio-economic activities, physical
                                         displacement of human settlement or loss of
                                         productive land. However, due to potential erosion
                                         shifting to another areas of the coastal zone that are
                                         likely hosting properties or activities, the Borrower
                                         will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                         that will be disclosed prior to appraisal as a free-
                                         standing document along with the ESIA. This
                                         instrument, in such a context, should focus also on
                                         communication and sensitization about risks
                                         associated to settling-in, in the specific threatened
                                         band of the coastal zone.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    The project will not finance dam works or activities
                                         associated to existing dam.
    Projects on International      No    The project will not finance activities that will
    Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 interfere with international watercourses; either in
                                         terms of water withdraw or discharge of pollutants.
          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                       The project intervention areas are not under dispute.
          BP 7.60

    III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
         A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-May-2015
O
         B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
            The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
              N/A

    IV. APPROVALS
          Task Team Leader(s):                            Name: Jean Michel Noel Marchat


         Approved By:
          Regional Safeguards                             Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                  Date: 17-Feb-2015
          Coordinator:
          Practice Manager/                               Name: John F. Speakman (PMGR)                                                                      Date: 19-Feb-2015
          Manager:




    Reminder. The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoSihop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
    form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
