                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1148

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of         Project ID:        P153487
                            Project Name:      Equal Access and Simplified Environment for Investment (EASE) in Egypt
                                               (P153487)
                            Task Team          Sherif Bahig Hamdy,Nabila Assaf
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       09-Mar-2015                        Estimated          08-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTCDR                               Lending            Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Industry and trade (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Regulation and competition policy (40%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                                               support (40%), Managing for development results (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      6.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              MENA Transition Fund - IBRD as Implementing Agency                            6.00
                              Total                                                                         6.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To improve the efficiency, accessibility, and transparency of key investment services by reforming
                           industrial licensing and land allocation processes, and enhancing the capabilities of one-stop shops
                           through which investor services are provided while supporting the Government’s efforts in building a
                           regulatory management system.
                         The higher level objective to which this project contributes is to increase private investment rates and
                         job creation, particularly among SMEs, and improve productivity growth through increased
                         competition and a leveled playing field.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The project seeks to transform industrial licensing and land allocation processes from two of the
                         greatest impediments to investment in Egypt into streamlined and transparent processes. The project
                         aims to provide technical assistance and systems to transform Industrial Development Authority
                         (IDA) licensing and land allocation processes and support the deployment of those reforms in the
                         General Authority for Investment and Free Zones (GAFI) One Stop Shops (OSSs) by providing
                         technical assistance, systems and capacity building. The project will also provide technical assistance
                         and capacity building to the Egyptian Regulatory Reform and Development Activity (ERRADA)
                         program to reinforce ERRADA as the mechanism for catalyzing these and future reforms.

                         Component 1: Capacity building for managing regulatory reform (ERRADA)

                         The Project aims for building the capacity of the GoE regulatory reform program (ERRADA) by
                         providing the necessary support to enable the performance of its mandate to manage business
                         environment regulatory reform. The project will focus on supporting ERRADA around a set of
                         horizontal (cross-cutting) reforms in the sense that they target constraints affecting firms in all
                         sectors of the economy such as the transparency and predictability of the regulatory environment as
                         well as vertical targeted priority areas of reform of industrial licensing and land allocation.

                         Within the horizontal reforms, the project will support ERRADA in:
                         •        completing a comprehensive inventory of business related formalities/administrative
                         procedures;
                         •        process mapping and re-engineering of the most relevant/frequent formalities/administrative
                         procedures with the objective of streamlining and simplifying them;
                         •        establishing an informational portal of business related administrative procedures rendering
Public Disclosure Copy




                         all information related to the requirements of these procedures accessible to the general public in a
                         simple and comprehensive manner;
                         •        putting in place a public consultation and review mechanism to secure that all business
                         related legislative proposals are properly reviewed and consulted with the stakeholders, including the
                         private sector.

                         Component 2: Supporting Industrial Sector transformational reforms (IDA)

                         The Project aims to support IDA focus on its strategic roles of regulation and development and
                         transform its approach to implement risk based regulation principles. The project seeks to implement
                         the recommendations of IDA’s Strategic Assessment Paper of 2008 , specifically:

                         1.       Eliminate technical evaluations and inspections as a precondition for industrial registration
                         and perform inspections/evaluations on risk-assessment basis utilizing professional, accredited
                         private practitioners,
                         2.       Return the policy objective of industrial registration from a licensing function to its original
                         purpose as a data collection function, and hence delink import/export and other permits from the
                         industrial register,
                         3.       Adopt primarily a wholesale industrial land allocation rather than the focus on the “retail”
                         land allocation by setting and administering policies and procedures for industrial land allocation and
                         introducing best practice contracting instruments with private developers,
                         4.      Support IDA’s technical capacity building at the governorates’ level to enable
                         decentralization of regulatory decision making to be deployed through existing OSSs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Facilitating accessible and transparent regulatory services (GAFI)

                         The Project aims to support GAFI become the national platform for business entry, licensing, and
                         access to investor information at the sub-national level through its One Stop Shops and GAFI
                         Information Portal. This will be done by:

                         1.       To streamline the business entry and licensing process for investors:
                         a.       Developing systems to enable hosting of licensing services both at the central agency and in
                         the One-Stop-Shops.
                         b.       Decentralizing IDA licensing services through GAFI OSSs. This would entail addressing
                         GAFI’s processes and interfaces with all the involved regulators including primarily IDA, but also
                         other line ministries and local authorities involved in licensing.
                         c.       Capacity building and technical assistance to enable and support GAFI in this enhanced
                         client-facing role.

                         2.      To enhance access to quality information, transparency and connectivity:
                         a.      Consolidating information on access to land through showcasing all land available for
                         investment under the jurisdiction of the Industrial Development Authority (IDA), on GAFI’s website.
                         Information would include areas available, terms and location.
                         b.      Further e-integration of the OSS network, including e-archiving and electronic connectivity
                         between OSS branches and agencies such as IDA to enhance quality of service provided by OSS.
                         c.      Developing GAFI’s capabilities for the tracking, collection, analysis, and publication of
                         quality private sector data and information to better inform policy makers, the private sector, and
                         potential investors (both foreign and domestic).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The aim of the project is to reform key investment processes and services, as well as enhance the
                         Government of Egypt’s capabilities to implement these services, which would be achieved primarily
                         through analytical and advisory services. The project will be implemented both in Cairo and
                         throughout Egypt, particularly since Component 3 will involve TA to the GAFI One Stop Shops
                         which are located in governorates outside Cairo. World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered as a
                         result of proposed activities under the components. The project will not include the construction of
                         physical infrastructure or civil works. Increased business activity that may indirectly result from the
                         project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts as beneficiaries are expected to largely
                         be SMEs in less capital intensive sectors.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         It is anticipated that the project will be implemented by both the Ministry of Investment (MoI) and
                         the Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Small Industries (MISTME) with support from the World Bank.
                         MISTME will be primarily responsible for the implementation of Components 1 and 2, while MoI
                         will be responsible for the implementation of Component 3. This project will be Category C as it is
                         comprised mainly of AAA and TA aiming to improve investment related services in Egypt. None of
                         the Bank safeguards policies will be triggered, however, the program will be contributing to
                         streamlining of the land allocation process and introducing transparent procedures for handling land
                               issues. This kind of reform will contribute positively to the future investment practices and
                               environment in the country While both Ministries have some experience implementing Bank
                               projects, technical assistance and capacity building will likely be required to strengthen the
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Ministries’ capacity in implementing the project.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (GSURR)
                               Banu Setlur (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment                                    No
                                 OP/BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No
                                 OP/BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No
                                 BP 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      As required, this section will be updated at the time of PAD-Stage ISDS.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sherif Bahig Hamdy,Nabila Assaf

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards                             Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                                                             Date: 30-Jan-2015
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Najy Benhassine (PMGR)   Date: 30-Jan-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
