                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC2689

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Malawi                         Project ID:      P131660
                            Project Name:      Higher Education and Skills Development Project (P131660)
                            Task Team          Muna Salih Meky
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Jan-2014                    Estimated        24-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEE                          Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (80%), Vocational training (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (60%), Education for the knowledge economy (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         50.00               Total Bank Financing:       50.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
                              Total                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives


                           C. Project Description
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to enhance access to and expand market-
                           relevant training in Higher Education and TEVET.

                           Component 1: Increased Access to and Enhanced Market-Relevance Training in Higher Education
                         The objective of this component is to support the reforms outlined in the NESP under two
                         subcomponents. Subcomponent 1.1 is the performance-based component part of the Credit and will
                         disburse against the achievement of agreed upon Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1.2 will strengthen capacities in the Government for compliance with DLIs.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Compact for Expanding Access and Market Relevant Training in Higher
                         Education

                         The main instrument for implementing this subcomponent will be compacts between the NCHE and
                         selected public higher education institution: Mzuzu University, Malawi Polytechnic and Chancellor
                         College (both constituent colleges of the University of Malawi), and the Lilongwe University of
                         Agriculture and Natural Resources. The compacts will help clarify each institution’s distinctive
                         mission, the scope and focus of its educational provision, expectations of its performance, and the
                         labour market areas for which each institution prepares graduates. Compacts will include a set of
                         initiatives in line with the institutions mission and comparative advantage in the areas indicated in
                         the PDO. Draft initiatives will be negotiated as part of the project preparation. Initiatives considered
                         include (i) expansion of e-learning modules and basic infrastructure to enhance access; (ii)
                         development of relevant curriculum reform, introduction of research and entrepreneurship grants
                         programs, faculty development programs, and technicians training programs to enhance quality and
                         relevance; and (iii) improved quality assurance and fiduciary systems for institutional strengthening.
                         This component will also support strengthening the student financing system.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional Development for Enhanced Access and Expanded Market Relevant
                         Training in Higher Education

                         This subcomponent will finance the design and implementation of institutional strengthening
                         programs linked to subcomponent 1.1. This includes capacity building and technical assistance to
                         Universities, NCHE and MoEST in areas of fiduciary reforms and Monitor and Evaluation; and (ii)
                         technical assistance to facilitate the implementation of initiatives in subcomponent 1.1.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Increased Access and Enhanced Market-Relevant Training in TEVET

                         The objective of this component is to enhance access to skills training and broaden the skills base in
                         selected priority sectors through expanding TEVET to labor market entrants with special emphasis
                         on the needs of presently underserved communities in rural areas and strengthening the governance
                         and management of TEVET. The proposed challenge fund in rural areas will not only support
                         enhancing access to skills development for underserved communities but also build-up a national
                         stock of programs, curricula, training methodologies and materials for non-formal training as well as
                         developed best practice targeting for informal sector training.. There are currently several
                         Development partners (AfDB, CIDA, and UNESCO) addressing issues of access and quality in
                         formal TEVET programs through ongoing infrastructure and teacher training interventions
                         supported, thus this subcomponent will limit its support to formal TEVET to institutional
                         strengthening interventions. The institutional strengthening, policy and systems development this
                         component will complement their contributing to the creation of effective and efficient demand-
                         oriented governance and management structure of the Malawian TEVET system.

                         Subcomponent 2.1 : Challenge Fund For Increased Access and Enhanced Market-Relevant Training
                         in TEVET
                         This subcomponent will finance (i) the development and implementation of a competitive grant
                         funding facility (“challenge fund”) for the expansion of relevant skills development in the national
                         priority sectors agriculture/agro-processing, construction and mining, with a strong focus on lower
                         level artisan training and target groups in the rural areas through non/informal training– accessible to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         both public and private TEVET institutions upon competitive bidding; and (ii) evaluating the
                         effectiveness of this intervention to improve employment outcomes for youth in rural communities.

                         The development and implementation of new TEVET non/informal training programs in the priority
                         sectors will be supported through a challenge fund, whereby institutions compete for grant funding
                         on the basis of project proposals. Clustered in different funding windows, this challenge fund will
                         provide financial support to projects implemented and managed by the training providers themselves
                         for activities including expansion of existing facilities (rehabilitation of classrooms, building/
                         construction of new classrooms/training centers, etc.), teacher training, tuition fees for students. The
                         fund will be built on the extensive experience with other recent challenge funds in the education and
                         training sector to facilitate tailored approaches to skills development, which is important to cater for
                         specific target groups and target labour markets. Through the competitive access to funding, based on
                         sound project proposals, the fund will also be instrumental in improving institutional capacities in the
                         TEVET sector and facilitate the development of institutional development plans.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 Institutional Development for Increased Access and Enhanced Market-Relevant
                         Training in TEVET

                         This subcomponent will finance institutional development for TEVET. This includes (i) capacity
                         building in TEVET A and Ministry of Labour for policy development, strategic planning, and
                         financing; (ii) review of apprenticeship system; and (iii) design and implementation of a harmonized
                         assessment/certification system including the development of a roadmap and funding of capacity
                         building measures.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         HESD will cover public universities and private TEVETA accredited private colleges across the
                         country in 28 districts of Malawi. All foreseen infrastructures are expected to be rehabilitated/built
                         on already existing premises. The specific locations, sizes of pieces of lands needed for such
                         expansion/civil works, the scope of construction/ rehabilitation works of classrooms at both public
                         university and colleges and private colleges are not known at this stage. Some of the information on
                         the above aspects will be gathered throughout the project preparation phases.

                         The rehabilitation and/or construction works will be done at existing public university colleges and
                         TEVETA accredited colleges. Some of these institutions are located in areas with high population
                         densities which have implications for involuntary resettlement as more land would be required for
                         expansion of the existing facilities since some of these institutions still unfenced are located in areas
                         with high densities. Other adverse environmental and social impacts would include air, land and
                         water pollution, noise pollution, disruption of normal life pattern, natural vegetation clearing which
                         could lead to soil erosion, generation of solid waste from construction materials and activities, etc.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Government of Malawi has a Ministry of Climate Change and Environment which, through its
                         Environmental Affairs Department, is responsible for coordination of environmental planning, policy
                         implementation, management of environmental considerations, including environmental assessment
                         work in development programs, while the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
                           coordinates resettlement planning.

                           Staffing levels within Environmental Affairs Department and Department of Lands and Valuation are
Public Disclosure Copy




                           satisfactory. At District level capacity has improved as key technical staff (for implementation of
                           safeguards) includes Environmental District Officer, District Environmental Inspectors and District
                           Lands Officers who have been trained in environmental management issues. Also, at district level,
                           there is a District Environmental Sub Committee (DESCO) which coordinates natural resources
                           management including environmental and social safeguards.

                           DESCO will have an active role in the implementation and monitoring of environmental and social
                           safeguards at local level. Recently, government has recruited Environmental Inspectors to strengthen
                           the environmental inspectorate and advisory management services in all parts of the country. These
                           Environmental Inspectors will play active role in further mainstreaming environmental and social
                           consideration of project activities under HESD. Additional technical capacity will be provided by the
                           project to further strengthen the technical safeguards capacity of all key stakeholders.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (AFTCS)
                           Lungiswa Thandiwe Gxaba (AFTTR)
                           Hastings Solomon Mumba (AFTA3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes            The project is classified as Environmental and
                           BP 4.01                                             Social Assessment (ESA) Category B - Partial
                                                                               Assessment as it is expected to generate
                                                                               moderate and site-specific adverse impacts
                                                                               during the construction of new classrooms and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               rehabilitation of existing structures. Negative
                                                                               environmental impacts may include natural
                                                                               vegetation clearing which may result in soil
                                                                               erosion, noise pollution, dust emissions,
                                                                               accumulation of solid wastes, water pollution,
                                                                               and disruption of social patterns, etc.

                                                                               Since the actual sites locations for the
                                                                               construction and tertiary institution will not be
                                                                               known by project appraisal, the borrower will
                                                                               prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) which will
                                                                               provide a uniform approach for addressing all
                                                                               potential social and environmental impacts in all
                                                                               sub-projects. The ESMF built upon that of the
                                                                               former education project will also establish
                                                                               clear procedures and methodologies for social
                                                                               and environmental assessment, review, approval
                                                                               and implementation of sub-projects to be
                                                                 financed under the HESDP, namely
                                                                 environmental and social screening form
                                                                 (ESSF) and environmental and social check-list,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 (ESCL),specify appropriate environmental and
                                                                 social clauses to be included in contractors’
                                                                 contracts, as well as roles and responsibilities,
                                                                 and outline the necessary reporting procedures,
                                                                 for managing and monitoring environmental and
                                                                 social concerns related to the project.

                                                                 The ESMF will be both in-country and at the
                                                                 Bank’s InfoShop prior to project appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    Project activities will not affect Natural Habitats
                                                                 since the project will be implemented within the
                                                                 known footprint of existing tertiary institutions.
                                                                 New land acquisitions for expansion will not be
                                                                 in close proximity to natural and/or critical
                                                                 habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Project activities will not affect forests or
                                                                 plantations. All sub-project sites will not
                                                                 acquire land in the vicinity of forests and
                                                                 plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project activities will not support or fund
                                                                 procurement of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project activities will not be located on or in
                         BP 4.11                                 proximity to known physical cultural resources
                                                                 (PCR) such as cultural artifacts, graves, shrines,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 or any other PCR. In case opportunistic PCR
                                                                 are discovered during civil works, “Chance
                                                                 finds procedures”, incorporated into the ESMF
                                                                 will guide the project team in preservation of
                                                                 these resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    As per World Bank’s definition, there are no
                                                                 legally defined Indigenous Peoples and areas of
                                                                 indigenous people in Malawi. This policy will
                                                                 therefore not be triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The construction of new satellite centres within
                         4.12                                    the country would require additional land
                                                                 acquisitions. The acquisition of land may
                                                                 generate social and economic losses; affect
                                                                 access to land or assets to some people.

                                                                 The borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                                 Framework (RPF) –which outlines a guideline
                                                                 for standards to be followed addressing
                                                                                                                                 incidences of land acquisitions and
                                                                                                                                 compensations whenever such cases occur.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not involve construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not be located on, or impact on
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            any international waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not be located on land in in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Dec-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Preparation of Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement
                                      Policy Framework (RPF) was completed in December 2013
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Muna Salih Meky

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Svetlana Khvostova (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 26-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Barbara Weber (SM)                                                                                                   Date: 27-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
