INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 176
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Ukraine                    Project ID:   P151701
Project Name:    Community Social Support Project (P151701)
Task Team        Yuliya Smolyar,Klavdiya Maksymenko
Leader(s):
Estimated        26-Oct-2015                Estimated     24-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other social services (50%), Sub-national government administration (25%),
Public administration- Other social services (25%)
Theme(s):        Social Inclusion (30%), Other social protection and risk management (30%),
Decentralization (20%), Participation and civic engagemen t (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       0.00             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
o         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development             0.00
Total                                                             0.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve living conditions and services in
targeted communities and to enhance capacity of local governments to manage local development
needs in a participatory and accountable manner.
C. Project Description


﻿The PDO would be achieved through: (i) investments in infrastructure and basic services micro-
projects identified by community members as their development priorities (including inter-
community micro-projects that would support agglomeration or 'right-sizing' of very small
communities into more sustainable structures); (ii) investments in the provision of social care to
vulnerable groups in communities; (iii) improvements in local governments' capacity to manage
community development through participatory methods and to carry out social needs assessments to
identify better and cover vulnerable populations with social care services. A consistent use of citizen
engagement mechanisms in local governments practices would be a cross-cutting approach in
project activities.
The proposed project has three components:
Component 1. Community development support (indicative loan amount US$180 million). This
component would support community-prioritized infrastructure and service delivery initiatives
(micro-projects).
Component 2. Capacity building, monitoring and knowledge transfer (US$15 million). This
component would finance technical assistance and other services, training, events, and goods that
would be necessary to ensure successful implementation and sustainable outcomes of community
micro-projects.
Component 3. Social policy development (US$5 million). The component (technical assistance)
would aim to strengthen national policies that underpin activities implemented at the local level and
to refine them based on the evidence collected from the ground.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project would build upon a previous Social Investment Fund project, and would
support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of existing municipal/social infrastructure, facilities and
social services in target communities. Various selection criteria, targeting different types of social
needs and vulnerabilities, will be used to identify the target communities. The project would cover
the entire country, including conflict-affected areas in the east that are now in Government control,
where there has been substantial destruction of infrastructure. Micro-projects to be financed would
be identified by community members through a participatory process. Tentatively, the maximum
grant for micro-projects is expected to be about $150,000.
In the eastern region, in areas where there are large numbers of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)
and little prospect of their returning to their homes in the foreseeable future, there is the potential for
exacerbating social tensions. The aim of the project is for the availability of these resources to
decrease rather than increase tensions that exist, particularly between resident and IDP groups. It will
therefore ensure a very inclusive, equitable and transparent process for sub-project selection and
implementation.
The recently completed Recovery and Peace-building Assessment provides an understanding of the
socio-political context, which will be reflected in detailed guidance for the subproject selection
process in the project Operational Manual. Also, the project will support capacity-building on the
participatory process for local governments and actors prior to starting the process of sub-project
selection.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Components 1 and 2 would be implemented by the Ukrainian Social Investment Fund (USIF). USIF


﻿is an autonomous public nonprofit institution created by the Government Resolution in 2000. The
Fund has extensive experience in implementation of community participation projects. In 2002-2008,
USIF implemented the World Bank loan of USD50 million that supported rehabilitation of small
scale community infrastructure in over 600 communities throughout Ukraine. According to the ICR,
)       this "project was in general compliance with agreed environmental requirements during project
implementation". On-site verification by the Bank confirmed satisfactory compliance with
environmental safeguards. Since then USIF has carried out similar activities for German government
and EU (both via KfW), for the total amount of about Euro 25 million. That has brought the overall
count to above 1,000 community micro-projects. Recently, the USIF has been engaged to implement
civil works under the Bank-funded Social Safety Net Modernization (SSNM) project but the works
have not started yet.
The Ministry of Social Policy (MSP) would implement the Component 3. The Ministry also has
experience with Bank-funded projects. It is currently implementing a SSNM project whose activities
are related to the proposed project in terms of improving social care services policy and delivery
models.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         OP 4.01 is triggered. The project is Environmental
OP/BP 4.01                              Category B ("low B"). The environmental issues are
expected to be the standard issues associated with
small scale infrastructure rehabilitation and
reconstruction. Because the specific investments will
be identified by target communities during project
implementation, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared
for the project and disclosed prior to Appraisal for
public consultations, and EMPs will be prepared for
sub-projects as needed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
Pest Management OP 4.09    No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         OP 4.12 is not triggered, as any sub-projects
BP 4.12                                 requiring land acquisition will be excluded from
financing. This will be clearly defined in the POM.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Environmental and Social management Framework (ESMF) will pin down the social risks
and the social assessment that has been undertaken to assess the potential for conflicts and other
social risks, and will recommend measures to minimize them. The methodology and the measures
of the risk mitigation and social cohesion promotion activities will be described in the POM. The
ESMF will be prepared by the Borrower during project preparation.
Before appraisal the ESMF will be disclosed on the web-site of the implementing agency (USIF).
It will also be disclosed through the web-sites of respective local administrations once the project
locations have been identified. The hard copy will be available in the office of the implementing
agency and in the administrations. The consultations on ESMF will be held in Kiev with
participation of the wide range of CSOs and other interested stakeholders.
As project implementation starts, the information meeting and the consultations will be held in
every participating rayon. The rayon level consultations will be facilitated by USIF that will also
be responsible for taking up all the queries resulting from them.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yuliya Smolyar,Klavdiya Maksymenko
a
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                       Date: 18-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Andrew D. Mason (PMGR)                    Date: 22-Feb-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


