                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1049

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Gabon                            Project ID:      P151077
                            Project Name:      Infrastructure and Local Development Program II (P151077)
                            Task Team          Mahine Diop,Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          23-Mar-2015                      Estimated        28-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General public administration sector (20%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                               protection sector (35%), Other social services (6%), Other industry (5%), Urban
                                               Transport (34%)
                            Theme(s):          Urban services and housing for the poor (60%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                               Enterprise support (10%), Participation and civic engagement (10%), Municipal
                                               governance and institution building (20%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                     Total Bank Financing:        100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Total                                                                        100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to provide access to services for the population living in
                           targeted low-income settlements and strengthen municipalities’ capacity to maintain these services.
                           C. Project Description
                         This is a follow-up operation to the Infrastructure and Local Development Project I (ILDP1). It is
                         expected that the proposed project will be able to: (i) build on the achievements of the original
                         project, particularly in terms of implementation of basic infrastructure, job creation and capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         building to SME/SMI; and (ii) address the problems of capacity-building for municipalities to enable
                         them to better perform their roles in urban development. The participatory approach initiated under
                         ILDP1, which helped improve transparency of urban investments and promote better lines of
                         accountability between municipalities and local populations, will be maintained and reinforced in the
                         proposed project. This participatory approach was based on the community involvement in project
                         identification, preparation, and monitoring of works.

                         Project Components

                         Component 1 (US$80 million): Urban infrastructure and services in disadvantaged neighborhoods in
                         the targeted municipalities. The objective of this component is to increase access to improved
                         services in underserved neighborhoods. The investments will improve urban mobility, drainage,
                         sanitation, water, electricity and health and education facilities in specific low-income
                         neighborhoods, while also improving land erosion control, markets and collective facilities for the
                         broader population. This component will have three sub-components:
                         (i) Implementation of a Priority Investment Program to allow for the completion of some unfinished
                         works and already identified works in the targeted neighborhoods under ILDP1.
                         (ii) Infrastructure and service improvements.
                         (iii) Preparation of Strategic Development Plans for additional works in the neighborhoods.

                         The output of the above Strategic Development Plans will inform the investments under the two first
                         sub-components, and will include: (i) key priority infrastructure investment plans using the same
                         successful participatory approaches developed during the previous project; (ii) capacity development
                         plans; and (iii) institutional development plans. The development of key priority infrastructure plans
                         will include extensive consultation with local authorities, civil society organizations, and beneficiary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities. The consultative and participatory mechanisms inherited from the previous project will
                         help ensure that financed activities are phased in and are of benefit to the entire community. The
                         concerns of youth, women, and vulnerable/marginalized groups will be fully integrated by involving
                         these groups in both the planning process and in key decision-making processes. Social and gender
                         equity issues will also be addressed in the provision of basic social and economic infrastructure. The
                         project will continue to encourage equal benefits to women, in particular through their participation
                         in public works programs.

                         The infrastructure that the project will finance is demand-driven and includes roads, markets, water
                         supply and sanitation sub-projects, municipal halls, schools, health and social centers, erosion control
                         and environmental works. There will be limited trunk infrastructure investments, which will only be
                         approved if they respond to the following eligibility criteria. To be eligible, all investment sub-
                         projects must: (i) respond to the demand of the beneficiary communities; (ii) be appropriate for the
                         financial capacity of the city (the city should be able to maintain and manage these investments and/
                         or take necessary measures to improve maintenance capacity); (iii) favor the rehabilitation or
                         upgrading of existing infrastructure over new investments; (iv) be socially and economically justified
                         or cost effective; (v) be designed to reflect the most appropriate and beneficial solution for the
                         poorest households and avoid resettlement as much as possible, including through favoring in-situ
                         upgrading; and (vi) avoid any negative impact or, at a minimum, adopt corrective measures to limit
                         or compensate this impact.
                         The environmental and social management under the project will draw on experience gained under
                         the previous operation. To further enhance the environmental and social sustainability of future
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure investments, Component 1 will finance the planting of indigenous tree species on
                         subproject sites where appropriate and areas prone to erosion.

                         Component 2 (US$15 million): Institutional support and capacity-building for project stakeholders.
                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of municipalities for planning,
                         programming, managing basic services, infrastructure and maintenance, and environmental and
                         social protection measures, and collecting municipal revenues. These objectives will be supported by
                         improving systems and capacity to collect taxes through the updating of the municipal tax base,
                         improved revenue collection capacity, and capacity-building for the administrative and financial
                         management of municipalities and municipal agencies responsible for provision of the services.
                         Organizational and financial audits of the participating municipalities will take place during project
                         preparation. Those audits will help identify the areas of capacity building needed in the participating
                         municipalities as well as the performance contracts to be agreed between the participating
                         municipalities and the Ministry. This component will have four sub-components: (i) capacity
                         building support for the participating municipalities in financial management, revenue collection,
                         procurement and urban planning; (ii) capacity building and efforts to involve other project
                         stakeholders in the targeted municipalities (including community organizations, NGOs) to improve
                         local governance; (iii) capacity building support for central government entities involved in urban
                         management in terms of training, technical assistance and limited contribution to equipment and
                         goods, etc.; and (iv) training and capacity building support for the private sector, primarily for SMEs
                         involved in project implementation.

                         Furthermore, the project includes a budget for: (i) environmental training and awareness raising for
                         local authorities, consulting firms, small and medium enterprises, NGOs, and relevant ministry staff
                         with a focus on the implementation of the ESMF and national environmental issues; (ii) training in
                         the management, monitoring and maintenance of infrastructure subprojects for municipal staff and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         neighborhood organizations; (iii) training for the environmental specialist within the CN-TIPPEE
                         with a focus on environmental audit and appraisal; (iv) environmental and impact assessments for
                         future subprojects, as well as environmental and social audits of subprojects under implementation
                         for one year; and (v) environmental and social monitoring in the field to ensure that the provisions of
                         the ESMF have been implemented appropriately. To further enhance the environmental and social
                         sustainability of future infrastructure investments, this component will finance the planting of
                         indigenous trees where appropriate on subproject sites and areas prone to erosion.

                         Component 3 (US$5 million): Management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation. This
                         component will finance project management costs, audits, monitoring and evaluation of project
                         activities, training and the costs of oversight of environmental protection activities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the six cities targeted by the ILDP1 - Libreville, Port-Gentil,
                         Franceville, Oyem, Lambaréné and Mouila - and other provincial capitals. The total number of cities,
                         including the six cities targeted during the first phase of the project, will be limited to nine (9) to
                         avoid spreading the resources too thinly.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           This is a follow-up operation to the ILDP1. It is expected that the proposed project will be able to
                           build on the achievements of the original project in the area of safeguards.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During the implementation for the ILDP1, the client built its environmental safeguards capacity, with
                           Bank support. The environmental unit of the Permanent Secretariat of the National Commission for
                           Public Infrastructure Works and Promotion of Small-Scale Enterprises (CN-TIPPEE) which was the
                           implementation agency (IA) under ILDP1 prepared TORs for safeguards studies environmental and
                           social safeguards framework policy documents and likewise Environmental and Social Impact
                           Assessments (ESIAs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RFP), and monitored the preparation and implementation of the instruments. Refreshment capacity
                           building on the above tools will be provided during the implementation of the ILDP II.

                           The Ministry of Promotion of Investment, Infrastructure, and Housing which will oversee the project
                           is not familiar with the World Bank safeguard policies, and will therefore draw on the expertise of
                           the ILDP1, and experience from CN-TIPPEE (which will be the IA for this new operation) to ensure
                           safeguards compliance. The project will also support the Ministry to strengthen its safeguards
                           management capacity, through hands-on training and formal training. Regular supervision by the
                           Bank's safeguards specialists will also be used to contribute to strengthen the Borrower's safeguards
                           compliance and capacity.

                           The investment program will be implemented at city and local neighborhood levels. Citywide
                           investments include a program of trunk investments, drainage network or central markets that will be
                           executed by well-established, experienced contractors. At the local neighborhood level, most of the
                           investments will be of simple design and technology, some using labor-intensive methods accessible
                           to local contractors and SMEs. The previous project provided small contractors an opportunity to
                           learn and grow, which has increased construction capacity in the country. Regular technical audits
                           will be carried out during project implementation and define improvement plans. This project will
                           require contractors familiar with the use of labor-intensive techniques with appropriate managerial
Public Disclosure Copy




                           capabilities to undertake construction and rehabilitation. The project also requires civil engineering
                           consulting firms to design and supervise works. The project will provide support through technical
                           and managerial training for contractors and consulting firm's personnel to enhance their capacity.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            OP/BP 4.01 will be triggered due to the project
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       activities that will include the rehabilitation and/or
                                                                            construction of socio-economic infrastructure such as
                                                                            roads, small bridges, integrated health centers,
                                                                            primary schools, and other municipal infrastructure
                                                                            in the targeted cities, as well as erosion control and
                                                                            environmental works. The sites for subprojects will
                                                                            be selected by local governments on the basis of their
                                                                            local development plans and based on existing
                                                              studies. Activities potentially include the
                                                              rehabilitation of roads and construction works, which
                                                              usually involves the opening of quarries. All these
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              activities may induce moderate adverse
                                                              environmental impacts, of limited significance and
                                                              magnitude, which can be easily managed and
                                                              mitigated. Therefore, the project is classified as
                                                              category B. Because the exact locations of all
                                                              project's activities is yet to be determined, an
                                                              Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                              (ESMF) would be the relevant safeguards instrument
                                                              to be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed both in
                                                              country and at the World Bank's Infoshop prior to
                                                              appraisal. The ESMF prepared will describe the
                                                              guidelines and procedures for the preparation of
                                                              Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                                                              (ESIAs), including environmental and social
                                                              management plans (ESMPs) and their
                                                              implementation for investments in site-specific sub-
                                                              projects as they are identified. For investments for
                                                              which the sites are known prior to appraisal,
                                                              investment-specific ESIAs and ESMPs will be
                                                              prepared before appraisal. All relevant safeguards
                                                              instruments will be consulted upon, reviewed and
                                                              cleared by the Government and the Bank and
                                                              disclosed in-country and at Infoshop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No    This OP is not triggered, as there will be no potential
                                                              impact on natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The proposed project will not affect forests, nor will
                                                              it involve reforestation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    There will be no use of pesticides or health-related
                                                              concerns with respect to vector management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   The works will take place in inhabited areas and will
                         OP/BP 4.11                           involve excavations and demolitions. There is a
                                                              possibility of chance finds of physical cultural
                                                              resources. To mitigate potential adverse impacts, the
                                                              ESMF, the ESIAs and the ESMPs will include
                                                              guidance and procedures for physical cultural
                                                              resources management. No separate safeguards
                                                              instrument is needed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    There are no indigenous people in the project areas.
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Component 1 (Urban Infrastructure and Services)
                         BP 4.12                              will induce land acquisition related to the
                                                              rehabilitation and/or construction of socio-economic
                                                              infrastructures such as roads, markets, water supply
                                                                                                                        and sanitation sub-projects, municipal halls, schools,
                                                                                                                        health and social centers, erosion control and
                                                                                                                        environmental works. As not all specific locations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        infrastructures are known, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework (RPF) will be prepared prior to appraisal
                                                                                                                        and subsequent Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                                                                        will be prepared and implemented as needed for
                                                                                                                        these investments. For investments with known sites,
                                                                                                                        investment-specific RAPs will be developed before
                                                                                                                        appraisal. The RPF and the RAPs will be consulted
                                                                                                                        upon, reviewed and cleared by the Government and
                                                                                                                        the Bank and disclosed in-country and at Info-shop.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This OP is not triggered, as there will be no dam
                                                                                                                        construction or rehabilitation of dams that will
                                                                                                                        necessitate safety status reports.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      This OP is not triggered, for there are no
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   international waterways in the project sites.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This OP is not triggered because project intervention
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                sites will not be within disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Between April and June 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mahine Diop,Deo-Marcel Niyungeko
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                                                                                         Date:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name:                                                                                                                        Date:
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
