                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8265
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                              Project ID:    P143608
                            Project Name:     Telangana Rural Inclusive Growth Project (P143608)
                            Task Team         Parmesh Shah
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         22-Sep-2014                        Estimated   19-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFADR                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Health (20%), Other
                                              social services (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural policies and institutions (20%), Rural markets (20%), Gender (20%),
                                              Nutrition and food security (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     107.00           Total Bank Financing:                75.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       32.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              75.00
                              Total                                                                                   107.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO would be to enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes and secure
                           increased access to human development services and social entitlements.

                           The “selected poor households” will include households that are geographically & socially excluded

                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         and have low income levels. The incomes for these households will be enhanced by ensuring
                         increased incomes from agriculture and allied sectors through increased productivity and enhanced
                         market access. The “human development services” include services related to health, nutrition and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sanitation. The “social entitlements” mainly include social safety nets like the wages from National
                         Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme, pensions and insurance benefits that are provided by the
                         government.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project would be focused on achieving inclusive growth built on 3 key pillars namely,
                         Livelihood Promotion through a value chain approach in key livelihood sectors, ‘Life cycle
                         approach’ to the achievement of MDGs in Health and Education and leveraging the existing
                         institutional platforms of the poor to ensure reliable and universal access to entitlements. This will be
                         achieved by linking small and marginal producers to formal markets; convergence with Government
                         programs; demand-side investments for improving effectiveness of programs for food security,
                         health and nutrition, education, drinking water, sanitation, etc. and delivery of safety nets and social
                         security schemes. It would also leverage innovations and the best global/national experiences and
                         technologies through dedicated human resources for the three key pillars, and spearhead teams for
                         specific interventions and partnerships with technical agencies.

                         Component 1: Value Chain Enhancement through Producer Organizations (US$ 30 million): The
                         objective of this component is to increase the income of 250,000 small and marginal farmers by at
                         least 50% through productivity enhancement and improved market access. This component will work
                         with those small and marginal producers who have built up productive assets and have previously
                         participated in productivity improvement, cropping technology and market access programs in select
                         livelihoods/sectors. The project now proposes to work with these producers and help them move up
                         the value chain and exploit growth opportunities. This will be achieved by organizing them into
                         economic organizations (producer groups/organizations/companies); ensuring high quality support
                         services like technology, credit, extension, marketing, etc.; and sustainable access to markets. In
                         other words, the project will create an ecosystem for inclusive growth of small and marginal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         producers. The above approach will be adopted in key pro-poor commodities such as paddy, red
                         gram, milk, poultry and small ruminants which have high potential to scale up and impact large
                         number of poor households. The project may opportunistically target other commodities as well. The
                         other key aspect of this component is to create local markets by connecting rural producers with
                         shandis , rural haats, kirana shops , etc.

                         The component will have two sub-components: Rural Value Chains and Rural Retails Chains/Social
                         Enterprises.
                         Rural Value Chains: This subcomponent includes the activities and investments aimed at increasing
                         the incomes of producers by enabling them to move up the value chain
                         Rural Retail Chains: The objective of this sub-component is to connect rural producers and
                         enterprises with the rural consumers and enhance the quality of consumption of the poor households.

                         Component 2: Human Development (US$ 15 million): Child development is influenced by both
                         nutrition-specific interventions, such as maternal and child dietary supplementation and infant and
                         young child feeding practices, that address the immediate causes of suboptimum growth and
                         development, and by nutrition-sensitive interventions, such as livelihoods and social safety nets that
                         address the underlying determinants of malnutrition. SERP, with its vast network of women’s
                         groups, has the potential to converge both nutrition sensitive and specific interventions at the village
                         level, thus creating an enabling environment for optimum child development at scale and in a


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         sustainable manner, where each household has access to both nutrition specific and nutrition
                         sensitive interventions and programs.
                         The project aims to bring about this convergence by building capacities and empowering village
Public Disclosure Copy




                         organizations (VOs) to demand and access services, while also investing in strengthening the
                         capacity of systems to deliver. Therefore, the focus of project interventions is to enable the demand
                         side to hold the supply side accountable for service delivery in the Human Development (HD) sector,
                         as well as to improve HD service delivery by strengthening the existing public systems to deliver
                         quality services. Clear linkages with the value chain component under the project, will further ensure
                         social safety and livelihoods interventions are also appropriately tapped, contributing to optimum
                         child development outcomes.

                         The specific interventions to operationalize this approach include:
                         Strengthening the demand for quality nutrition, health, sanitation and pre-school education services
                         by undertaking specific mobilization at the village level centred on HD outcomes including nutrition,
                         sanitation, health and pre-school education.
                         Sub-component 2.2: Strengthening the supply of key nutrition, health and pre-school education
                         services by introducing and improving mechanisms for community engagement, community
                         monitoring and ICT based monitoring systems

                         Component 3: Access to entitlements and social development (US$ 7.5 million): This component
                         aims to improve the coverage and service delivery of social protection entitlements to 500,000 of
                         poorest households mainly belonging to the SC/STs and particularly those with PWDs, and ensures
                         that they are protected from risks and vulnerabilities through an integrated mission mode approach,
                         while addressing the last mile issues. The component will consist of two main sub components:

                         Subcomponent 1: Improved delivery of service and entitlement at the Panchayat levels: This sub-
                         component will support the establishment of one stop shop service points by the Village
                         Organizations to improve the outreach and quality of access for select services and entitlements by
                         the SC/ST and poorest of the poor communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 2: Pilots on Improved access to vulnerability services: This subcomponent seeks to
                         achieve an improved access to vulnerability services for Persons with Disabilities (PwDs) and
                         Gender related services.

                         Component 4: ICT & Partnerships (US$ 15 million):
                         The objective of this component is to build an enabling ecosystem for innovation and transformation
                         in delivering good quality services in the last mile. Recognizing that technology, innovation and
                         entrepreneurship play critical role in addressing major development challenges the project seeks to
                         bring together different stakeholders from the public private and civil society sectors and form
                         partnerships for customizing inclusive innovations in the project context. This engenders intensive
                         use of ICT at levels of project governance and delivery, high performance project implementation
                         and effective coordination mechanisms with supply/demand side partner institutions and social
                         entrepreneurs and innovators by providing them technical assistance, strategic advisory and
                         knowledge management services with national and international expertise. Open data will be a
                         crucial part of the program ICT and Partnership strategy.

                         It will have the following 4 main sub components
                         Sub Component 1: Information and Communication Technologies (ICT): The project will make
                         strategic investments in ICT and m-Governance systems to develop state of the art IT platform for
                         hosting and delivering variety of project services like management information system (MIS),

                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                         decision support systems (DSS), financial manageme nt system (FMS),
                         Sub Component 2: Partnerships : The project recognizes that the partnerships as key implementation
                         arrangement and accordingly develop a partnership framework which will allow it to enter into
Public Disclosure Copy




                         partnerships with innovators, social entrepreneurs and reputed agencies
                         Sub Component 3: Technical Assistance to line departments: The objective of the sub component is
                         to provide technical assistance to line departments in improving their implementation and monitoring
                         capacity.
                         Sub Component 4: Centre of Excellence and Knowledge Management: A Centre for Excellence and
                         Knowledge management shall be set up which will enable the project to share lessons with other low
                         income states and NRLM

                         Component 5: Project Implementation Support (US$ 7.5 million): The objective of this component is
                         to strengthen the project implementation and will finance dedicated staffing for the project activities
                         that are attributable to outcomes of the project, consultancies, training and related material, office
                         equipment, and operational costs. It will also support establishing Monitoring, Evaluation and
                         Learning (MEL) systems, Financial Management systems, Procurement Management, Governance
                         and Accountability Systems, Knowledge Management and Communication, etc.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         State of Telegana. Communities from 150 most backward mandals in the newly created state of
                         Telengana covering about 5,000 villages. These mandals were identified as based on the following
                         parameters:
                         i. SC/ST population within a mandal (Data taken from census 2011)
                         ii. Female illiteracy in the mandal (Data taken from census 2011)
                         iii. Mandals having more unirrigated land (Data taken from DES-2011)
                         iv. All the Urban Mandals notified as Class 1 & 2 towns (Municipalities) are excluded from the list

                         While Scheduled Tribes are present all districts of Telangana, they are concentrated more in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         districts of Khammam (27%), Adilabad (18%), Nalgonda (11%), Warangal (15%), and
                         Mehboobnagar. All these districts are characterized by general backwardness, lack of social
                         infrastructure and services and higher poverty and exclusion. All these districts would be covered
                         under TRIGP
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
                         Varun Singh (GFADR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             While the activities are small scale, with
                          BP 4.01                                             relatively low environmental risks, cumulatively
                                                                              these impacts may have a larger and more serious
                                                                              environmental footprint and would require some
                                                                              environmental due diligence measures to be put in
                                                                              place. The Society for Elimination of Rural
                                                                              Poverty (SERP) has undertaken a situational
                                                                              assessment of the project to ensure that the
                                                                              planned activities are environmentally



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                                                                            sustainable. The study was conducted with an
                                                                            objective of understanding environmental
                                                                            implications of project activities, and to define
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            remedial measures to mitigate any negative
                                                                            impacts, in line with the national and state legal
                                                                            and regulatory framework and the World Bank
                                                                            Operational Policies. The project has prepared an
                                                                            Environmental Management Framework to
                                                                            delineate the key issues and the measures to be
                                                                            implemented to address them.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Although no significant or large scale impact is
                                                                            foreseen, some of the value chain and Human
                                                                            Development activities happen in tribal areas near
                                                                            natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           Although no significant or large scale impact is
                                                                            foreseen, some of the value chain and Human
                                                                            Development activities happen in tribal areas
                                                                            within or near forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           TRIGP will not finance pesticide procurement,
                                                                            but there is possibility of pesticide use by farmers
                                                                            as part of productivity enhancement efforts. A
                                                                            separate Pest management Plan has not been
                                                                            prepared for the project; however due diligence
                                                                            mitigatory measures for the sustainable use and
                                                                            management of pesticides has been included in
                                                                            the project EMF
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           TRIGP will be implemented in districts and
                                                                            mandals which have significant concentration of
                                                                            tribals. Project interventions on rural value/retail
                                                                            chains, health and nutrition and access to social
                                                                            entitlements and services would have a strong
                                                                            focus on targeting andincluding tribal
                                                                            communities
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            There will be no Involuntary land acquisition
                            4.12                                            under this project and the screening section in the
                                                                            SMP will also ensure this.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project interventions could have the possible environmental issues
                           •        Possible over exploitation of the resources such as ground water for irrigation
                           •        Introducing high yielding varieties which need intensive irrigation and fertilization that
                           may have negative impact on soil and water
                           •        Setting up mills, processing units and storage structure which need high energy
                           requirement and may release wastes that are harmful to the environment
                           •        Use of chemicals, waste disposal and energy use in micro enterprises and possibility of
                           health hazards.
                           •        Possibility of contamination of the surrounding environment due to drinking water and
                           sanitation interventions when environment guidelines are not followed

                           TRIGP aims to enable selected poor households to enhance agricultural incomes and secure
                           increased access to human development services and social entitlements, with a specific focus on
                           schooled tribe and scheduled caste households in the most excluded and backward districts/
                           mandals of the state. Project interventions are anticipated to have significant and widespread
                           positive impact on these households by way of increased incomes from agriculture and allied
                           sectors through increased productivity and enhanced market access, enhanced access to health,
                           nutrition and sanitation services, and better access to wage opportunities, pensions, insurance and
                           unique identity cards etc. The main safeguard issue is to ensure meaningful consultations with, and
                           effective outreach, coverage and inclusion of habitations and houseohlds of scheduled tribes and
                           scheduled and other vulnerable social groups with respect to project supported interventions,
                           institutions and investments.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project activities have small environmental footprints, if the environmental guidelines and
                           proper due diligence measures are implemented. Therefore there are no long-term impacts
                           anticipated. Longer term impacts are anticipated to be enhanced incomes and improved health,
                           education and nutritional status of scheduled tribes and scheduled caste households, specially
                           women and girls.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The EMF incorporates sound remedial measures which will minimize potential adverse impacts.
                           TRIGP interventions do not anticipate any large scale adverse impacts, if the measures are well
                           implemented.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Given the numerous little activities in multiple sites, a framework approach was adopted to
                           identify the potential environmental impacts and remedial measures. The Environment
                           Management Framework (EMF) identifies the possible environmental implications of each
                           interventions proposed under each component and sub component and suggests environment
                           friendly alternatives or mitigation measures for each. It provides a strategy to manage negative
                           environmental impacts of the value chain and human development activities there by sustaining
                           the benefits of these interventions. It also provides the institutional mechanism to operationalise


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                          the EMF which contains guidelines, systems and procedures for ensuring environmental
                          sustainability during project implementation. It includes ‘environment guidelines’ or ‘environment
                          friendly alternatives’ for all the components. It also encourages Green Business Opportunities on
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the critical environmental issues identified in the proposed activities through ‘innovation forums’
                          ‘solution market places’ and ‘knowledge events’ under partnership component. the EMF also
                          includes a negative list of activities which cannot be funded under the projects – into section 4
                          second last sentence.

                          Telangana SERP has integrated several measures into the TRIGP project design such as selection
                          of high tribal presence areas as project mandals, rural value chains for tribal areas, linkages with
                          SC/TSP programs of tribal and social welfare departments and ITDAs. Telangana SERP has
                          leveraged its long standing experience of working with tribal and scheduled caste households and
                          updated its social assessment and prepared social management plan (SMP), that includes a tribal
                          development plan (TDP) that summarises the main issues and strategies for targeting and inclusion
                          of women and men from scheduled caste and scheduled tribe households in project interventions.
                          The SMP and TDP include specific approaches and strategies for TRIGP components on rural
                          value chains, rural retail chains, health and nutrition interventions and access to social entitlements
                          and services, including mechanisms for consultatoin and participatoin, ensuring inclusion of tribal
                          and SC households/habitations, gender and communication strategies. The SMP also includes
                          institutional and staffing arrangements, capacity building plan, grievance redressal mechanism and
                          monitoring and evaluation system.

                          Given the numerous little activities in multiple sites, a framework approach was adopted to
                          identify the potential environmental impacts and remedial measures. The Environment
                          Management Framework (EMF) identifies the possible environmental implications of each
                          interventions proposed under each component and sub component and suggests environment
                          friendly alternatives or mitigation measures for each. It provides a strategy to manage negative
                          environmental impacts of the value chain and human development activities there by sustaining
                          the benefits of these interventions. It also provides the institutional mechanism to operationalise
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the EMF which contains guidelines, systems and procedures for ensuring environmental
                          sustainability during project implementation. It includes ‘environment guidelines’ or ‘environment
                          friendly alternatives’ for all the components. It also encourages Green Business Opportunities on
                          the critical environmental issues identified in the proposed activities through ‘innovation forums’
                          ‘solution market places’ and ‘knowledge events’ under partnership component. the EMF also
                          includes a negative list of activities which cannot be funded under the projects.

                           SERP has long experience of implementing strategies and programs for inclusion of tribal and
                           scheduled caste households and promoting sustainable agricultural practices among poor farmers
                           through ‘Community Managed Sustainable Agriculture’ programme however given the
                           multisectoral nature of TRIGP, it would need capacity building for implementing the SMP/TDP
                           and EMF. Additionally the state has been newly formed and there will be need for strengthening
                           capacity of the personnel at SERP and at the various levels of the state machinery. These aspects
                           have been included in the plans for capacity building and technical assistance partnerships in both
                           deocuments.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The EMF was designed in consultation with various stakeholders – the project teams, concerned
                           departments, community representatives through field consultations. Workshops were held in 2


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           locations – in Karimnagar on 11th July 2014 and Rangareddy district on 15th July 2014 which
                           were attended by local community, NGOs and representatives from government line departments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In preparing the project and the SMP/TDP, SERP has undertaken a series of field visits,
                           stakeholder consultaitons and indepth situation assessment studies, with focus on SC and ST
                           houseohlds across many districts of Telangana. These consultations and focus group discussions
                           were held with key stakeholders of the projects: excluded SC/ST houseohlds, tribal farmers and
                           leaders, women memebers of VOs and MS etc. These consultations were held in SC and ST
                           dominated mandals of Medak, Adilabad, Khammam, Nizamabad and Warangal districts.

                           TRIGP has Grievance redressal systems to provide effective services, coupled with counselling
                           and facilitation services. These systems will ensure better implementation of the programs and
                           also have increased outreach to the beneficiaries. The GRM and Feedback systems include One
                           Stop Shops, Call Centres and GRM monitoring cell.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Aug-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Sep-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            09-Sep-2014
                           Comments: The EMF was consulted with a wide range of stakeholders and was translated and
                                         disclosed in the state of Telengana
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            16-Sep-2014
                           Comments: Draft social management plan was disclosed on 9 Sep 2014
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Sep-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            09-Sep-2014
                           Comments: The project does not have a stand-alone PMP,; pest management issues have been
                                         subsumed into the EMF.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Parmesh Shah
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 29-Sep-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                           Date: 01-Oct-2014
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
