INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1052
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Nov-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uganda                     Project ID:  P149286
Project Name: Uganda Multisectoral Food Security and Nutrition Project (P149286)
Task Team       Ziauddin Hyder
Leader:
Estimated       15-Oct-2014                Estimated    31-Dec-2014
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (50%), Agricultural extension and research (50%)
Theme(s):       Nutrition and food security (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     27.64             Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                               27.64
Total                                                                      27.64
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase production and consumption of
micronutrient-rich foods and utilization of community-based nutrition services in smallholder
households in project areas.
3. Project Description
The proposed project will support GoU efforts to improve child nutrition through nutrition
Page 1 of 8


﻿interventions across multiple sectors at national and district levels yet to implement selected
interventions within each respective sector emphasizing existing systems, budgets, and accountability
structures in eligible districts.
O
COMPONENT 1. DELIVERY OF MULTI-SECTORAL NUTRITION SERVICES AT PRIMARY
SCHOOL AND COMMUNITY LEVELS
The objective of this component is to improve nutrition functions of (i) community-based
institutions; (ii) primary schools; (iii) agriculture extension mechanisms; and (iv) village health teams
(VHTs) in line with UNAP and the three sector strategic plans. The activities supported are
organized broadly by the lead responsible sector, although there will be overlap in activities given the
cross-cutting nature of the interventions and the differing roles and capacities of each sector.
Sub-component 1.1 Community sensitization and establishment/strengthening of community-based
institutions (Lead entity: Districts)
This sub-component will support: (i) operational costs for initial sensitization, formation,
mobilization, and facilitation of Parent Groups (PGs) from the communities surrounding selected
primary schools; (ii) two "lead farmers" (LF) from each PG who will coordinate mobilization and
participation of the PGs in the school demonstration plots and other project activities; (iii) provision
of necessary seeds and planting materials, tools, and fertilizers for the LFs to establish community-
based multiplication and distribution mechanisms to increase community access to improved seeds
and vines.
Sub-component 1.2 Enhancing nutrition services delivered through primary schools (Lead sector:
Education)
This sub-component will support: (i) "School Nutrition Committee" establishment/strengthening to
develop and implement a Primary School Nutrition Action Plan (PSNAP), including demonstration
garden selection and oversight activities; (ii) nutrition education, food preparation, food safety, and
hygiene practices deworming for school children and weekly iron folic acid tablets for female
students 11 years or older (iii) selection and oversight .
o        Sub-component 1.3 Agriculture support for school-based nutrition services (Lead Sector:
Agriculture)
This sub-component will support: (i) engagement of MAAIF agriculture crop extension specialists
with selected primary schools in development of the PSNAP,; (ii) agricultural design and technical
and procurement support for the primary school demonstration gardens; (iii) technical and
procurement support to Lead Farmers and communities in expanding production of promoted crops;
(iv) and delivery of a pre-developed curriculum based on the UNAP priorities.
Sub-Component 1.4 Strengthened nutrition services through Village Health Teams (VHTs) (Lead
Sector: Health)
This sub-component will support: (i) engagement of MOH specialists with selected primary schools
in development of the PSNAP; (ii)MOH/VHT focus on nutrition behavior communications, monthly
community-based growth monitoring and promotion of children under 23 months; (ii) MOH/VHT
provision of IFA supplements for pregnant/lactating women, deworming during pregnancy, and zinc
Page 2 of 8


﻿supplements for children 6 -59 months; (iii) MOH/VHT coordination of MOH nutrition policies in
communities; (iv) MOH promotion of the use of nutrition related health services and improved
practices; (v) curriculum development and regular MOH primary school nutrition education sessions
for students (and PG demonstrations) will be included in the PSNAP and necessary inputs can be
O
procured by the School Nutrition Committee.
o        COMPONENT 2 STRENGTHENING CAPACITY TO DELIVER NUTRITION
INTERVENTIONS
This component will support: (i) district wide project stakeholder initial sensitization training and
refresher training; (ii) consultancy services to develop necessary training materials for extension
agents, primary school and community workers including workshops to finalize training and support
materials, and printing and distribution of necessary support materials for each sector; (iii) sector-
specific technical training for relevant district, primary school and community personnel given by
Master Trainers; and (iv) supportive supervision and nutrition monitoring at district level and below.
COMPONENT 3. PROJECT MANAGEMENT, MONITORING, EVALUATION AND
KNOWLEDGE GENERATION
This component will include initiatives to: (i) ensure project management and coordination; and (ii)
support monitoring, evaluation at all levels, knowledge generation and management, and
dissemination of findings within Uganda and globally. This component will finance goods, services,
and specified incremental operating costs (for all components).
Monitoring of activities at district level and below in each sector will be reported by that respective
sector. Sectors may decide to simultaneously provide information through sectoral channels and to
the district. Information must be provided to the district which will compile, consolidate and produce
reports by the project Nutrition Focal point, shared with the DNCC (under supervision of the CAO)
and reported to the National Project Coordination Unit in MAAIF.
o
Sub-component 3.1 Project management and coordination
O
This sub-component will support: (i) project-related implementation capacity, including support for
a        the designated project coordinator and key additional staff needed in areas such as fiduciary and
M&E specialists who make up the Project Coordination Unit (housed within MAAIF); (ii) additional
activities and related expenditures for central ministries not currently readily handled by their
procurement and financial management systems, including management information systems, as well
as auditing, and reporting; (iii) strengthening district and sub-entities fiduciary management and
service delivery contracting capabilities, including staff training, as well as supplemental operational
funds to carry out explicit project-related mandates.
Sub-component 3.2    Project monitoring, evaluation, and knowledge generation:
This sub-component will support: (i) active strategic planning and cross-coordination of project
activities, execution and adjustments by agriculture, health and education sectors; (ii) development
and implementation of a consolidated project system for regular project activity and fiduciary
monitoring reporting; (iii) surveys to provide baseline, midline and endline values, ultimately for
impact evaluation purposes; and (iv) policy analysis and operational research.
Page 3 of 8


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 20 selected districts that have a combined score of below 10 for
highest stunting prevalence and lowest prevalence of adequate diversity from 7 agro-ecological
zones: Southwest Farmland (IX), Highland Ranges (X), Northwest Savannah Grassland (III), Kyoga
Plains (V), Lake Victoria Crescent (VI), Western Savannah Grassland (VII), and Pastoral Grassland
(VIII). The 20 were obtained from the 41 potential Agriculture Cluster Development Project (ACDP)
areas under the 12 clusters across ten agro-ecological zones. The 41 districts were ranked based on
the following: (i) High prevalence of stunting in under five children; and (ii) Low dietary diversity.
There are limited negative environmental and social impacts resulting from this project due to the
establishment of demonstration gardens at selected schools and lead farmers premises that may apply
the use of pesticides and fertilizers. A pest management plan as part of the ESMF has been prepared
and disclosed to address potential related issues.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSURR)
Herbert Oule (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Component 1 involves establishment and
BP 4.01                                     operation of demonstration gardens of selected
farmer groups and primary schools, of selected
crops. In the process, pesticides may be used to
enhance production of selected crops. Since the
Multisectoral Food Security and Nutrition Project
is closely linked with ACDP under preparation in
that both projects will be implemented in the
same Cluster Districts, Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) for ACDP was
revised to cover the MNP. The ESMF has been
disclosed before appraisal, both at infoshop and
in-country. Specific guidance on the handling, use
of pesticides and disposal of empty pesticide
containers shall be included in the Project
Operational Manual.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No           N/A. The Project will be implemented in Primary
Schools Land and selected farmers' gardens. It
will therefore not affect any Natural Habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No           N/A. The project will not support activities which
may affect any forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes          Component 1 involves establishment and
operation of demonstration gardens of selected
farmer groups and primary schools, of selected
crops. In the process, pesticides may be used to
enhance production of selected crops. A Pest
Management Plan has been prepared as part of
Page 4 of 8


﻿the ESMF. Specific guidance on the handling, use
of pesticides and disposal of empty pesticide
containers shall be included in the Project
Operational Manual.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No         N/A. The project does not involve any civil works
BP 4.11                                     that would affect PCRs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No           N/A. The target project areas under ACDP from
a                                                     which the project will draw participating districts
does not have known IPs in Uganda.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No          N/A. Schools that will be selected to host the
4.12                                        demonstration gardens shall be chosen after
confirming availability of at least one half acre of
available arable land within the school boundaries
and therefore there will be no land acquisition and
therefore OP4.12is not triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No           N/A. The project does not concern dams.
Projects on International      No           N/A. No international waterways will be affected
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        by the project.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No         N/A. The project will not be implemented in
7.60                                        disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The salient physical project activities relevant to safeguard analysis apply to Components 1 which
involve establishment and operation of demonstration gardens both in selected progressive farmer
0          homes and at primary schools. However, these demonstration gardens are expected to be limited in
size to half acre per selected school or homestead and may involve use of fertilizers and pesticides
which may generate some environmental, health, safety and social issues. However, the use of
pesticides will be very limited because not all schools shall establish demos, and those that may,
will have only 0.5 acre demo garden. Therefore the environmental impact will be of very low-
intensity, minor, site specific at primary school vegetable gardens and as inputs for the use of
smallholder Lead Farmers. Schools that will be selected to host the demonstration gardens shall be
chosen after confirming availability of at least one half acre of available arable land within the
school boundaries and therefore there will be no land acquisition and therefore OP4.12 is not
triggered. The respective District Agricultural Extension services shall be rendered to the schools
and selected farmers to provide guidance for the management of the demonstration gardens.
Therefore, two safeguard policies OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment and OP 4.09 Pest
Management have been triggered and the project is recommended EA category B- Partial
Environmental Assessment.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None
Page 5 of 8


﻿3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Multisectoral Nutrition Project is closely linked with the Bank-financed ACDP (P145037)
under preparation in that both projects will be implemented in the same Cluster Districts.
o          Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which also includes a Pest
Management Plan (PMP) for ACDP has been revised to cover the MNP. In addition, specific
guidance on the handling, use of pesticides and disposal of empty pesticide containers shall be
included in the Project Operational Manual for the Multisectoral Nutrition Project. OP 4.01will
also address social aspects related to the inclusion of the vulnerable groups of people in project
activities. Through the community based participatory processes the project will ensure inclusion
of all target groups. The ESMF has been disclosed before appraisal, both at the Bank Infoshop and
in-country.
The implementing agencies that include MAAIF and MoES have no staff to address environment
related concerns. Therefore since MAAIF will be implementing both this project and its related
ACDP, the hiring of an Environment Officer is a priority. This has already been provided for
under PCU for ACDP. The staff when in place will be provided with targeted and focused training
to help build their knowledge and skills to address environmental and social issues arising out of
project activities.
The local governments have District Environment Officers and Community Development Officers
who will support project activities to address both environmental and inclusion related concerns.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders for this project are the government ministries including MAAIF, MoES,
MoH and the selected local government and communities in the catchment area of the selected
schools for demonstration purposes. The various stakeholder groups were consulted during project
design to better identify their roles, and will continue to be consulted on the issues arising out of
pesticide use during project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                   19-Nov-2014
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Nov-2014
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Uganda                                                     19-Nov-2014
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
NA
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes [  ] No [ X ]   NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes X  No      NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 7 of 8


﻿Task Team Leader:   Name: Ziauddin Hyder
Approved By
Practice Manager/   Name: Tijan M. Sallah (PMGR)             Date: 11-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


