                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7728
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P133017
                            Project Name:      Guilin Integrated Environment Management (P133017)
                            Task Team          Sing Cho
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          29-May-2014                        Estimated   04-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (35%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection sector (25%), Water supply (20%), Wastewater Collection and
                                              Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (55%), Water resource
                                              management (45%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     155.46           Total Bank Financing:                 100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  55.46
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                                    155.46
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project objective is to improve the water and sanitation services in Guilin
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         Component 1: Water Supply. Investments under this component will allow the water supply system
                         to meet future demand of domestic consumers (including those who are not served), commercial and
                         industrial enterprises, an expanding airport, and two growing universities. To do so, the component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will involve (a) the installation of a 37 km long drinking water main along the east 2nd ring road and
                         associated distribution pipelines linking the existing Chengbai Water Treatment Plant (WTP) mainly
                         to serve Lingui District and Balijie Area; (b) the construction of a booster pumping station at airport
                         road to supply water to the residents in Lingui District and the vicinity of the Guilin Liangjiang
                         Airport; and, (c) the provision of monitoring and inspection equipment in the network to improve the
                         compliance of new drinking water quality standard, and the development and installation of a
                         decision support system (water operation platform) for improved efficiency, including drinking water
                         allocation and distribution among service areas, pressure management, and control of NRW.

                         Component 2: Wastewater Management. This component focuses on reducing pollution discharge
                         loads from Guilin’s Wastewater Treatment Plants (WWTPs). This component focuses on
                         maintaining the water quality of the Lijiang River by reducing pollution discharge loads from
                         Guilin’s wastewater treatment plants (WWTPs). The component will focus on (a) replacing aged
                         equipment at selected pumping stations and the installation of additional odor control facilities
                         including ventilation systems; (b) expanding or rehabilitating sewer networks with the necessary
                         equipment to control leakages or blockage, and the replacement and/or rehabilitation of associated
                         manholes; (c) upgrading four WWTPs (Beichong, Qilidian, Shangyao, and Yanshan) to improve the
                         quality of effluent discharges, and associated odor control and disinfection equipment; and (d)
                         upgrading of sludge dewatering equipment at three WWTPs (Beichong, Qilidian, Shangyao) and
                         installing associated ventilation and odor control facilities at all five WWTPs (Shangyao, Qilidian,
                         Beichong, Yanshan and Lingui).

                         Component 3: Sludge Management. This component aims at preventing environmental pollution
                         from increased sludge disposal as a result of more wastewater treated. Thus, it will focus on (a)
                         construct a sludge management center (site selection to be confirmed at implementation) with solar
Public Disclosure Copy




                         drying and composting facilities and the associated ventilation and odor control facilities, and (b) the
                         purchase of sludge hauling trucks.

                         Component 4: Water Quality Monitoring and Pollution Management. This component involves the
                         (a) strengthening of the water quality monitoring system associated to the Lijiang River to enable
                         real-time data collection and processing; (b) the development and integration of a pollution source
                         management system for the effective discharge surveillance, compliance enforcement and pollution
                         management of the Lijiang Rivers, and (c) the piloting a pollution source analysis including non-
                         point sources for the urban stretches of the Lijaing River.

                         Component 5: Project Management and Supervision. This component covers: (a) project
                         management (including M&E), (b) consultancy services for engineering design review and least cost
                         review of sludge management options, and supervision of the implementation of environmental
                         assessments, and resettlement action plans, (c) incremental operating support for PMO operation at
                         implementation, and (d) training and study tours.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Located in northeast of Guangxi Autonomous Region, southern China, Guilin has a subtropical
                         climate having more than 1800mm of annual precipitation averagely. With its karst topography and
                         scenic Lijiang river flowing through the city, Guilin is one of the most famous tourist destinations in


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         China. Its population is around 0.9 million and expected to reach 1.2 million by 2020.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ximing Zhang (GWADR)
                         Jun Zeng (GURDR)
                         Xin Ren (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will bring environmental benefits
                         BP 4.01                                             through reducing the volume and impacts of
                                                                             waste water and sludge. However, major negative
                                                                             impacts are also associated with the project
                                                                             particularly those associated with the siting and
                                                                             construction of the sludge management plant and
                                                                             impacts of civil works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             The project will bring environmental benefits in
                                                                             river systems in the project area through
                                                                             improved water quality. The policy is triggered
                                                                             when a project both negatively and positively
                                                                             affects natural habitats, in this case the river
                                                                             systems.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              Not Applicable.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No              Not Applicable.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The EA screening process and systematic site
                         BP 4.11                                             survey doesn’t identify any physical cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             resources as defined by this policy in the project
                                                                             area. Nevertheless, Chance Find Procedures has
                                                                             been included in the project’s Environmental
                                                                             Management Plan (EMP) in case this might occur
                                                                             during implementation.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The project activities are all within constructed
                                                                             urban areas, where there is no ethnic minority
                                                                             community present, so the policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             Based on the site visit and primary project
                         4.12                                                alignment, land taking caused by the project
                                                                             construction will be unavoidable. The main
                                                                             involuntary resettlement impact will include
                                                                             urban/rural structure demolition, land acquisition
                                                                             and temporary land taking. Therefore, the Bank’s
                                                                             Social Safeguards policy on Involuntary
                                                                             Resettlement is triggered and a Resettlement
                                                                             Action Plan will be prepared by the client in both
                                                                             English and Chinese. To deal with small changes
                                                                             in the project that might easily go beyond the



                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                                                                               coverage of the RAP, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                               Framework (RPF) is also needed and will be
                                                                               prepared during the project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               According to the present project proposal, the
                                                                               domestic funded expansion of Chengbei (City
                                                                               North) Water Plant and the construction of
                                                                               connecting road between Chengbei Water Plant
                                                                               and East 2rd Ring road were identified as linkage
                                                                               project as defined by the Bank’s OP4.12. All
                                                                               related resettlement plan will be included in the
                                                                               project RAP.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The project will not finance construction of new
                                                                               dams or rehabilitation of any existing dams (or
                                                                               related facilities) as defined under this policy.
                                                                               Also, none of the water supply or any of the
                                                                               components or activities is dependent on any
                                                                               existing dams or dams under construction.
                                                                               Therefore the project does not trigger dam safety
                                                                               policy.
                            Projects on International          No              Lijiang river is tertiary tributary of Pearl River
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               which flows through China before entering the
                                                                               South China Sea in Guangdong, thus not an
                                                                               international waterway, according to the OP’s
                                                                               definition.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                Not Applicable.
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will have social impacts related to the need for land acquisition and demolition of a
                              number of structures. About 810 people from 193 families will be affected by the acquisition of
                              8.22 ha of collective owned land and the demolition of some 11800 m2 of structure. Within 11,800
                              m2 of to be demolished structure, 10,400 m2 of them had no legal documents and no people lived
                              in these illegal houses.

                             Construction of the project will have mostly short-term impacts, such as noise, dust, traffic, soil
                             erosion, worker safety and social and traffic disturbance. They are relatively moderate, site
                             specific and can be readily minimized by standard measures. Operation of WWTPs and associated
                             pumping stations and pipelines will have impacts on residents and the surrounding environment,
                             such as odor from aeration, sedimentation and sludge condensation tanks, and noise from pumps.
                             More potentially serious concerns include impacts from sludge treatment and outflow from the
                             WWTP in cases of malfunction or failure.




                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                          As a tourist-oriented city, Guilin’s sewage is dominated by domestic discharges. Although
                          Chinese regulation requires industrial wastewater can only be discharged into sewer system after
                          meeting relevant discharge standard through on-site treatment, heavy metals found in WWTPs
Public Disclosure Copy




                          sludge indicates some industrial mis-discharge in the sewer. In spite of this, all heavy metals in
                          sludge are well below China’s national standard for land application of sludge. As a result, most
                          WWTP sludge in Guilin, after composting at the Shangyao WWTP, has been applied in forest land
                          and landscaping.

                           However, this existing sludge composting plant within Shangyao WWTP does not have adequate
                           odor control and thus poses adverse impacts on ambient environment and surrounding
                           communities. In addition, it utilized the land reserved for the expansion of Shangyao WWTP
                           which is now surrounded by residential areas. To cope with the increase in WWTP sludge
                           foreseen in Guilin due to urban development and improve the sludge treatment, new sludge
                           treatment facilities, improved composting and a pilot of sludge sun-dry, are proposed by Guilin
                           under the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Various alternatives, including a “no project” scenario, have been identified and compared during
                           the EA process aiming to avoid or minimize potential adverse environmental and social impacts.
                           Alternatives considered include: different technology adopted to upgrade WWTPs’ discharge to
                           meet higher discharge standard, for odor removal at WWTPs and pumping stations, different
                           options for sludge dewatering to 60% moisture content (advanced dewatering – composting – land
                           application, advanced dewatering – drying – incineration/landfill) . Different options for sludge
                           treatment are compared, namely direct land application, composting, brick making and landfill
                           etc. , Different technology of composting ( open air windrow composting, composting cell and
                           dano drum composting ) are also compared, based on centralized vs. decentralized options. –).
                           The recommended options are those environmentally sounder, more economically viable and more
                           sustainable.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Various alternatives, including a “no project” scenario, have been identified and compared during
                           the EA process aiming to avoid or minimize potential adverse environmental and social impacts.
                           Alternatives considered include: different technology adopted to upgrade WWTPs’ discharge to
                           meet higher discharge standard, for odor removal at WWTPs and pumping stations, different
                           options for sludge dewatering to 60% moisture content (advanced dewatering – composting – land
                           application, advanced dewatering – drying – incineration/landfill) was compared, and alternative
                           analysis was conducted for different technology based on these two options (centralized vs.
                           decentralized options, and different options of composting – open air windrow composting,
                           composting cell and dano drum composting). The recommended options are those
                           environmentally sounder, more economically viable and more sustainable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In accordance with local laws and Bank requirements, A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for the component was prepared in Chinese and English by
                           the Guilin PMO, with assistance from house demolition offices, local land bureaus, affected
                           villages and communities, potentially displaced persons, and Hohai University. During project
                           design, the project owners and design institutes paid attention to possible linkages to associated


                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                         on-going or planned resettlement practices. As a result, linked projects in the project were
                         identified and included in the project RAP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The RAP was prepared in line with relevant Chinese laws and regulations, and World Bank OP
                         4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. Key principles, considerations and salient activities in project
                         design and RAP preparation included:
                         •        Acquisition of land and other assets, and relocation of people, will be minimized as much
                         as possible.
                         •        A socio-economic survey will be conducted to determine baseline conditions, especially of
                         project affected persons.
                         •        Compensation for houses or other properties will be determined at full replacement value.
                         •        Compensation will be provided to all project affected persons, including those who lack
                         house registration or other documents, such as legal documents.
                         •        Basic infrastructure and service facilities will be provided in areas where project affected
                         persons will be resettled.
                         •        Affected persons will be consulted during planning for acquisition of land and other
                         assets, and provision of rehabilitation.
                         •        Financial and physical resources for resettlement and rehabilitation will be made available
                         when required.
                         •        Special consideration will be given to vulnerable groups.
                         •        Institutional arrangements will be established to ensure effective and timely design,
                         planning, consultation and implementation of the RAP.
                         •        Effective and timely supervision, monitoring and evaluation of project implementation
                         will be executed.

                         Compensation Standards. Land acquisition compensation is including land compensation, a
                         resettlement subsidy, and compensation for standing crops. The land acquisition fund is calculated
                         based on land output value according to local regulation. The compensation rates for structures are
                         determined based on their replacement costs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Implementation arrangements. A multi-level organization was established to implement the RAP.
                         An independent monitor will be selected for resettlement implementation and livelihood
                         restoration. The PMO will be responsible for internal monitoring and will provide semi-annual
                         internal monitoring reports to the Bank. Details of staffing and their responsibilities are provided
                         in the RAP.

                         Budget and funding arrangement. The Borrower will prepare a sufficient budget from counterpart
                         funding to conduct resettlement of projects.

                         Public participation. Project-affected persons and organizations were informed about the project
                         and its impacts in meetings during the preparation of the RAP. Comments and recommendations
                         received from these meetings were incorporated in the RAP and feasibility study. Public
                         participation will continue during RAP implementation. Project information will be provided to
                         affected persons through television, newspapers, bulletins and posters. The RAP will be
                         summarized in a resettlement information booklet and distributed to affected households.

                         Gender issues. Gender issues were considered and sensitive approaches were applied in
                         resettlement planning. Both males and females affected by the project were consulted during RAP
                         preparation and the social assessment process. Men and women's group were separately

                                                                   Page 6 of 10
                         interviewed. Resettlement impacts on men and women were found to have no discrepancies; both
                         men and women will equally benefit from the proposed project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Grievance mechanism. A grievance mechanism was established during the preparation of the
                         RAP. All relevant telephone numbers were disclosed to PAPs. The PAPs can prosecute any
                         resettlement aspect, if needed. All prosecuted cases will be recorded in paper.

                         Resettlement Policy Framework. A Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed according
                         to relevant local laws and regulations as well as World Bank’s OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary
                         Resettlement for components that might change their location during project implementation. It
                         describes the overall legal framework, planning principles, procedures, compensation and
                         rehabilitation approach, consultation and participation requirements, grievance redress
                         mechanisms, organization and monitoring arrangements.

                         Resettlement organization. The PMO will assume the overall responsibility for the
                         implementation of the resettlement program. PMO will work with the district and county
                         government offices to implement the resettlement programs. These offices have competent and
                         experienced staffs. Their respective responsibilities and functions are detailed in the RAP.
                         Training will be provided to the project staff during project implementati on.

                         Environment

                         To address environmental safeguard issues, capacity building of the clients in Guilin has been an
                         integral part of the project preparation process. The borrower has engaged a well-qualified
                         institute (Guangxi Autonomous Region Academy of Environmental Science), which has very
                         recent experience in preparing environmental assessment (EA) for other similar WB projects in the
                         province, to carry-out EA. The consolidated EA mainly describes baseline environmental and
                         social conditions, assesses the potential impacts during construction and operation and analyzes
                         different alternatives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To mitigate potential impacts of the project as assessed in the EA, the EMP was developed as the
                         result of close collaboration between the PMO and the EA institute. This ensures the EMP’s
                         ownership by the project entities which in turn helps guarantee its effective implementation. To
                         ensure the EMP implementation, a budgeted training plan is included in the EMP and monitoring
                         of EMP implementation is part of the component 5 on project management. The EMP will be
                         referred to in bidding documents and contracts with contractors and supervisors to ensure its
                         implementation.

                         More specifically, the EMP outlines the institutional arrangement and responsibility of each party
                         (PMO, owners, contractors, supervision engineers, operators, regulating government agencies,
                         etc.) during implementation. The overall responsibility for ensuring the EMP’s implementation
                         rests with the PMO. The PMO should have at least one staff in charge of EMP implementation,
                         supervision, monitoring and reporting. The EMP specifies common mitigation measures especially
                         during construction and site-specific measures for individual components especially during
                         operation. The EMP devises a detailed environmental monitoring plan for construction and
                         operation phases covering discharge at sources, ambient air, water quality and noise levels with
                         details on parameters monitored, location, frequency, monitoring agency and budget estimates.
                         The EMP also proposed supervision arrangement for EMP implementation, and set out
                         requirements on reporting by major parties involved and response procedures to ensure

                                                                  Page 7 of 10
                           appropriate actions are taken in response to the problems.

                           Environmental Management Framework (EMF). To deal with the uncertainty on the location of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the sludge treatment plant, an EMF was prepared as a chapter of the EA. It specifies a set of site
                           selection criteria for the sludge plant, including social acceptability, stipulates requirements on its
                           EA preparation highlighting those on public consultation and outlines EA review and approval
                           procedure. Arrangement for updating the EMP of this subproject is also described with
                           implementation and supervision mechanism being the same as the overall project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Three rounds of information disclosure followed by public consultation were conducted during the
                           EA process. The first round was in November 2013 with the project announcement and outlines of
                           EA published at the official websites of Guilin Development and Reform Committee (the PMO)
                           and City Utility Bureau as well as the bulletin of affected communities. The second round took
                           place in January-February 2014 mainly though public notice posted in the affected neighborhoods
                           with hard copies available at the PMO’s office. The last round was in May 2014 on the same
                           websites with full text of draft EA/EMP down-loadable and hard copy available at their offices.
                           Public consultations were carried out mainly through questionnaire and meetings. Altogether more
                           than 500 people were surveyed involving different age groups, genders, educational backgrounds
                           and occupations, as well as experts and officials of relevant government agencies. Public concerns
                           and opinions expressed during the process have been addressed in the finalization of the EA
                           package and incorporated into the project design.

                           Project-affected persons and organizations were informed about the project and its impacts in
                           meetings during the preparation of the RAP. Comments and recommendations received from these
                           meetings were incorporated in the RAP and feasibility study. Public participation will continue
                           during RAP implementation. Project information will be provided to affected persons through
                           television, newspapers, bulletins and posters. The RAP will be summarized in a resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           information booklet and distributed to affected households.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          12-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       15-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                                06-May-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          09-May-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       12-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                                03-May-2014
                           Comments:


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Sing Cho
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)       Date: 07-Jul-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Joop Stoutjesdijk (SM)    Date: 15-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 10 of 10
