                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12241
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P147864
                            Project Name:      UP CORE ROAD NETWORK DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM (P147864)
                            Task Team          Rajesh Rohatgi,Elena Y. Chesheva
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          03-Mar-2015                       Estimated   29-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Information technology (2%), Health (1%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
                                              Highways (97%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (92%), Pollution management and
                                              environmental health (2%), Other social development (2%), Trade fa cilitation
                                              and market access (2%), Injuries and non-communicable diseases (2%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     570.00           Total Bank Financing:                400.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                170.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   400.00
                              Total                                                                                   570.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to reduce travel time and improve safety of road users on
                           targeted corridors.



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                          3. Project Description
                         Component I : Network Improvement
                         The Network Improvement component shall include rehabilitation, pavement strengthening and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upgrading (widening) of about 600 km of selected high priority corridors which are part of the Core
                         Road Network.

                         Component II : Institutional Strengthening of PWD
                         The component would introduce better road management practice in PWD contributing to
                         sustainability of investments. The activities include implementation of an IT-Based Project
                         Management Information System (PMIS); Upgrade and operationalize exiting ICT tools being used
                         by PWD; Operationalization of Road Asset Management System (RAMS), integrated with
                         Geographic Information System database; and Training and capacity building of PWD staff.

                         Component III : Road Safety Initiatives
                         The road safety component has been designed to support the decisions taken by the Government of
                         Uttar Pradesh (GoUP) to strengthen road safety leadership, policy and coordination arrangements
                         across the state. Key activities include:
                         •       Establishment of UP Highway Police (UPHP) on two high-risk highway corridors totaling
                         about 830km (NH2, entire stretch passing through UP and NH25, Lucknow-Kanpur)
                         •       State-wide implementation of road crash database and analysis system
                         •       Policy and strategic management support to the Road Safety Cell
                         •       State-wide media campaigns supporting the new State Road Safety Policy
                         •       Driver licensing policy review.
                         •       Establishment of 2 vehicle testing stations
                         •       Commercial driver training program
                         •       Capacity building of the new Road Safety Division at PWD
                         •       Design, implementation and evaluation of systematic, cost-effective safety engineering
                         improvements to high-risk corridors of the Core Road Network
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component IV: Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
                         Uttar Pradesh has been plagued by various natural disasters such as floods, drought, fire, epidemics,
                         earthquake, causing severe damage to life and property and thus adversely affecting normal life. Out
                         of 71 districts, 30 are highly prone to floods while drought is a regular phenomenon in Vidhyachal
                         and Bundelkhand region. Similar is the case with epidemics. The component would ensure that once
                         a disaster is triggered, funds can be quickly allocated to this component.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in the state of Uttar Pradesh (UP) which is the fifth largest state in
                         India. With an area of 2, 40,928 sq.km, UP covers 7.3% of India’s land area, and is the country’s
                         most populous state with a population of nearly 200 million. One sixth of India’s population lives in
                         the 70 districts of UP. Many roads in UP have locally important cultural properties located along the
                         edge of pavement. UP forms the bulk of the Gangetic plain in India and though it has very little
                         forest cover, it has several protected areas, including bird and animal sanctuaries and national parks.
                         Roadside trees are considered as protected forests in UP.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gaurav D. Joshi (GENDR)


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                           Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental               Yes            The project activities, under component 1, are likely to
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      have impacts on the environment which will need to be
                                                                       identified, assessed, and properly managed. Hence this
                                                                       policy has been triggered to ensure that the negative
                                                                       impacts are properly mitigated and positive ones are
                                                                       enhanced.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            Some of the activities, in Phase II, have the potential to
                            4.04                                       affect natural habitats - for example a bird sanctuary
                                                                       close to a candidate road, and a proposal of a new bridge
                                                                       across a river. This policy is triggered to ensure that these
                                                                       impacts are properly handled during preparation of the
                                                                       EIA and implementation of the EMP.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes            There is no commercial logging supported under the
                                                                       project. However, there may be some diversion of Forest
                                                                       land to Non-forest use. So, this policy has been triggered
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 No pesticides are likely to be used in the project.

                            Physical Cultural           Yes            Project activities have the potential to impact some road
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       side locally important cultural properties. In addition,
                                                                       chance finds are also possible. Hence, this policy has been
                                                                       triggered.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes            Though there is no tribal families were found in phase I
                            BP 4.10                                    corridors, there are chances of tribal families in phase II
                                                                       corridors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes            There is acquisition of private land resulting in adverse
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 impact on livelihood and displacement of non-titleholders.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental issues and impacts

                             The road improvements supported under the project are likely to have some direct impacts,
                             especially on road side features like trees, which are classified as Protected Forests, diversion of
                             Reserved Forest land, impacts on roadside cultural properties, increase in pollution levels,


                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         especially close to sensitive receptors like education and health facilities, as well as safety of
                         workers, other road users, and roadside residents could be adversely impacted. Other impacts
                         would include temporary increase in pollution from the construction plants and camps, stress on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental services in the project area, and impacts that can occur due to improper handling of
                         specific construction material like ash from thermal power plants.
                         The project improvements will require cutting of about 32,435 trees, which are classified as
                         protected forests in Uttar Pradesh, along all Phase I roads put together. In addition, about 0.1 ha of
                         Reserved Forest land would also need to be diverted for construction of bridge approaches along 1
                         road. None of the Phase I roads pass close to any protected areas or other natural habitats. A total
                         of 12 roadside water bodies could be negatively impacted by the road works. While there are none
                         along the Garuntha-Chirgaon road, 3 are likely to be affected along Hamirpur-Rath road, 7 along
                         Gola-Shahjahanpur road, and 2 water bodies along the Badaun-Bilsi road. Other commonly
                         identified impacts during construction phase of include the pollution increase from plants required
                         for construction – Hot-mix, Cement batching, and from domestic waste of construction camps
                         established for the project as well as improper handling of ash used to be used in embankment
                         construction for two roads. In addition, safety of the workers and other road users, especially since
                         these roads will be improved while being used by regular road users, are a key concern.

                         If not properly designed, improved roads could have safety concerns during the operation phase,
                         especially since design speed improvements are a key desired outcome of the project. Climate
                         change related impacts have been identified for impacts on the project supported infrastructure, as
                         well as due to project induced emissions of greenhouse gases.

                         Social issues and impacts

                         A Social Impact Assessment (SIA) for all project corridors of phase I was completed in December
                         2014. It included consultations with stakeholders, information on socio-economic and cultural
                         features of the population, and baseline data on impacts due to involuntary land taking. These data
                         were subsequently verified and updated through independent review and have informed the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of measures to ensure that negative impacts are mitigated and that people receive
                         benefits from the project. Based on SIA results, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for all phase I
                         project corridors have been prepared and disclosed in country as well as on Bank’s InfoShop.
                         Bank’s Operational Policy (OP) 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered as project
                         will acquire private land for widening of existing bridge approaches in two out of four project
                         corridors of phase I and will have adverse impact on livelihood of the community along the
                         corridor. Project will be adversely impacting 1197 families of which 619 will be displaced. The
                         displaced families are non-titleholders and largely small commercial structure and kiosk owners.
                         Out of total 1197 affected families, 56 percent are losing commercial structures of which more
                         than 50 percent are kiosk owners. These kiosks will move out of corridor of impact but will
                         remain within the right of way. Little over 15 percent are losing part of their residential structure.
                         Project activities though largely is restricted within the right of way, project will be acquiring 7.7
                         ha of private land for widening of bridge approaches. The families losing part of their agriculture
                         land are 16 percent of the total project affected families and no titleholder is getting displaced.
                         Project will also impact 218 common property resources and majority of them are hand pumps.
                         The other CPRs include religious structures, stand posts, water tanks, bus stops and boundary
                         walls.

                         OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has been triggered though a small number of scheduled tribe found
                         in the project area has m igrated from other part of the state. They do not speak a separate

                                                                    Page 4 of 10
                          language from that of the majority population (Hindi), nor do they have political institutions that
                          separate them from the majority population. They do not have a historically based collective
                          attachment to the land in the project area or any customary rights to forest and grazing land.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Therefore an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan has not been prepared. The survey for phase
                          II corridors is yet to begin as roads for phase II has not been identified yet.

                           The cut-off date for entitlements for losses caused by land acquisition varies from corridor to
                           corridor and ranges from August 2014 to December 2014 when data collection was completed for
                           all four project corridors. Project will relocate all adversely impacted CPRs in consultation with
                           the community. Project has also developed Gender Action Plan for phase I roads as part of
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to be implemented along with RAP. The gender action plan
                           provides for additional livelihood scope apart from creating awareness for gender based violence;
                           safety of women and child; and equal participation of men and women in decisions related to
                           project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to have limited adverse impacts from land acquisition and resettlement.
                           The Social Impact Assessment carried out as part of the project shows that adverse social impacts
                           are minimal the area of impact is confined within the existing right of way. The private land will
                           be purchased only for approach roads for the bridges in two project corridors of phase I. However,
                           there will be large scale acquisition of private land for approaches of Sharda Bridge which is part
                           of phase II.

                           Few indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated except for the diversion of the Reserved
                           Forest land. In Phase II, the impacts on riverine ecology due to the proposed bridge across the
                           Sharda River, and potential impacts on Parvati-Araga bird sanctuary which is close to another
                           candidate road could be potentially long term.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           The corridors under phase I follow the existing alignment hence no analysis of alternative has been
                           carried out. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for
                           safeguard management for phase II project corridors however requires analyzing various
                           alternatives for each sub-project while carrying out respective Environmental and Social Impact
                           Assessments (ESIA). As per the agreed policies of ESMF, these ESIAs and subsequent EMPs and
                           RAPs will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank prior to approving the sub-projects for
                           implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to mitigate these adverse impacts, UP Public Works Department has developed a project-
                           specific Resettlement and Rehabilitation (R&R) Policy which goes beyond the requirements of the
                           Right to Fair Compensation, Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
                           Act of 2013 and which together with the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) establishes compliance
                           with OP 4.12. The R&R policy has been approved by State Government vide Government Order
                           number / 23-12-2014 (SA) /2012 dated August 19, 2014. The policy has the provisions for
                           mitigating losses for (i) both titleholders as well as non-titleholders and (ii) direct and indirect
                           losses. Based on project specific R&R policy, Resettlement Action Plans for all the four phase I
                           corridors have been prepared and disclosed in country as well as on Bank’s InfoShop. Project


                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                         apart from compensating loss of immovable property, will assist each affected family for physical
                         relocation and economic rehabilitation. The total budget for RAP implementation for all the phase
                         I corridors is INR 160.6 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In line with OP4.01, Environmental Assessments – standalone EIAs for each of the 4 Phase I
                         roads have been prepared and are under reviewed by an Independent Review consultant team to
                         confirm that these are in line with Operational Policies. The portions of EMP that are related to
                         construction works have been suitably integrated into the Contract documents for their smooth
                         implementation. The plans for compensatory afforestation, in lieu of the trees cut for
                         improvements, have been prepared and the amount for the same, including the Net Present Value
                         of the land, has been earmarked. Enhancement of selected common properties close to the roads
                         being improved has also been envisaged, and plans for the same are part of the EMP. A total
                         budget of about INR 422.41 million has been estimated for implementation of the environmental
                         management measures for the 4 Phase I roads.

                         Since phase II roads are yet to be identified, project based on findings of phase I roads, has
                         prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) that acknowledges
                         adverse environmental and social issues and integrates the measures for addressing them in the
                         project preparation and implementation for phase II roads. The draft ESMF was presented to a
                         wide range of stakeholders in a state level workshop. The comments and feedback received has
                         been included in the final version of the ESMF. The ESMF includes a Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF), which specifies the procedures, eligibility, grievance redress and other
                         measures to be followed in the event that resettlement or land acquisition is required for any sub-
                         project. Although there is negligible presence of tribal community in the state, an Indigenous
                         People Policy Framework (IPPF) has been prepared for a chance find, with the objective of
                         including tribal communities in the project in order to achieve the highest possible positive impact
                         of the interventions to improve their quality of life. Most of the women’s status indicators
                         (including those pertaining to health, literacy, work force participation, spousal abuse) show that
                         gender equity and empowerment remain important issues in the state. ESMF also includes Gender
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment and Development Framework (GADF). The ESMF also envisages specialist studies to
                         address specific concerns like the impacts on biodiversity in vicinity of havens for wildlife –
                         Parvati Araga Bird Sanctuary adjacent to Balrampur- Utraula road, and Sharda River, where a new
                         bridge is proposed both candidates under Phase II of the project. The project designs should be
                         gender responsive based on the gender analysis, and should be included in the DPR The findings
                         and recommendations from the gender analysis during project planning and feedback from
                         beneficiaries during implementation must be discussed thoroughly to determine the need for
                         further action. Gender analysis will be carried out for the sub-projects at the screening stage, in
                         order to analyze gender issues and to design interventions to address women’s needs. In order to
                         ensure that the potential for disruption to the normal life is minimized and that the potentially
                         affected populations were consulted and adequately informed during the preparation stages. ESMF
                         makes it mandatory to consult potential PAPs and local community during the design and
                         preparation stages of the sub-project; adoption of better planning and construction practices to
                         reduce the potential disruptions; and strong local level communications and grievance redress
                         system to inform and respond to the affected people.

                         UP PWD has implemented Uttar Pradesh State Roads Project (UPSRP) and therefore has the
                         experience of working with World Bank. In order to have smooth implementation of RAP, project
                         has established Environment, Social Development and Resettlement Cell (ESDRC) managed by
                         Chief Engineer as head of the cell and supported by an Environmental Specialist and a Social

                                                                   Page 6 of 10
                           Development Specialist. At district level project has established project implementation units
                           (PIUs) headed by and Executive Engineer and supported by an Assistant Engineer designated as
                           Environmental and Social Development Officer (ESO). Project has contracted a non-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           governmental organization (NGO) for implementation of RAP. The RAP will be implemented
                           over a period of two years for the phase I roads. The project will also establish an integrated
                           grievance redress mechanism (IGRM) which will allow project affected persons and other
                           community members to register their grievance / feedback. Grievances of any kind may be
                           submitted through various mediums (e.g. a dedicated toll free phone line, direct calls to concerned
                           officials, online via a dedicated portal, in written form, etc.) and will be addressed. Although the
                           project causes adverse impacts, it will also bring positive benefits to the local population. Apart
                           from IGRM, a separate grievance redress cell (GRC) will be established at district level headed by
                           District Magistrate or his / her representative and supported by the head of PIU and ESO. NGO
                           representative will also be part of district level GRM. The RAP implementation will be
                           concurrently monitored internally by PWD and externally by supervision consultants. The RAP
                           implementation will be evaluated at midterm and again at end term by external consultants.

                           The implementation of the EMP will be mostly done by the Contractor during the construction
                           phase. The Project Management Consultant’s Environmental Specialist will be responsible for the
                           preparation of the EA documentation, oversight of the implementation by the Contractor, and
                           periodic reporting on progress in the EMP implementation to the UPPWD. The ESRDC’s
                           Environmental Specialist will be the primary interface with the PMC. There will also be
                           designated Environmental and Social Officers in the field divisions to ensure that the coordination
                           with the other departments of GoUP is smooth. In addition, compensatory plantation will be the
                           responsibility of the Forest Department, GoUP.

                           Training of various stakeholders on issues relevant during the implementation of the project has
                           been included to ensure that capacity gaps can be addressed during the subsequent stages of the
                           project. Budgetary resources have been provided for the same.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A total of 25 local level consultations were carried out across all the four phase I corridors with the
                           local community including project affected persons. The issues discussed included widening
                           options; removal of encroachment; employment opportunities; shifting religious structures and
                           other common properties; safety of women and children; compensation and drainage. The
                           suggestion given by the community has informed project preparation and has been incorporated in
                           the design and Resettlement Action Plans and EIA/EMP as appropriate. Such consultations will
                           continue during the implementation phase as well.

                           Sustainability of the priority investments will depend substantially on the meaningful participation
                           and support of key stakeholders, especially local communities. During Social Impact Assessment,
                           perception of various stakeholders was also recorded and it indicates a high-level of demand at the
                           grassroots level for greater transparency and for active involvement in the planning of proposed
                           road corridor. Therefore, local communities and key stakeholders will be engaged to ensure their
                           inclusion and participation in the planning of road design and also in implementation stage. These
                           interventions will include: (i) Information, Education, and Communications (IEC) campaigns; (ii)
                           mobilization of local communities (particularly women and youth) around issues of road safety;
                           livelihood; sanitation, health and hygiene; (iii) transparent consultations; (iv) dissemination of
                           project information; and (v) community oversight. NGO partners deployed for RAP


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           implementation will be responsible for implementation of these investment-level social
                           intermediation programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The safeguard documents have been disclosed in country as well as on Bank’s InfoShop between
                           November 20, 2014 to January 30, 2015. The links for in-country disclosures on the internet are as
                           under:

                           http://uppwd.up.nic.in/wbprojects.html (Hamirpur-Rath section of SH-42)
                           http://uppwd.up.nic.in/wbprojects.html (Gauratha-Chirgaon section of SH-42)
                           http://uppwd.up.nic.in/wbprojects.html (Gola-Shahjahanpur section of SH-93)
                           http://uppwd.up.nic.in/wbprojects.html (Badayun-Bilsi-Bijnaur section of SH-51)
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      30-Jan-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            25-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Dec-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            15-Jan-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Dec-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            20-Nov-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]     NA [   ]
                          report?



                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rajesh Rohatgi,Elena Y. Chesheva
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                Date:
                            Practice Manager/    Name:                                               Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
