                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC6485

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Congo, Democratic Republic                  P145965
                                                                           Project ID:
                                                of
                            Project Name:       Human Development Systems Strengthening (P145965)
                            Task Team       Luc Laviolette
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Feb-2014                          Estimated         06-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTHW                                 Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (34%), General education sector (33%), Health (33%)
                            Theme(s):           Other social protection and risk management (25%), Health system performance
                                                (25%), Education for all (25%), Administrative and civi l service reform (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     15.00                      Total Bank Financing:          15.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    15.00
                              Total                                                                          15.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to increase the availability of data for decision
                           making for human development and to strengthen systems for essential medicines.

                           The higher level objective to which this technical assistance project would contribute is to increase
                           the efficiency of investments in the education, health and social protection systems in order to
                         improve human development outcomes. Improvements in efficiency, in turn, may lead to increases in
                         overall investment in the social sectors. This higher level objective will be achieved by working in
                         two related and parallel steps: i) across sectors on reinforcing information systems; and ii) addressing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sector-specific systems constraints. The first sector-specific constraint, which will be addressed by
                         this project, is to strengthen the systems for supply and quality assurance of essential medicines. This
                         sector-specific constraint was selected because of its high potential positive impact on the DRC’s
                         population, especially the poor, and its close linkage to larger Bank investments in the health sector.
                         Other sector-specific constraints could be addressed once additional financing becomes available,
                         either from IDA or from development partners.

                         The proposed project development objective is to increase the availability of data for decision
                         making for human development and to strengthen systems for essential medicines.

                         The direct beneficiaries of this project will be the decision-makers and staff of the Ministries of
                         Primary, Secondary and Professional Education; Public Health; Social Affairs; and Labor,
                         Employment and Social Insurance, through the technical assistance and related support they would
                         receive to strengthen the systems which enable them to deliver services more efficiently and
                         effectively. The ultimate beneficiaries will be the users of the services provided by the four
                         Ministries.
                         C. Project Description
                         Decades of conflict and low state investment have left the systems in the social sectors at high need
                         of technical assistance in almost all areas. This project is very selective in focusing on some of the
                         most “foundational” system building blocks in each sector, taking into consideration the support of
                         other development partners (e.g., procurement and financial management to be supported by DFID).
                         While technical assistance will be provided to all four participating Ministries, larger activities will
                         be financed for the education and health sectors because these two Ministries are considerably more
                         prepared for larger scale activities. As the two Ministries responsible for social protection increase
                         their capacity and preparedness (partly through the analytical tasks in component 3 below) and if
Public Disclosure Copy




                         additional financing is identified, these two Ministries could be provided larger scale technical
                         assistance.

                         The project will have three components as follows:

                         Component 1: Information Systems (approx. US$7 million)

                         The overall objective of this component is to enable data-driven decision making, leading to more
                         efficient use of resources and improved human development outcomes. The targeted Ministries
                         currently have very limited reliable data on which to base decisions and thus the investments are of
                         less than optimal efficiency. The project will address that situation in the following four ways:

                         •        GIS-based information management system for infrastructure (approx. US$ 2.5 million):
                         This will build on the national population and household census, partly supported through the Bank-
                         financed Catalytic Project to Strengthen the National Statistical Institute, which will undertake in
                         2014, during the mapping phase, a census of all social sector infrastructure of public interest (e.g.,
                         public and private schools, health facilities, pharmacies, pre-schools, vocational schools, shelters,
                         etc.). The census will use geo-positioning and thus maps of the infrastructure could easily be linked
                         to population figures. This proposed sub-area will build on the census by enabling the targeted
                         Ministries to develop dashboards for managing the detailed information on physical infrastructure
                         collected from the census and thus facilitate data-driven decision making related to infrastructure
                         investments. The Ministries will have, as a starting point, a tool to assist them in deciding where to
                         build new infrastructure. While the initial phase of support would focus on physical infrastructure,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project will create a platform on which other “layers” of GIS-based information and data can be
                         added, e.g., to manage human resources and supplies, such as text books and medical equipment.

                         •        Education program information management system (approx. US$ 1 million). This will
                         accelerate the decentralization and quality improvement of the information management system for
                         education, as initiated in the province of Katanga and which is ready to be replicated in the other
                         provinces. The system collects and manages information on a range of parameters that are require for
                         managing the education system (e.g. school enrollment, teachers, textbooks, etc.). The team will
                         explore during preparation the possibility of enhancing the Katanga experience in other provinces
                         using tablets and cell phones (e.g. an open access application implemented in countries such as Côte
                         d’Ivoire). The assistance will enable the Ministry of Education to improve its tracking of key
                         performance indicators. It will build and replicate in other provinces the approach adopted by the
                         Global Partnership for Education-financed PROSEB project (supervised by the Bank) that will
                         finance the administrative offices at district level in two provinces for, inter alia, the collection of
                         statistical data. It is envisaged that this program information management system will become a
                         “layer” of the overall GIS system for the social sectors.

                         •        Health information management system (HMIS) (approx. US$ 1.1 million). An HMIS
                         provides the information required to manage the health system (e.g. coverage of health services,
                         availability of supplies such as medicines, etc.). The current HMIS does not deliver reliable data to
                         enable the Ministry of Public Health to manage service delivery in a decentralized, data-driven and
                         timely manner. Data collection is slow and does not take full advantage of available information and
                         communication technologies. The Ministry of Public Health has developed a costed work plan to
                         update the HMIS to a DHIS-2 software and for related capacity building, which currently has a
                         considerable financing gap. The team will study the HMIS financing plan during preparation in
                         order to identify a suitable set of areas to support in coordination with other partners. The Ministry
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will soon start a study on an organization-wide system for information management; it I likely that
                         the HMIS would become a “layer” of the overall GIS system for the health sector.

                         •        Service Delivery Indicators surveys (approx. $2 million). The Service Delivery Indicators
                         (SDI) provide a set of metrics for benchmarking service delivery performance in education and
                         health in Africa. They complement the education and health information systems described above by
                         being population based (as opposed to only users of the services) and by delving deeper into the
                         quality of service delivery. The overall objective of the indicators is to gauge the quality of service
                         delivery in primary education and basic health services. The indicators enable governments and
                         service providers to identify gaps and to track progress within and across countries over time. The
                         broad availability, high public awareness and a persistent focus on the indicators is intended to
                         mobilize policymakers, citizens, service providers, donors and other stakeholders into action. The
                         project would support DRC to carry out two rounds of SDI surveys (one at the start of the project and
                         another 2-3 years later). The surveys will complement the information collected through the program
                         management information systems by adopting the perspective of citizens accessing a service. The
                         SDI process in a country is very visible and tends to attract considerable attention to quality, which is
                         a prime concern in DRC in health and education. The SDI process will thus provide a periodic
                         service delivery report card on education and health care. Being part of the group of countries in
                         Africa which are participating in the SDI process will also enable DRC to compare itself to
                         benchmarks and to share knowledge on approaches to improve service delivery. The Bank would
                         support DRC with additional Bank-executed resources for quality assurance of the surveys.

                         Component 2: Systems for Safe Essential Medicines (approx. US$3.25 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The overall objective of this component is to enhance the capacity of the system that provides safe
                         and effective essential medicines. While a well-designed national system for delivery of
                         pharmaceutical products exists on paper in the country, it is not operating at its full intended scope or
                         as efficiently as it could. Support is required both to reinforce the supply chain to public sector health
                         facilities as well as the regulatory role of the government to control the quality of essential medicines
                         in the market.

                         The project preparation will build on a recent Bank-financed assessment of the needs of the national
                         pharmaceutical supply management system and conduct additional analysis of the regulatory
                         framework. This analytical work, which will also integrate the latest sectorial analysis made by
                         development partners, will enable the Ministry to determine the best approaches to address supply
                         constraints through the public system as well as to build the capacity of the regulatory system to
                         register and control the quality of essential medicines that are sold in DRC’s markets.

                         The resources available through this project are not sufficient to enable a full reform of the
                         pharmaceutical regulatory and supply systems in the country. The project will thus focus on a few
                         key bottlenecks in some provinces and health zones and coordinate closely with other development
                         partners, through the pharmaceuticals sub-group of the health sector coordination group (GIBS), to
                         build synergies with other interventions.

                         Regarding the regulatory system, the focus is likely to be on drug registration and quality control,
                         while other regulatory functions such as pharmaco-vigilance could be the subject of future assistance.
                         The project would leverage the Medicines Regulatory Harmonization initiatives that have already
                         materialized on the continent. Although DRC is part of the SADC (South African Development
                         Community), the closest initiative is likely to be the one driven by the CEMAC (Communauté
Public Disclosure Copy




                         économique et monétaire d’Afrique centrale) region. The project will also build on the recent support
                         from the Belgium Cooperation to the Ministry’s Division for Pharmaceuticals. A stepwise result-
                         based financing approach could be used in order to build the foundation of a well-functioning DPM
                         (e.g., adoption of a documented drug approval process, creation of an independent homologation
                         commission, creation of a drug registry).

                         Given the size of the country, the intervention on the supply chain will be targeted. Geographically, it
                         will align with the health zones selected for support by the next Bank-financed health sector support
                         project, anticipated in FY15. Content-wise, this project may also be an opportunity to test innovative
                         drug supply model(s) at a small scale. The options include: involving the private sector, introducing
                         decentralized procurement for certain classes of medicines under framework contracts, and
                         experimenting a cross-docking system which was proved to be successful in Zambia. The
                         opportunity to use ICT, building on a recent USAID initiative, will also be explored. A different
                         option would be to focus the intervention on the FEDECAM, in order to find a sustainable funding
                         model and to strengthen the procurement capabilities. These options will be investigated during
                         project preparation.

                         The team will work in close coordination with the development partners during preparation to
                         identify system components that would be most strategic for Bank support. Once a consensus has
                         been reached on the critical technical assistance needs and the solutions that would be appropriate to
                         the specificity of DRC, support will be provided in the form of equipment to improve and secure the
                         supply chain (e.g., cell phones for real-time reporting of stock levels), technical expertise (e.g.,
                         technical expert positioned at the national regulatory agency) and capacity building.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Analytical Products for Systems Strengthening/ Project Management (approx. US
                         $4.75 million)

                         The overall objective of this component is three-fold: i) to ensure that targeted Ministries have access
                         to high quality analytical products to inform decision-making and systems development; ii) to enable
                         DRC to learn from and share its lessons with the global community, particularly from/with other
                         fragile and conflict-affected states; and iii) to ensure good coordination and management of the
                         project. There are currently limited specialized analytical skills in the Ministries and thus a lack of
                         analytical products to inform policies and guide decisions. While project management units have
                         been set up by Ministerial decree they will require additional support.

                         This project will finance the following two areas:

                         •        Analytical products for systems strengthening (approx. US$ 2.5 million). This will enable
                         the targeted Ministries to build the analytical basis required for informed decisions. A full work
                         program for the first few years of this area will be determined during preparation but it is likely to
                         include the following: i) Organizational audit of the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social
                         Insurance; ii) Study to establish a vulnerability targeting mechanism; iii) Assessment of the
                         vocational training sector/system; iv) Assessment of the gaps and requirements of the human
                         resources management system of the Ministry of Public Health; v) study of IT requirements of the
                         National Institute of Social Security and of the National Bureau of Employment. Work programs for
                         subsequent years of the project will be agreed at the Steering Committee. The project will also
                         finance other forms of learning such as South-South exchanges, participation in international fora,
                         etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Project monitoring and management (approx. US$ 2.25 million). This will finance the
                         provision of goods, consultant services, training and operating costs to support project management,
                         with a view to ensure efficient, effective, transparent and accountable project delivery. The project
                         will also finance a communications strategy to mitigate the risks related to these systems reforms.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Institutional capacity building at national level is the focus of the project. Particular attention is given
                         to some of the most “foundational” system building blocks in each sector. No civil works will be
                         undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The project does not
                         require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                         resources and livelihood. The project is expected to have a positive impact for all beneficiaries.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         At national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
                         environmental management. In addition, the DRC has signed a number of international treaties and
                         conventions. However, implementation capacity is weak. Environmental policies and their
                         compliance are governed by the Ministère de l’Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du
                         Tourisme (MECNT) – (Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism). The MECNT has
                         three departments in charge of environmental monitoring and management: i) Le Groupe d’Etudes
                               Environnementales du Congo (GEEC); ii) le Centre National d’Information sur l’Environnement
                               (CNIE); and iii) La Cellule Réglementation et Contentieux Environnementaux (CRCE). The GEEC
                               is responsible for safeguards compliance of all projects in the country, but with emphasis on
Public Disclosure Copy




                               environmental category A project. The unit is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite several
                               donor-funded capacity building initiatives, the unit still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its
                               field supervision duties.
                               At project level, the project recognizes the above institutional framework for safeguards compliance,
                               but will not need it, as project activities will not require the preparation of safeguards instruments.

                               While each participating line Ministry (i.e., Primary, Secondary and Professional Education; Public
                               Health, Social Affairs, Labor, Employment and Social Insurance) will be responsible for the
                               implementation of the technical assistance activities related to their mandates, the overall
                               coordination will be ensured by the Ministry of Finance and it is anticipated that the project will be
                               guided by a multi-sectoral Steering Committee. The Ministry of Finance and the line ministries are
                               well versed in World Bank safeguards policies since they have collaborated on several World Bank
                               projects.
                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Alexandra C. Bezeredi (AFTSG)
                               Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No                            The project is not expected to have any
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         environmental impacts.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project will not affect natural habitats.

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project does not involve physical cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area. The project is focused on systems building
                                                                                                                                 in several government ministries.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The project will not induce land acquisition
                                 4.12                                                                                            leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                                                                                 restrictions of access to resources and
                                                                                                                                 livelihoods.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project does not involve dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Jan-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             No studies will be needed.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Luc Laviolette

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 16-Dec-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Trina S. Haque (SM)                          Date: 16-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
