                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5941
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                               Project ID:    P131013
                            Project Name:      National Agricultural Innovation (P131013)
                            Task Team          Wilhelmus Gerardus Jansse
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          18-Oct-2013                        Estimated   17-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSAR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (80%), Central government administration
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (35%), Rural policies and institutions (35%),
                                              Participation and civic engagement (10%), Indigenous peoples (10%), Other
                                              environment and natural resources management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     128.70           Total Bank Financing:                  40.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  56.95
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     40.00
                              Inter-American Development Bank                                                            1.00
                              Local Farmer Organizations                                                                30.75
                              Total                                                                                    128.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         To support the effectiveness and cooperation of member organizations of Peru’s agricultural
                         innovation system in providing or developing improved agricultural technologies for small and
                         medium sized farms
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         Agricultural innovation in Peru has been partly fed and led by central government investments in
                         INIA, but has also been driven by farmers, agribusinesses, regional and national initiatives, as for
                         example evidenced by the strong growth in vegetable production inthe coast. These decentralized
                         innovation processes were also supported by the national government, as shown by the INCAGRO I
                         and II projects. As a result, there are many players in Peru's agricultural innovation system who are
                         not necessarily operating in a coordinated manner. The existence of this informal agricultural
                         innovation system was recognized by the "Decreto Ley 1060 (DL1060)", which identifies INIA as
                         the lead agency of the National Agricultural Innovation System and tries to identify coordination
                         principles. According to D.L.1060, the system is made up of many actors: the Ministries of
                         Agriculture and Education, INIA and SENASA (the sanitary and phytosanitary service agency of
                         Peru), the relevant units in local and regional governments, public and private universities,
                         agribusinesses, producer organizations, other agricultural research and training organizations (e.g.,
                         NGOs) and Peru's Intellectual Property rights authority. While many of the actors in the system will
                         pursue their own (privately or regionally defined) objectives, there is wide agreement that public
                         support to the system will help to increase the contribution of innovation to agricultural and
                         economic development.

                         In order to increase the contribution of agricultural innovation to green and inclusive sector growth,
                         the proposed project will combine the emphasis on a decentralized bottom-up approach to mobilize
                         ideas and initiatives as implemented in the earlier INCAGRO 1 and 2 projects with the strengthening
                         of the central capacity to coordinate the innovation system and to produce research results with a
                         public goods nature. The design follows from the ICR of the INCAGRO 2 project which concluded,
                         among other points, that the focus on competitive grant systems was conducive to the effective and
                         efficient use of public funds.., but also that there is a need to ensure the provision of essential public
Public Disclosure Copy




                         goods and the institutional strengthening of key actors, such as INIA, to coordinate the agricultural
                         innovation system. Furthermore, decentralization is proceeding in Peru and suggests that regional or
                         departmental governments will start playing a bigger role in supporting agricultural development.

                         Four components have been designed in response to these considerations:


                         Component 1: Strengthening Capacities of the National Institute for Agricultural Innovation (INIA)
                         to Lead the National Agricultural Innovation System (SNIA). The objective of Component 1 is to
                         build INIA’s institutional capacities to lead and coordinate the National System for Agriculture
                         Innovation (SNIA), as conceived in National Legislative Decree No. 1060 (DL 1060). DL 1060 also
                         established the National Commission for Innovation and Training in Agriculture (CONICA), which
                         brings together a representation of the main stakeholders in Peru’s agricultural innovation system.
                         CONICA will be headed by the Minister of Agriculture; will be a sound board and a source of advice
                         on innovation policies; and will evaluate of INIA’s role as leader of the SNIA. INIA’s specific
                         functions regarding the SNIA are defined in DL 1060 and include the formulation of national
                         innovation policies, the identification of the potential for innovation, the promotion and evaluation of
                         technological innovations and the coordination of activities in relation to the establishment of the
                         SNIA.


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         Component 2: Consolidating the Market for Innovation Services. Three competitive funds will be
                         established to support the development of a market for innovation services: 1) adaptive research; 2)
                         extension and technical assistance; and 3) community seed enterprises. This component will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance promotional actions for the competitive funds, including programs targeted to women and
                         indigenous population groups. These workshops will give special attention to climate change.

                         Component 3: Strategic Capacities. Component 3 will enhance the capacity of the system to produce
                         and facilitate innovations. For this purpose the Component supports strategic research initiatives,
                         capacity building programs for extension agents, scientific exchange workshops, and grants for post
                         graduate studies. National and regional workshops will be implemented to promote participation in
                         this component and to bring these funds to the attention of the target audience.

                         Component 4: Project Implementation. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be established
                         within INIA to implement PNIA and its two projects, PSNIA; and PINIA. The main functions of the
                         PIU are to facilitate, monitor and coordinate the implementation of the two projects and to ensure the
                         synergy between the functioning of the overall national agricultural innovation system and the
                         strengthening of INIA. For this function the implementation unit will be led by a Project Director and
                         will host planning and budget specialists, fiduciary, legal, safeguard management and M&E
                         specialists and the required support staff. The PIU will also host the implementation managers of
                         PINIA and PSNIA. In the case of PSNIA, most staff involved in the implementation of the Project
                         will be located in the Technical Secretariat, as discussed in Component 1. At the request of the GoP,
                         who prefers to have only one set of procedures to operate the PIU, Component 4 is funded by the
                         IDB, with the World Bank having the same no-objection rights.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Salient issues

                         Peru is a multiethnic country formed by the amalgamation of different cultures and ethnicities over
Public Disclosure Copy




                         thousands of years. Indigenous peoples and afro-descendants constitute an important part of the
                         Peruvian population. The two major indigenous groups are the Quechuas followed by the Aymaras,
                         mostly found in the extreme southern Andes. Large proportions of the indigenous population who
                         live in the Andean highlands still speak Quechua or Aymara, and have vital cultural traditions.
                         Several indigenous cultures are also dispersed throughout the country beyond the Andes Mountains.
                         Indigenous peoples and afro-descendants are well organized in Peru. The Project will keep a roster of
                         all organizations to ensure that these are consulted and are offered the opportunity to participate.

                         Peru's distinct geographical regions (Costa, Sierra, Andean and Amazonia) are mirrored in
                         socioeconomic and ethnic cultures. The Social Assessment highlighted the social and cultural
                         richness and variety of Peru. Therefore the Project will embrace the concept of national innovation
                         system including a national perspective while at the same time including regional and/or local
                         perspectives.

                         Rural women play a fundamental role in decisions regarding the household, including decisions
                         regarding crop and livestock production, use of resources, and expenditures. However, women's
                         decision-making role tends to be marginalized outside the household, especially in public decision-
                         making bodies. The gender division of labor in Peru differs according to regions. In the mountain,
                         women participate in all the agricultural tasks, especially land preparation, weeding, harvesting and
                         irrigation, and are responsible for livestock and small-scale marketing. On the coast, women are


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         particularly active in harvesting. In the Amazon forest zone, indigenous and river dwelling women
                         participate in various phases of subsistence farming with an overall participation in household food
                         production, particularly in harvesting and processing of crops (FAO 2000). The project will take
Public Disclosure Copy




                         especial considerations to ensure that women from all ethnic groups will be included and will benefit
                         from the outcomes of the Project. Particular measures will be taken to integrate indigenous women.

                         Understanding the role of women in agriculture by regions is fundamental, to ensure that PSNIA
                         succeeds in empowering farmers (women and men) to explore new options for making their business
                         more viable and/or sustainable. A Gender Assessment and strategy has been prepared to ensure that
                         policy-makers members of the national agricultural innovation system develop a “culture of women
                         in innovation? and, that the same culture is fostered within community-based organizations and
                         private sector. A communication strategy will be prepared to convey the importance of gender-
                         inclusive innovations, and overall, promote the significance of the project in fostering agricultural
                         innovation, and consequently, boosting Peruvian agriculture.

                         Location

                         Sub-projects financed under Components 2 and 3 will be implemented country-wide, covering the
                         three main ecological regions of Peru (Costa, Sierra, Selva). Sub-projects will be selected and
                         approved through a two stage submission process (concept notes and full proposals). A selection and
                         approval process based on merit will be used in Component 2 to select the best proposals. In
                         component 3 the approval will be more based on compliance with eligibility criteria and less on
                         competitive selection. In the full proposal stage, sub-projects must meet adequate standards for
                         environmental safeguards management and adequate consideration of indigenous people. Given that
                         the specific location and nature of potential sub-projects to be financed under these components will
                         only be known during Project implementation, the potential environmental and social impacts and
                         their magnitude cannot be fully ascertained at this time. Since assessing and mitigating risks
                         associated with these interventions would be premature at this stage, it was deemed appropriate to
                         develop an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for screening, evaluating and approving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proposed subprojects. The EMF includes procedures to screen out category A sub-projects and will
                         be used to screen proposals/subprojects.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mary Lisbeth Gonzalez (LCSSO)
                         Raul Tolmos (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              At concept stage, the Project was rated as
                         BP 4.01                                             environmental category B, since the components
                                                                             were found to have relatively limited
                                                                             environmental impact potential. An
                                                                             Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                                                                             was prepared. The EMF includes the legal and
                                                                             regulatory framework applicable to the Project in
                                                                             a variety of topics such as sectorial environmental
                                                                             management, pest management and pesticides,
                                                                             biotechnology and biosafety, agro-biodiversity
                                                                             conservation, use of certified seeds, and organic


                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                                                                     production. The EMF also presents baseline
                                                                     information and potential environmental risks
                                                                     associated with climate change, use of pesticides,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     modern biotechnology and improved seeds. An
                                                                     Environmental Impact Statement and an
                                                                     Environmental Management Report will be
                                                                     prepared by proponents of any research and
                                                                     innovation subproject. The EMF includes
                                                                     environmental eligibility criteria for screening the
                                                                     research, innovation and development activities
                                                                     supported under the various funds of the Project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes             Most, if not all interventions, will be localized in
                                                                     areas that have been traditionally dedicated to
                                                                     agriculture and pastures. Any research proposal
                                                                     in the buffer zone of, or within, a protected area
                                                                     or critical natural habitats will be designed to help
                                                                     reduce pressure on the protected area or habitat
                                                                     itself. In particular, research and innovation
                                                                     subprojects on South American camelids should
                                                                     not increase pressure on their natural habitats. All
                                                                     the proposals for subprojects of competitive funds
                                                                     will include a screening of potential
                                                                     environmental impacts as is outlined in the EMF
                                                                     and according to the sectorial Regulations on
                                                                     Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes             Prioritized crops include forest species. Thus the
                                                                     Project will undertake research or promote
                                                                     innovations in forest areas. It is highly likely that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     some innovation and research subprojects will be
                                                                     localized within critical (e.g. native) forest
                                                                     habitats.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes             Prioritized crops include potato, coffee, cacao,
                                                                     yellow maize, white maize, quinoa and Andean
                                                                     crops, livestock (cattle, South American
                                                                     camelids, and guinea pigs) and forest species.
                                                                     While it is expected that new research lines and
                                                                     technological innovations will promote and/or
                                                                     adopt sound pest management practices, certain
                                                                     changes, such as the adoption of new cultivars in
                                                                     response to market demands may lead to a
                                                                     potential increase in the use of pesticides and to
                                                                     the introduction of pesticides in new geographic
                                                                     areas. The Project will disseminate IPM
                                                                     approaches to fit the specific needs of the
                                                                     proposed research and innovation subprojects
                                                                     including the use of biological control, cultural



                                                             Page 5 of 10
                                                                         practices in habitat management, use of resistant
                                                                         or tolerant varieties, and safer pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project will mainly finance sub-projects in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                         strategic research lines intended to generate new
                                                                         scientific and technological information, products
                                                                         and processes, of public character, addressing key
                                                                         problems in the national/ regional agriculture, and
                                                                         market opportunities, and participatory adaptive
                                                                         research. It does not plan major infrastructural
                                                                         development.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Indigenous people will be explicitly targeted in
                                                                         the project, since they strongly rely on agriculture
                                                                         for their livelihoods and would benefit
                                                                         considerably from improved technologies and
                                                                         other innovations. The project will prepare an
                                                                         IPDP and an Environmental and Social
                                                                         Management Framework to ensure that
                                                                         indigenous peoples do not experience adverse
                                                                         impacts and received appropriate benefits from
                                                                         subprojects. These instruments will require the
                                                                         development of (i) culturally appropriate
                                                                         information, communication, consultation and
                                                                         participation strategy (ii) collaboration strategies,
                                                                         and (iii) the new law on indigenous previous
                                                                         consultation (Law & Reglamento No. 29785) in
                                                                         order to ensure that indigenous peoples’
                                                                         communities and their leaders of both genders
                                                                         will participate in the project, and also to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         guarantee that their participation will be
                                                                         compatible with their customs and cultures.
                                                                         Therefore, an institutional assessment will be
                                                                         developed, focusing on (i) institutional
                                                                         experience of indigenous peoples, (ii) policies
                                                                         and social safeguards, (iii) dialogue, consultation
                                                                         and participation process with indigenous leaders;
                                                                         (iv) alternative conflict resolution strategies; and
                                                                         (v) grievance mechanism, which must be part of
                                                                         the IPP and Project documents. The policies and
                                                                         procedures elaborated for the INCAGRO II
                                                                         Project will be adapted and updated for PNIA.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              The project is not planning any major
                         4.12                                            infrastructure development, construction or
                                                                         zoning activities. At this stage it is not expected
                                                                         that the project will be executed in protected
                                                                         areas or buffer zones. The project will design
                                                                         screening processes to determine if activities will
                                                                         incur in restriction of access to natural resources


                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                                                                                or land acquisition. If during implementation it is
                                                                                determined that the project will irremediably have
                                                                                such impact, the policy will be triggered and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                project will be restructured.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project will not support the construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                investments which rely on existing dams.
                            Projects on International        No                  The project will not affect international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will not support activities in
                            7.60                                                disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are not foreseen in this project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Positive indirect long term effects are anticipated due to mainstreaming of the environmental
                              dimension into PSNIA by the Environmental Specialist.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              NA
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              INIA’s institutional capacity to deal with environmental and social safeguard issues is weak. To
                              strengthen capacity, an Environmental Specialist and a Social Specialist will be hired once the
                              project implementation starts who will report to the PNIA Operations Director.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The main beneficiaries of the project are the following: (a) state institutions participating in the
                              national innovation system such as the implementing agency (INIA), the Ministry of Agriculture,
                              and the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CONCYTEC); (b) regional and local
                              governments; (c) private sector organizations; (d) research institutions, and (e) universities. At
                              civil society level, the main beneficiaries are the farmers themselves and their community-based
                              organizations, cooperatives, non-government organizations and indigenous peoples and women-
                              based organizations.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                          24-Sep-2013
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                       21-Oct-2013



                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Peru                                                             24-Sep-2013
                           Comments: Website INIA
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                             11-Oct-2013
                           Comments: website INIA
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Peru                                                             24-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]



                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Wilhelmus Gerardus Jansse
                            Approved By



                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Holger A. Kray (SM)      Date: 14-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 10 of 10
