                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7284
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                              Project ID:    P147157
                            Project Name:      BRAZIL BAHIA SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
                                               (P147157)
                            Task Team          Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       09-Apr-2014                            Estimated   27-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSAR                                   Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Agro-industry, marketing,
                                              and trade (30%), Water supply (20%), Information t echnology (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (40%), Technology diffusion (20%), Trade facilitation and market
                                              access (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%), Gender (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     260.00           Total Bank Financing:                  150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    110.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       150.00
                              Total                                                                                       260.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To increase market integration, net revenues, and food security of organized beneficiaries; as well as
                           to improve access to water supply and sanitation services of households in Project areas.



                                                                        Page 1 of 16
                         3. Project Description
                         1. Component 1: Productive Inclusion and Access to Markets (US$ 153.0 million of which US$ 64.2
                         million IBRD financing). This Component will increase productive inclusion and access to markets
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for family farmers and other disadvantaged populations in the Borrower’s territories, through: (a) the
                         provision of support to Producer Organizations (POs) and Community Associations (CAs), as the
                         case may be, for: i.      the carrying out of Market-Oriented Subprojects including the preparation
                         and implementation of approved Business Plans; ii.         the carrying out of Social and
                         Environmental Subprojects including the preparation and implementation of approved Investment
                         Plans ; (b)      the provision of support to CAR for the implementation of activities to manage
                         agricultural risks as assessed in the planned Agricultural Risk Analysis; and (c) the provision of
                         support to CAR for the construction of warehouses and other logistic infrastructure to support market
                         access by POs and CAs.

                         2. Market-Oriented Subprojects. will be based on business plan proposals prepared by eligible POs
                         with support from the Project and linked to pre-identified priority value chains and territorial
                         development strategies. The proposed Project will support the analysis of those value chains as well
                         as the preparation of Territorial Development Plans in those territories of the State where they have
                         not yet been finalized. Subproject eligibility and selection criteria are outlined in Annex 3 and
                         detailed in the POM. The submission of Market-Oriented Subprojects will be done through calls for
                         proposals issued by CAR that will specify, on a case by case basis, the specific value-chain and
                         territorial priorities. Beneficiary producer organizations (POs) will receive technical assistance for
                         structuring of a Business Plan and capacity building activities to promote usage of financial
                         management instruments.

                         3. Under the first category of productive subprojects, formally registered producer organizations will
                         be eligible to respond to public call for proposals. After establishing that basic eligibility criteria are
                         met (e.g. DAP, linked to a priority value chain , etc.), these proposals will be technically reviewed.
                         Those proposal which meet technical criteria and are consistent with territorial sustainable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development plans, will receive technical assistance for business plan development, including
                         detailed market analysis and identification of beneficiary contribution equal to at least 20% of the
                         total subproject costs, at least half of which must be a financial contribution (the remainder can be
                         ‘in-kind’). These business plans determine commercial viability of the subproject proposal including
                         identifying markets – both institutional and private – into which producer organizations will be
                         integrated or in which they will expand their access. Those which are assessed as commercially
                         viable (and meet additional social and environmental sustainability requirements) will be selected to
                         receive matching grants and technical assistance for business plan implementation. Business plans
                         will identity a range of investments including, inter alia, working capital; productive inputs,
                         technologies, and infrastructures; equipment for value-added processing; packing and storage
                         facilities; distribution networks, etc.

                         4.        Social and Environmental Subprojects. Social and Environmental Subprojects will be based
                         on Investment Plans prepared by POs, CAs, or groups of organized households who are part of CAs,
                         with support from the Project. Those subprojects will aim at improving the quality of life of rural
                         households, with a specific focus on food security, the diversification of income sources, and the
                         adoption of sustainable natural resources management practices. Subproject eligibility and selection
                         criteria are outlined in Annex 3 and detailed in the POM. Municipal Councils for Sustainable
                         Development (CMDS) will receive Social and Environmental Subproject proposals and send to CAR
                         those proposals meeting basic eligibility. Beneficiary CAs and POs will receive technical assistance


                                                                        Page 2 of 16
                         for structuring of an Investment Plan and capacity building activities to promote food consumption
                         diversification.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Under the ‘social and environmental’ subprojects, community associations and other social
                         organizations will be eligible to submit proposals either in response to public calls for proposals or
                         through Sustainable Development Municipal Councils (CMDS). Those proposals submitted in
                         response to public calls for proposals will undergo the same selection process described above.
                         Those which are submitted to CMDS will be reviewed by Municipal, Territorial and State
                         Sustainable Development Councils. If approved, these proposals will be submitted to CAR for
                         technical appraisal. These proposals will receive technical assistance to develop investment plans
                         which demonstrate sustainability of social and environmental impacts, such as improved food
                         security, increased climate resilience, recovery of natural resources, etc. In order to implement
                         investment plans, community associations and social organizations will receive technical assistance
                         and matching grants to which beneficiaries must make contributions (in cash or monetized ‘in kind’)
                         valued at least 10% of the total subproject cost. Priority for this category of subproject will be given
                         to proposals from the extreme rural poor, women’s producer organizations, youth, indigenous people,
                         quilombolas and other traditional communities.

                         6. For both Market-Oriented Subprojects and Social and Environmental Subprojects, the Project
                         Management Unit (PMU) within CAR will establish technical review committees for business and
                         investment plan proposals with experts on the specific value chains or type of social or
                         environmental investment being reviewed. For both types of subprojects, prioritization criteria will
                         include incentives for proposals which include food-security, environmental recovery, CSA and
                         GAP. As well, proposals which are presented by women-led POs and CAs, as well as proposals
                         submitted by quilombolas and indigenous people will receive special consideration.

                         7. After prioritization of business and investment plan proposals, POs and CAs will receive technical
                         assistance for the elaboration of business or investment plans. These will subsequently be assessed
                         by the technical review committees established by CAR to ensure technical, financial, social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental feasibility of the subprojects. Those subprojects demonstrating full feasibility will be
                         selected for financing under the proposed Project. For those subprojects not selected, feedback will
                         be provided to the proponents in order to enable them to improve their proposals and submit them for
                         consideration at a later stage. Project funds will thereafter be transferred to POs and CAs whose
                         business or investment plans are deemed viable. Successful POs and CAs will be responsible for all
                         procurement and contracting required for the implementation of subprojects, as well as for subproject
                         financial management and oversight. Technical Assistance for the preparation of business and
                         investment plans and their implementation will be provided by technical experts in the CAR
                         territorial offices, other state agencies such as Bahia Service for Small Enterprise Development
                         (SEBRAE-BA) and the Bahia Agricultural Extension Services (EBDA), as well as technical experts
                         from Interamerican Institute for Cooperation in Agriculture (IICA) and private providers contracted
                         directly by the POs and CAs. Through these and other partners, the proposed Project will provide
                         capacity building to POs and CAs throughout the subproject identification, preparation,
                         implementation and evaluation cycle.

                         8. Component 2: Household Water Supply and Sanitation (US$ 68.9 million of which US$ 56.2
                         million IBRD financing). This component will support the State of Bahia’s efforts to improve
                         sanitation conditions and access to water supply services where a pre-established adequate
                         management system is present and sufficient hydrological resources have been identified, through
                         the provision of support to: (a) CAR for the carrying out of WSS infrastructure Subprojects identified

                                                                      Page 3 of 16
                         by CAs; and (b) CENTRAL and SAAE for the strengthening of their capacities for the operation and
                         maintenance WSS systems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         9. One of the main criteria for subproject approval is the existence of an adequate management
                         structure for water supply and sanitation systems, and cleaning and maintenance of septic tanks. The
                         two eligible management structures under the project are (i) the CENTRAL; and the municipal
                         Autonomous Water Supply and Sewage Systems (SAAE). In order to receive the improved WSS
                         services, households will be required to give their formal adherence to whichever management
                         system is operating in the community.

                         10.The Project will include activities for strengthening of existing CENTRAL or implementation of
                         new ones as a condition to the financing of water supply systems to be managed by them. The
                         Project will also provide institutional strengthening and capacity building for the Autonomous Water
                         Supply and Sewage Systems that assume the responsibility of managing subprojects.

                         11. Investments under this component will follow specific technical, environmental, financial and
                         management criteria as described in Annex 3. CAR will directly implement the installation of WSS
                         systems in coordination with the Rural Sanitation Department of the State Secretariat of Regional
                         Development (SEDUR), the Bahia State Company of Environmental Engineering and Water
                         Resources (CERB) and the Bahia State Water Supply Company (EMBASA). The feasibility reports
                         and technical designs for each WSS investment will be submitted for the Bank’s approval prior to
                         their implementation by CAR.

                         12. This Component will be implemented in two territories where CENTRAL and SAAE are
                         operating; namely, Chapada Diamantina and Piemonte da Chapada.

                         13. Component 3: Institutional Development, Technical Assistance and Project Management (US$
                         38.1 million of which US$ 29.6 million IBRD financing). This Component will include the following
                         Subcomponents: (a)       Subcomponent 3.1 will provide technical assistance for the carrying out of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the necessary research and diagnostics in the areas of, inter alia: integration of value chain activities
                         and market access, vulnerable population participation and potential social and environmental
                         impacts of Project interventions; (b) Subcomponent 3.2 will support the carrying out of capacity
                         building activities for CAR’s technical staff, POs, CAs and Partner Agencies; (c) Subcomponent 3.3
                         will provide support for the design and implementation of dissemination activities of the Project’s
                         processes and results, the mobilization of local communities and the carrying out of a beneficiary
                         assessment of the Project; (d) Subcomponent 3.4 will provide support to CAR for the strengthening
                         of its technical and administrative management capacity to ensure effective Project management; and
                         (e)       Subcomponent 3.5 will provide technical assistance to support policy actions related to
                         Territorial Governance Policy stakeholders (namely, CEDETER & CODETER) and instruments
                         (namely, Territorial Development Plans).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         1.       The project will be implemented across the State’s 27 rural territories and will target family
                         farmers who are overrepresented among the poor population in the state. The later include
                         quilombolas, indigenous groups, and artisanal fishermen, among other traditional groups, who
                         collectively number approximately 150,000 families. The project also aims at ensuring that women,
                         youth, indigenous peoples and other vulnerable rural groups can benefit from increased agricultural
                         and nonagricultural rural competitiveness, as well as from water services investments.


                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                         2.      The Bahia semi-arid region continues to be ridden by rural poverty and is most vulnerable to
                         climate change. Data from the 2010 Census show that the State of Bahia has a large share (27.9%) of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         its population living in rural areas in comparison with Brazil’s (15.6%) and that 21.1% of its
                         households live with per capita income of less than one quarter of the minimum wage (extreme
                         poverty line), a percentage twice the national average (10.4%). Poor households taken as those with
                         per capita income below half the minimum wage amounted to 44.9% of the total, well above the
                         Brazilian average (27.6%). Across state regions there were wide differences in poverty (IBGE: 2010
                         Census). In fact, spanning over 68.7% of the territory and housing 49.1% of the population, the
                         Semi-Árido region is the poorest and less developed region of the State. Most of the state s rural
                         population lives in this poverty stricken, drought prone and highly vulnerable to climate change
                         semi-arid zone, which continues to lag in terms of economic development with consequences in
                         terms of its contribution to overall state growth, decreasing population, and low job creation.

                         3.       In these lagging semi-arid regions, Bahia holds a large segment of small producers devoted
                         to subsistence family farming who are poor and excluded from the commercialization chains. They
                         may benefit the most from the activities of social and productive inclusion. The supported activities
                         will raise productivity and farmers’ incomes as the appropriation of value chains is increased by
                         opening up commercialization outlets.

                         4.      Indigenous peoples, quilombola communities and other traditional communities are
                         overrepresented among the poor rural population in the state of Bahia. According to FUNAI (the
                         Brazilian Agency of Indigenous Affairs) there are 16 Indigenous Peoples in the state of Bahia. They
                         account for 16,817 people, living in 31 indigenous lands, which comprise 113 local communities.
                         Nearly 56 percent of them live with monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the Brazilian minimum
                         wage and 80% earn up to ½ of the minimum wage. There are also 468 quilombola communities and
                         507 communities (11,431 families) in which the system of “fundo de pasto” prevails. Poor soils in
                         drought prone areas and low technology productive practices compromise their livelihood. Perennial
                         water shortage reduces quality of life in indigenous and traditional communities at the North-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Northwest portions of the state and land conflicts prevail in some areas at the southern coastal region.

                         5.       Bahia also presents wide gender inequality especially in rural areas. Gender inequalities
                         express themselves in relation to poverty rates and labor market outcomes (lower labor force and
                         gender participation, higher unemployment and lower earnings). In Bahia the percentage of families
                         headed by women reached 35.9% in 2009, slightly above the Brazilian average (35.2%). Although
                         declining in Bahia, poverty among female headed households (13.0%) has been higher than among
                         males’ (11.0%). In rural areas this picture is even worse: the share of poor female’s headed
                         households is almost double the figure for urban areas. The fact that women have, on average, more
                         years of education than their male counterparts is not reflected in comparable outcomes in economic
                         opportunities. On the contrary, as to the male-female composition of the labor force, men have a
                         slightly higher share (56.7%) than the national average (56.1%). Recent unemployment data (FIBGE/
                         PME: December, 2011) also show that the women´s rate (11.2%) is almost double that for men’s
                         (5.7%). Besides facing higher unemployment women have lower earnings as compared to men – the
                         ratio between male and female earnings equals 1.58 (PNAD: 2009). Higher unemployment and lower
                         income turns women more dependent on their male partners and increases the probability of being
                         subjected to domestic violence. Coupled with race and other attributes women are at an even greater
                         disadvantage. Actually, if a woman is illiterate, afro-descendent, head of household with small
                         children, works in family agriculture and lives in the semi-arid interior of the State, she will have a
                         very high probability of being extremely poor in addition to being overexposed to risky situations.

                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                         These outcomes reflect fewer opportunities for women and disrespect for their rights.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                         Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project is Category “B” as the impact is
                         BP 4.01                                             limited in scope, localized, temporary and
                                                                             reversible. . The proposed project interventions
                                                                             will be small-scale, demand-driven investments
                                                                             (i.e., subprojects). These subprojects would not
                                                                             cause significant adverse environmental impacts,
                                                                             related mainly to infrastructure development (i.e.,
                                                                             water, sanitation and rural roads), new
                                                                             agricultural practices (i.e., product diversification,
                                                                             conservation agriculture, promotion of value
                                                                             added products, and product certification).
                                                                             As the exact type and nature of subprojects to
                                                                             finance business plans and small-scale
                                                                             community infrastructure would not be known ex
                                                                             ante (i.e., prior to project appraisal), the Borrower
                                                                             has prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                                             Management Framework (ESMF).
                                                                             The ESMF draws on lessons from previous
                                                                             operations implemented by CAR, including the
                                                                             Rural Poverty Reduction Project (RPRP). The
                                                                             ESMF focuses on Project-specific aspects, such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             as institutional arrangements and capacity,
                                                                             regulatory framework, environmental screening
                                                                             procedures and criteria and licensing. The ESMF
                                                                             includes an analysis of any economic or social
                                                                             impact project activities might have on vulnerable
                                                                             groups, traditional communities or poor rural
                                                                             communities.
                                                                             The ESMF provides guidance on: (i) identifying
                                                                             the potential social, environmental and
                                                                             distributive impacts associated with the typology
                                                                             of project investments; (ii) minimizing potential
                                                                             impacts for productive and infrastructure
                                                                             subprojects; (iii) specifying procedures to be used
                                                                             in assessing environmental and social impacts
                                                                             during the subproject design stage; and (iv)
                                                                             addressing identified impacts during subproject
                                                                             implementation. Additionally, the subprojects
                                                                             selection procedures will be consistent with (i) the
                                                                             national, state and local legislation concerning
                                                                             Brazilian Forest Code, natural habitats and


                                                                     Page 6 of 16
                                                                     protected areas (Law 12.651/12; SNUC - Law
                                                                     9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and Decree 5758/06);
                                                                     (ii) Law 12.334/2010; and (iii) World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     safeguards policies.

                                                                     The ESMF also includes the provisions related to
                                                                     social and environmental safeguard policies
                                                                     supervision.

                                                                     The ESMF and Operational Manual include clear
                                                                     methodology, procedures, and criteria to monitor
                                                                     subprojects impacts on water resources from
                                                                     water storage infrastructures in semi-arid region.

                                                                     The ESMF was submitted to the Bank on March
                                                                     10, 2014 and approved during the pre-appraisal
                                                                     mission at March 14, 2014. It was disclosed and
                                                                     disseminated through the executing agency’s
                                                                     website (http://www.car.ba.gov.br/wp-content/
                                                                     uploads/2014/03/ANEXO_04_
                                                                     PLANO_DE_GESTAO_SOCIOAMBIENTAL11
                                                                     .pdf) on March 17, 2014; and was consulted with
                                                                     key stakeholders on March 20, 2014.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           While activities are not planned for Protected
                                                                     Areas (PA); Areas of Permanent Preservation
                                                                     (APP), Legal Reserves (LR), and Protected Areas
                                                                     (PA) activities under the project components
                                                                     should nonetheless lead to positive impacts on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     natural habitats, through the direct protection and
                                                                     rehabilitation of these areas, following the
                                                                     provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code. Given
                                                                     that OP/BP 4.04 is triggered.
                                                                     The Project has provisions to regenerate and
                                                                     reforest water-producing systems (mainly riparian
                                                                     vegetation), benefiting also local biodiversity
                                                                     preservation and restoration. Subprojects resulting
                                                                     in any significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                     critical natural habitats will not be eligible.
                                                                     Springs and river margin areas are classified as
                                                                     Permanent Preservation Areas (APP), and legally
                                                                     protected by the Brazilian Legislation (Federal
                                                                     Law 12.651/2012). APP use for water systems
                                                                     development, intake and pipelines, requires
                                                                     specific permitting, mitigation and regeneration
                                                                     measures. Despite the expected positive impacts,
                                                                     the ESMF includes clear guidance regarding
                                                                     direct and indirect impacts on natural habitats,



                                                             Page 7 of 16
                                                                 screening mechanisms to indicate the potential for
                                                                 conversion or degradation of critical or other
                                                                 natural habitats. The ESMF also identifies
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 monitoring and management activities to prevent
                                                                 or mitigate any possible negative impacts on
                                                                 natural habitats
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        Yes           It is not expected that Project implementation will
                                                                 have negative impacts on forest resources.
                                                                 Subprojects with the potential for conversion or
                                                                 degradation of natural forests or other natural
                                                                 habitats that are likely to have significant adverse
                                                                 environmental impacts which are sensitive,
                                                                 diverse, or unprecedented, are ineligible. The
                                                                 Project also excludes activities that require
                                                                 commercial forest harvesting, wood extraction or
                                                                 firewood use in the production chain.
                                                                 Activities resulting in deforestation and loss of
                                                                 native vegetation cover will not be allowed. The
                                                                 project would contribute to conserve and restore
                                                                 natural vegetation, generating positive impacts
                                                                 through the maintenance and/or recovery of
                                                                 natural vegetation on rural private land holdings
                                                                 on steep slopes, along water courses (up to a
                                                                 certain distance from the riparian margin) or in
                                                                 the vicinity of springs. Additionally, the project
                                                                 would contribute to conserve and/or restore a set
                                                                 aside area called Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal -
                                                                 RL) in these private holdings. As already
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 mentioned, the subproject selection procedures
                                                                 would be consistent with the Brazilian Forest
                                                                 Code. Typical activities should support mainly
                                                                 conservation and restoration activities.
                                                                 The ESMF considers the requirements of OB/
                                                                 BP4.36 whenever restoration and plantation
                                                                 activities are being planned, and should be
                                                                 planned and executed in such a way to minimize
                                                                 or prevent negative impacts on forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes           Minor amounts of pesticides would probably
                                                                 continue to be used in the short term by a small
                                                                 portion of targeted small-scale landholdings. The
                                                                 project would encourage and support technical
                                                                 assistance for the adoption of organic agriculture
                                                                 and of proven, economically- and
                                                                 environmentally-sustainable Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management (IPM). This approach would
                                                                 increase farmer productivity (i.e., yields), reduce
                                                                 input costs and human health risk, and minimize


                                                         Page 8 of 16
                                                                         adverse environmental impacts through the virtual
                                                                         elimination of pesticide use. The IPM approach
                                                                         further improves the sustainability of agro-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         ecosystems by focusing on the knowledge and
                                                                         skills of farmers to better enable natural resource
                                                                         management.
                                                                         The need to use pesticides or herbicides should be
                                                                         indicated in each subproject, as well as the IPM
                                                                         measures to be adopted. When the use of
                                                                         pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis of
                                                                         potential negative impacts resulting from the use
                                                                         of these chemicals and the risks associated with
                                                                         the inappropriate handling or storing of their
                                                                         containers should be conducted. The subprojects
                                                                         should also include measures to reduce those
                                                                         risks, in compliance with Law No. 7802/89.
                                                                         The Borrower prepared Pest Management
                                                                         procedures that are incorporated in the ESMF and
                                                                         in the Project Operational Manual The ESMF
                                                                         makes use of the World Health Organization’s
                                                                         Recommended Classification of Pesticides by
                                                                         Hazard and Guidelines to Classification (Geneva:
                                                                         WHO 1994-95). The ESMF excludes finance
                                                                         under the proposed project for formulated
                                                                         products that fall in WHO classes IA and IB, or
                                                                         formulations of products in Class II, if: (a) the
                                                                         country lacks restrictions on their distribution and
                                                                         use; or (b) they are likely to be used by, or be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         accessible to, lay personnel, farmers, or others
                                                                         without training, equipment, and facilities to
                                                                         handle, store, and apply these products properly.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Project implementation would not cause any
                         BP 4.11                                         negative impact on known physical cultural
                                                                         resources (PCR). Proposed subprojects with
                                                                         expected direct and negative impacts on known
                                                                         archaeological, paleontological, historical or other
                                                                         culturally significant sites will not be eligible.
                                                                         However, this policy is triggered given that some
                                                                         sub-project investments could result in physical
                                                                         interventions with small earthworks involving the
                                                                         chance finds of physical cultural resources.
                                                                         The ESMF and the Operation Manual include
                                                                         specific screening provisions for evaluating
                                                                         potential impacts on cultural resources and should
                                                                         provide specific guidance on the chance finds
                                                                         procedures.
                                                                         The State of Bahia has many historical and



                                                                 Page 9 of 16
                                                                        archaeological sites. Brazil has a well-developed
                                                                        legislative and normative framework, which is
                                                                        under Federal oversight by the National Institute
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        for Protection of Historical and Archaeological
                                                                        Sites (IPHAN).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes            Indigenous peoples are a priority target of this
                                                                        project as they are overrepresented among the
                                                                        poor rural population of the state of Bahia.
                                                                        According to FUNAI (the Brazilian Agency of
                                                                        Indigenous Affairs) there are 16 Indigenous
                                                                        Peoples in the state of Bahia (Arikosé, Atikum,
                                                                        Botocudo, Kaimbé, Kantaruré, Kariri, Kiriri,
                                                                        Kiriri-Barra, Pankararé, Pankararú, Pataxó,
                                                                        Pataxó Hã-Hã-Hãe, Tupinambá, Tuxá e Xucuru-
                                                                        Kariri). They count for 16,817 people, living in
                                                                        31 indigenous lands, which comprise 113 local
                                                                        communities. Nearly 56 percent of them live with
                                                                        monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the
                                                                        Brazilian minimum wage and 80% earn up to ½
                                                                        of the minimum wage.
                                                                        Poor soils in drought prone areas and low
                                                                        technology productive practices compromise their
                                                                        livelihood. Perennial water shortage reduces
                                                                        quality of life in indigenous villages at the North-
                                                                        Northwest portions of the state and land conflicts
                                                                        prevail in some areas at the southern coastal
                                                                        region.
                                                                        As the exact type, nature and location of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        subprojects to be financed would not be known
                                                                        prior to project appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                        Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared by
                                                                        the client in compliance with the Bank policy, its
                                                                        principles and guidelines. The IPPF draws on
                                                                        lessons from previous operations implemented by
                                                                        CAR, which have set participatory processes of
                                                                        consultation and planning and have benefited
                                                                        indigenous communities (3,337 families from 23
                                                                        indigenous lands).
                                                                        Given the on-demand nature of the Project, the
                                                                        IPPF clarifies the processes to carry-out free,
                                                                        prior and informed consultation with potential
                                                                        beneficiaries and ensure broad community
                                                                        support for subprojects to be supported by their
                                                                        communities. The subprojects requested by
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples will meet the OP 4-10 criteria
                                                                        for Indigenous Peoples Plans.
                                                                        The IPPF was submitted to the Bank on March



                                                               Page 10 of 16
                                                                         10, 2014 and approved during the pre-appraisal
                                                                         mission at March 14, 2014. It was disclosed and
                                                                         disseminated through the executing agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         websites (http://www.car.ba.gov.br/wp-content/
                                                                         uploads/2014/03/ANEXO_03_-
                                                                         _PLANO_INDIGENA1.pdf) on March 17, 2014;
                                                                         and was consulted with representatives of
                                                                         Indigenous Peoples on March 20, 2014.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes            OP 4.12 is triggered because some activities
                         4.12                                            aiming to promote employment and income
                                                                         growth in rural areas may require land acquisition
                                                                         and have adverse impacts related with involuntary
                                                                         resettlement and/or economic displacement. As
                                                                         the exact type, nature and location of subprojects
                                                                         to be financed would not be known prior to
                                                                         project appraisal, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) has been prepared by the client
                                                                         in compliance with the Bank policy, its principles
                                                                         and guidelines.
                                                                         The RPF addresses all cases in which land
                                                                         acquisition is related with (i) activities that cannot
                                                                         technically be implemented in another location,
                                                                         (ii) the affected households do not willingly agree
                                                                         to donate land or assets for the community sub-
                                                                         project without compensation, or (iii) the criteria
                                                                         for “voluntary asset donation” are not met.
                                                                         The screening criteria for documenting voluntary
                                                                         land donations have been included under the RPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         and in the ESMF, but this type of transaction
                                                                         would in itself does not require the triggering of
                                                                         the Policy.
                                                                         Environmental conservation or protection
                                                                         activities will not lead to involuntary restrictions
                                                                         in access to natural resources in protected areas.
                                                                         Therefore, there is no need to prepare a Process
                                                                         Framework.
                                                                         The RPF was submitted to the Bank on March 10,
                                                                         2014 and approved during the pre-appraisal
                                                                         mission at March 14, 2014. It was disclosed and
                                                                         disseminated through the executing agencies
                                                                         websites (http://www.car.ba.gov.br/publicacao/
                                                                         marco-de-reassentamento-involuntario/) on
                                                                         March 17, 2014; and was consulted with key
                                                                         stakeholders on March 20, 2014.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        Yes            The project would finance small dams (less than
                                                                         15 meters in height), including farm ponds, local
                                                                         silt retention dams, and low embankment tanks.


                                                                Page 11 of 16
                                                                               The Project will exclude activities that require
                                                                               large dams, which are 15 meters or more in
                                                                               height. Given that OP/BP 4.37 is triggered and all
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               planning activities must follow World Bank
                                                                               policies.

                                                                               The ESMF ensures that the Project is fully in
                                                                               compliance with Federal and State legislation and
                                                                               Bank safeguard, including: (a) identifying the
                                                                               potential social, environmental and distributive
                                                                               impacts associated with the small dams; (b) plans
                                                                               for construction supervision and quality
                                                                               assurance; and, (c) plans for operation and
                                                                               maintenance. Environmental evaluation of each
                                                                               subproject prior to its financing will be standard
                                                                               procedure designed to prevent, minimize or
                                                                               mitigate eventual adverse effects on the
                                                                               environment.

                                                                               The ESMF also ensures that environmental
                                                                               assessment for the subprojects have determined
                                                                               that there would be no risk or negligible risk of
                                                                               significant adverse impacts due to potential
                                                                               failure of the structure to local communities and
                                                                               assets.
                            Projects on International          No              This policy is not triggered since the project will
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               not affect any international waterways as defined
                                                                               under the policy. The project will be implemented
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               across the Bahia State’s 26 rural territories. Bahia
                                                                               State is located in the eastern part of the Brazil on
                                                                               the Atlantic Coast.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                            7.60                                               work in any disputed areas as defined under the
                                                                               policy. The project will be implemented across
                                                                               the Bahia State's 26 rural territories and will
                                                                               target family farmers who are over represented
                                                                               among the poor population in the Bahia State.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project interventions comprise mainly small-scale investments that may cause positive or
                              neutral impacts. However, a few may produce direct negative impacts to the surrounding
                              environment. The implementation of productive arrangements heavily relies on the management
                              capacity of individuals or producers’ organizations, which varies widely. Finally, traditional
                              patterns of the social division of labor may hamper women's and black people participation in

                                                                      Page 12 of 16
                           productive economy and restrict their access to market-related job opportunities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           NA
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           NA
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           During project preparation, the Bank team reassessed the institutional capacity of CAR and the
                           other state agencies that will implement the project and identified the kind of additional support
                           for institutional capacity building and strengthening might be needed to assure good
                           implementation of Bank safeguard policies.

                          An Environmental and Social Management Framework, and Indigenous Peoples Policy
                          Framework, and a Resettlement Policy Framework address safeguard compliance and propose
                          actions, where needed, to ensure adequate technical capacity.

                          Additionally, the social assessment addressed the main risks and restrictions that may hinder the
                          participation of these most vulnerable social groups and proposes mitigation measures.
                          Furthermore, the project will provide capacity building to women and Afro-descendants targeted
                          on participation in project production investments.

                          Site-specific assessments will be conducted and impact mitigation plans drawn up, as needed,
                          during subproject preparation which complies with the overall project safeguard framework.

                           A Grievance Redress Mechanism has been designed and encompasses five channels to receive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           grievances (the Municipal Councils of Sustainable Development, the Territorial Councils, Car
                           Territorial Offices, a website and CAR Ombudsman.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           There are multiple stakeholders (State Secretariats and agencies, territorial councils and
                           consortiums, local community and producer organizations) with different expectations for the
                           timing of project execution and results achievement. Changes in the administration might reduce
                           commitment to the PDO and operational procedures.

                          Project design is aligned with the consensus state development strategy as reflected in the
                          Participatory Multi-Year Investment Plan (PPA-P 2012-2015). It also builds on the State’s
                          targeted policies for family agriculture as well as for water and sanitation in the rural areas.
                          Continuous consultation with project stakeholders during preparation and implementation built
                          consensus on PDO and methodology. Also, have well-designed institutional arrangements and
                          information and monitoring systems for implementation. Additionally, the Environmental and
                          Social Management Framework, the Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework and the Resettlement
                          Policy Framework have been disclosed and submitted to consultation with key stakeholders and
                          representatives of potentially affected people.

                          Consultations with key stakeholders have been carried out in March 19-20, 2014. This event


                                                                    Page 13 of 16
                           counted with the participation of 545 people, including representatives Municipal Councils of
                           Sustainable Development, rural community associations, family farmers, Quilombola and “fundo
                           de pasto” communities, and Indigenous peoples. All safeguard documents are publically available
Public Disclosure Copy




                           at CAR website (http://www.car.ba.gov.br/publicacao/estudos-de-caso-e-impactos-
                           socioeconomicos/). The safeguards documents have been disclosed in country on March 17, 2014
                           and in Infoshop on April 8, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     14-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                          17-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Public Consultation carried out on March 19, 2014
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     14-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                          17-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Public Consultation carried out on March 19, 2014
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     14-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  08-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                          17-Mar-2014
                           Comments: Public Consultation carried out on March 19, 2014
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                  NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level



                                                                   Page 14 of 16
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?




                                                                     Page 15 of 16
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Renato Nardello (SM)                        Date: 06-Jun-2014




                                                                     Page 16 of 16
