                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3431
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                           Project ID:    P130276
                            Project Name:      Pastoral Community Development Project III (P130276)
                            Task Team          Laketch Mikael Imru
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          01-Oct-2013                        Estimated   12-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA3                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (15%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (35%), Sub-national government administration (20%), Other social services
                                              (15%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Decentralization (20%), Other social development (15%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (15%), Rural services and infrastructure (35 %), Other rural
                                              development (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     210.20           Total Bank Financing:                 110.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         15.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               110.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                                             85.00
                              Total                                                                                     210.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         To improve access to community demand-driven social and economic services for pastoralists and
                         agro-pastoralists of Ethiopia.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         PCDP-3 will build on implementation experiences and lessons learnt from the PCDP -1 and PCDP-2.
                         This series of operations has helped expand services to pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in
                         Ethiopia and introduced a CDD approach as an effective model of local development. PCDP-3 will
                         scale up these achievements geographically whilst also deepening the CDD approach. It will help
                         targeted communities to think through their development issues more comprehensively, proactively
                         target the priorities of the most vulnerable sections of their societies (particularly in terms of
                         improving livelihoods of the poorest households and those falling out of the traditional livestock-
                         based livelihood systems), ensure inclusiveness in their consultation processes, promote
                         accountability among their representatives, and promote self-monitoring and learning. It will also
                         seek to integrate the CDD modality within the Government of Ethiopia’s (GoE)regular planning and
                         budget development processes, and will include institution building interventions to enhance the
                         capacity of local government and community stakeholders to take over project activities.

                         The Project will consist of four components:
                         (i) Community Driven Service Provision (132.5 million USD);
                         (ii) Rural Livelihoods Program (42.2 million USD);
                         (iii) Development Learning & Knowledge Management (4.5 million USD);
                         (iv) Project Management & Monitoring and Evaluation (19 million USD); and
                         an allocated amount of 5 million USD.

                         •        Community Driven Service Provision: PCDP-3 will support community sub-projects in
                         targeted pastoral and agro-pastoral kebeles (sub-districts) to build demand-driven social and
                         economic infrastructure. It will provide investment funds that, together with community
                         contributions, will help expand and improve service delivery and build infrastructure for local
                         development. Investments will be identified, prioritized, implemented and monitored by beneficiary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities who will also be responsible for procurement and the financial management of sub-
                         projects. This component will comprise an investment fund, Technical Assistance (TA) to promote
                         broad participation and community decision-making in local development and grassroots institution
                         building to strengthen the community demand driven (CDD) approach and ensure its
                         institutionalization. PCDP-3 will build community institutions that can engage in planning and
                         resource mobilization, implement small public investment projects, and participate in the oversight
                         service delivery. It will also help local government institutions to integrate PCDP’s experience of
                         planning with communities within the GoE’s regular planning and budget development processes.
                         Finally, PCDP-3 will put in place systems for community level self-monitoring and learning.

                         •       Rural Livelihoods Program (RLP): PCDP III will promote enhanced access to finance by
                         pastoralists as a means of supporting strengthened and more diversified livelihoods. It will do so by
                         promoting Savings and Credit Cooperatives (SACCOs) within pastoralist/agro-pastoralist
                         communities. It will also assist a number of households, selected by their community members, to
                         improve their economic livelihood systems. Interventions under the RLP will be based on priorities
                         formulated through a community planning process.

                         •       Development Learning and Knowledge Management: Component 3 comprises a set of
                         interventions to complement community level development (on which the first two components
                         focus) with policy dialogue, strategic thinking around pastoralist development issues and enhanced

                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         transparency and learning within the Project. The Component will have two sub-components: (i)
                         policy consultations and knowledge management, and (ii) communication and internal learning.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Project Management and M&E: Although PCDP-3 implementation will be carried out
                         through relevant government offices at the federal, regional and district (woreda) levels, its
                         implementation and oversight will be supported by project coordination units and support teams at
                         each level. PCDP-3 will also place an emphasis on strong M&E systems
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         PCDP-3 will be located in most pastoral and agro-pastoral areas of Ethiopia including Afar National
                         Regional State, Somali National Regional State; and, several districts in the Oromiya, and Southern
                         Nations Nationalities and Peoples Regions. The community investment funds provided by the
                         project to target communities will finance small infrastructural sub-projects prioritized by such
                         communities. Rural livelihood activities to be funded by the project may include support to
                         strengthening livestock production, which is the target communities’ traditional livelihood, as well as
                         helping them to diversity into new income generating activities such as crop production, processing
                         and marketing depending on their own priorities. The physical characteristics already known at
                         present include: development/management of natural resources, including water, infrastructural
                         development (primary school buildings, health posts, veterinary clinics, rural roads) and livestock
                         fattening, horticulture development where irrigation is possible, and petty trading. Environmental
                         and social mitigation measures will be undertaken for both upstream and downstream activities; and
                         the project will adopt ecosystem approach during project implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTN3)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              PCDP III will finance small scale community
                          BP 4.01                                             driven sub-projects some of which will require
                                                                              environmental management. These can include
                                                                              schools, health posts, veterinary posts, small
                                                                              water supply and irrigation, small feeder roads,
                                                                              catchment management improvements. The
                                                                              ESMF for PCDP II has been updated to reflect
                                                                              potential safeguard issues and appropriate
                                                                              prevention and mitigation measures, and will be
                                                                              used for this Project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes              Pastoral areas cover some natural habitats which
                                                                              are protected by law, such as the Awash and
                                                                              Yangudi Rasa National Parks (Afar), Yabello
                                                                              Sanctuary (Borena) and the Babile Wildlife
                                                                              Sanctuary (Somali). However, PCDP III will not
                                                                              operate within such areas or other areas that
                                                                              qualify as critical natural habitats under OP. 4.04.
                                                                              or include any sub-projects that have a bearing on
                                                                              protected areas.


                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              Forests are not a common feature of the
                                                                         Ethiopian lowlands where PCDP III will operate
                                                                         and thus the project is not expected to affect or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         involve forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes             Promotion of rain fed and/or irrigated farming
                                                                         where feasible and profitable is part of promoting
                                                                         sustainable livelihoods and may indirectly
                                                                         involve use of agrochemicals including fertilizers
                                                                         and pesticides for both crop and livestock. The
                                                                         Pesticide Management Plan that was prepared for
                                                                         PCDP II has been updated and will be used for
                                                                         PCDP III.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             There are few areas in the Ethiopian lowlands
                         BP 4.11                                         that may constitute physical cultural resources in
                                                                         the sense described in BP/OP. 4.11. Although the
                                                                         nature and scope of the community sub-projects
                                                                         (identified through a demand-driven process) is
                                                                         not known now, they are unlikely to involve any
                                                                         major excavation work or inundation of areas
                                                                         with water, and are thus not likely to affect any
                                                                         physical cultural resources. Furthermore, sub-
                                                                         projects will be carried out only in areas selected,
                                                                         through a broader consultative process that
                                                                         includes prior informed consent, by local citizens
                                                                         who would normally give great importance to
                                                                         safeguarding their cultural resources.
                                                                         Nonetheless, the policy is triggered, predicated on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         the assumption that there could be “chance find”.
                                                                         No sub-project that might have negative impacts
                                                                         on cultural property will be funded without
                                                                         acceptable mitigation measures prepared prior to
                                                                         execution of any such sub-project. There are
                                                                         national procedures and guidelines for reporting
                                                                         chance finds to be followed, and a national entity
                                                                         for coordinating and facilitating the archiving,
                                                                         safekeeping and documentation of physical
                                                                         cultural resources. The Project would work
                                                                         closely with the national authority, should any
                                                                         chance find issues arise.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             The Project triggers OP 4.10 as the vast majority
                                                                         of people in the project area meet the criteria for
                                                                         OP 4.10. The Project has conducted an extensive
                                                                         consultation and an enhanced social assessment
                                                                         to identify social issues. These have been fully
                                                                         reflected in PAD, which also includes measures
                                                                         to ensure the project involves and benefits



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                                                                                 appropriately the various groups, as well as
                                                                                 mitigating adverse environmental and social
                                                                                 impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes               PCDP III interventions may involve acquisition
                            4.12                                                 of land and /or restriction of access to communal
                                                                                 natural resources. Therefore, a Resettlement
                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and
                                                                                 will be disclosed to ensure that appropriate
                                                                                 measures are in place to address any issues which
                                                                                 might arise from potential land acquisition and or
                                                                                 restriction of access to communal natural
                                                                                 resources under the Project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            Yes               PCDP III will not finance any investments
                                                                                 aimed at rehabilitating or constructing large
                                                                                 dams. Although there could possibly be
                                                                                 construction of small dams under PCDP III,
                                                                                 particularly for small scale irrigation, they may
                                                                                 not be large (more than 4.5 meters high) and
                                                                                 therefore may not require special procedures that
                                                                                 are normally applied for large dams to follow.
                                                                                 This notwithstanding, the Project will trigger OP
                                                                                 4.37 (Safety of Dams). In cases of small dams
                                                                                 construction (less than 4.5 meters), the Project
                                                                                 will use the FAO ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams,
                                                                                 A Guide to Siting, Design and
                                                                                 Construction’ (FAO Irrigation and Drainage
                                                                                 Paper # 64, Rome, 2010. Available at FAO
                                                                                 website: www.fao.org). In addition, the guideline
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 for small dam construction prepared by the MoA
                                                                                 will be used to ensure safety of small dams.
                            Projects on International            Yes               PCDP III would abstract small amounts of water
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 from any of the shared rivers or drainage systems.
                                                                                 This notwithstanding, the Project has, in
                                                                                 accordance with the requirements of the policy,
                                                                                 sent renewed notification of intended water use to
                                                                                 the Governments of Somalia, Djibouti and Kenya.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    The project is not being implemented in any
                            7.60                                                 disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              PCDP environmental and social safeguard issues may arise from small community demand-driven
                              investments in social services or rural infrastructure and/or support to strengthening/diversification
                              of pastoralist livelihoods. These small-scale, geographically dispersed investments are expected to


                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                           create little to no adverse impacts that will anyway be largely avoidable through informed,
                           community consultations and common-sense sub-project planning. Pest management issues may
                           arise through PCDP promotion of rainfed and/or small-scale irrigated farming, or of the use of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           animal pesticides (e.g. livestock dips). Social safeguard issues are associated with land acquisition
                           and or restriction of access to communal natural resources as well as potential IP issues. Given the
                           small footprint of the CDD sub-project activities, it is expected that land acquisition will be
                           limited, site specific with no adverse social impact. As a precautionary measure, an RPF has been
                           prepared and will be used as guide on land acquisition processes as well as the management of any
                           restrictions to natural resources. As the vast majority of people in the project area meet the criteria
                           for OP4.10, the policy is therefore triggered. The Government of Ethiopia has carried out an
                           enhanced social assessment in the four project regions of Afar, Somali, Oromiya and SNNPR. As
                           part of the social assessment, extensive free, prior and informed consultations have also been
                           carried out to seek broad community support for the project. In accordance with its CDD
                           approach, these consultations will be followed up during implementation with consultations
                           among each beneficiary community that includes social mapping, engagement with different
                           social groups including the most vulnerable, articulation of a development vision and planning for
                           project activities as well as formal acceptance of the project's interventions, rules and norms. The
                           project includes a grievance redress system and measures to ensure the various groups participate
                           in and benefit from the project’s benefits. The project also includes measures for mitigating
                           adverse environmental and social impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None anticipated
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The planning of sub-projects will actively involve the beneficiary communities to, among other
                           things, consider alternatives to avoid adverse environmental and social impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           All investment sub-projects would be subject to environmental and social screening to ensure
                           compliance with all the applicable safeguard policies. To address pest management issues, a Pest
                           Management Plan has been developed; and to address land acquisition and /or restriction of access
                           to communal natural resources, Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed. As
                           OP/BP 4.10 is triggered an enhanced social assessment was carried out including extensive
                           consultation with selected communities. As per the project's operational manuals, the planning
                           process includes free, prior and informed consultations and broad community consent for all sub-
                           projects and RLP interventions, a grievance redress system, and due attention to culturally
                           appropriate benefit-sharing. Additionally, the project will include safeguards advisors in the FPCU
                           and two RPCUs. Further training, implementation support and M&E will strengthen institutional
                           capacities of the borrower to meet safeguards requirements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The community members in the participating regions, who are the key stakeholders, were
                           consulted during project preparation to seek their buy in --in the course of the preparation of the
                           safeguards documents. They will further be consulted during implementation. Furthermore, in
                           compliance with World Bank guidelines and the Ethiopia EIA proclamation, before a sub-project
                           is approved, the applicable screening documents will be made available for public review at a


                                                                       Page 6 of 9
                           place accessible to local people (e.g. at a local government office (i.e. kebele council, Woreda
                           Offices and regional bureaus, at the EPA), and in a form, manner, and language they can
                           understand.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       10-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                             05-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       10-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                             05-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       10-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                             05-Oct-2013
                           Comments: As OP4.10 is universally applied, the safeguard instrument to be disclosed is the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         enhanced Social Assessment that assesses key socio-economic factors that require
                                         consideration; identifies vulnerable and historically underserved groups that may be
                                         exclude from the project and be adversely affected as a result, and the necessary
                                         impact mitigating measures; and recommends in the early stage of project
                                         preparation the appropriate measures towards addressing the World Bank
                                         requirements on social safeguards triggered by the project (OP/BP 4.10 and OP/BP
                                         4.12).
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          06-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       10-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                             05-Oct-2013
                           Comments: Appraisal is scheduled for September 30, 2013 and PMP will be disclosed prior to
                                         appraisal as part of the ESMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Laketch Mikael Imru
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                     Date: 11-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                            Date: 11-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
