                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA6793

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-May-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Haiti                             Project ID:    P147608
                                                        Parent         P124134
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      AF for Haiti Education for All Project Phase II (P147608)
   Parent Project     Haiti - Education for All Project - Phase II (P124134)
   Name:
   Task Team          Patrick Philippe Ramanant
   Leader:
   Estimated          24-Feb-2014                       Estimated   20-Jun-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     LCSHE                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):         Primary education (100%)
   Theme(s):         Education for all (82%), Nutrition and food security (11%), Rural services and
                     infrastructure (7%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      14.75           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                0.00
     Haiti Reconstruction Fund                                                                 14.75
     Total                                                                                     14.75
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?


                                              Page 1 of 9
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the Project is to support the Strategy for Rebuilding the Education System
   through the implementation of sustainable programs to improve: (a) access, particularly of under-
   served populations, to Primary Education; (b) quality of Primary Education; and (c) the
   institutional capacity in the Recipient's education sector.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The objective of the Project is to support: (i) enrollment of students in select non-public primary
   schools in disadvantaged areas; (ii) student attendance in select public and non-public primary
   schools in disadvantaged areas; and (iii) strengthened management of the Recipient’s primary
   education sector.
3. Project Description
The parent Project co-finances the implementation of the Government’s Operational Plan for
Education (OPE). Component 1 aims to improve access and learning through (i) enhancing the
Government’s Tuition Waiver Program (TWP), (ii) supporting rural communities in delivering
education services by creating new schools, and (iii) supporting the Government’s school health and
nutrition program. Component 2 aims to improve pedagogic approaches by supporting the
Government’s accelerated teacher training program, training community instructors, and
modernizing distance education programs. Component 3 aims to strengthen the institutional
capacities of the MENFP and local authorities, with a focus on the administrative office of the
MENFP, the creation of the National Education Partnership Office, the integration of local
authorities in the education system, and the increasing of accountability throughout the system.
Component 4 supports increased Ministry capacity to implement the Project. In particular,
Component 1.2 of the parent Project finances the small-scale construction of community-based
schools in sections of the country without schools or with extremely limited capacity relative to the
rest of the country. The design of this sub-component would remain unchanged under the proposed
Restructuring, but its scope would be reduced with respect to the number of schools built.

The proposed Restructuring and AF changes are two-fold. The Restructuring would align the Project
to revised GoH priorities for education outlined in its Transitional Education Sector Plan, based on
its OPE. It is proposed to: (i) revise the PDO to be more achievable and measurable, (ii) reorganize
the Project design by merging and renaming some components, and (iii) revise the activities under
some sub-components. The AF would exclusively finance the Project's existing SHN Program sub-
component and related operating costs, ensuring continuity of financing for two additional school
years.

The Restructuring/AF Project would consist of four components:

Component 1: Support to Primary Education Enrollment. This component would consist of two
subcomponents on (i) the TWP and (ii) basic educational services in Selected Rural Communities.

Sub-component 1.1. Enhance the Tuition Waiver Program. This sub-component would continue
financing grants to School Management Committees and consultancies, but until the end of the


                                             Page 2 of 9
school year 2013-2014 rather than the 2014-2015 school year. The parent Project has financed a
higher number of students than originally planned for the 2012-2013 and 2013-2014 school years due
to delays in funding availability from other development partners. As a result, other development
partners will take over financing for the 2014-2015 and 2015-2016 school years.

Sub-component 1.2. Support to Communities. This sub-component would continue channeling grants
and providing training to selected communities in underserved areas to offer basic educational
services to school-aged children by constructing rural schools. The scope of the sub-component
would be reduced from 200 to 80 participating communities and from 700 to 160 classrooms built, as
a result of higher than anticipated unit costs and in line with MENFP implementation capacity.

Component 2: Support to Improved Student Attendance. The restructured Project would include
three sub-components, on (i) supporting pre-service teacher training, (ii) implementing a Haitian
Creole structured reading instruction approach to improve reading instruction, and (iii) implementing
a SNH Program to maintain student attendance and enhance students’ active participation during
classes.

Sub-compo nent 2.1. Pre-service Teacher Training. This sub-component would finance (i) the costs
for two years of classroom-based practice for a third cohort, currently in training and (ii) the ongoing
consultancies for the finalization of the FIA curriculum. Recruitment of a fourth FIA cohort, which
was expected under the parent Project, has been canceled, and the MENFP focus would be on policy
measures to absorb the unemployed graduated teachers.

Sub-component 2.2. Support to the quality of Reading Instruction. This sub-component would
finance the development and distribution of teacher guides for Grades 1 and 2 to selected Project
schools. In addition, the MENFP has worked in close collaboration with USAID to improve upon its
existing early grade reading instruction approach Lekti se Lavni. It is now implementing the
improved version of this approach, called M ap Li Net Ale under the USAID financed project
TOTAL (Tout Timoun Ap Li, “All Children Are Reading”) in selected regions. This sub-component
would introduce the USAID-financed version of M ap Li Net Ale including, inter alia, teacher
training and coaching, student and teacher assessment and the provision of teacher and student
materials in Grades 1 and 2 in selected Project-financed schools (participating in the TWP and
community-based schools). Given high unit costs of the existing M ap Li approach, the sub-
component would also introduce a lower-cost version of the approach drawing on fewer human
resources, including a reduced period of coaching by externally-recruited (non MENFP) staff. Both
versions of M ap Li would be tested in a pilot phase in 2014-1015, benefiting approximately 12,000
students. In the 2014-2015 school year, an impact evaluation of M ap Li would be conducted
(financed under Component 3.2). Based on pilot results, the sub-component would finance th e
scaling up of one approach to cover additional students in 2015-2016 by supporting higher number of
TWP and community-based schools to implement the approach, upon request.

Sub-component 2.3. School Health and Nutrition. This sub-component would continue supporting
the Government’s SNH Program through the financing of (i) daily morning snacks and hot meals and
the provision of micronutrients and deworming to selected schools in low income areas, and (ii)
operating costs of the National School Feeding Program (the national agency responsible for
supervising the sub-component). This sub-component would fill a financing gap with the AF amount
to provide SHN services for about 76,500 students for two additional school years beyond the parent
Project timeline. With the availability of a 2013 nutritional map of Haiti, SHN targeting may be
revised. The AF could therefore also finance activities to prepare the transition to financing new

                                              Page 3 of 9
schools, such as informing existing beneficiary schools about the changes and preparing new
participating schools during the 2014-15 school year if changes in targeting are needed. Service
provision to the revised list of beneficiaries could begin in the 2015-16 school year. In addition, two
new interventions would be introduced. To mitigate potential negative environmental impacts from
the use of wood for cooking school meals, the Project would finance a study on and the gradual
introduction of improved stoves in selected SHN schools. To improve service delivery monitoring,
firms would be recruited for the verification of service delivery at SHN schools.


Component 3: Strengthening Sector Management. The objective of this revised component is to
strengthen the MENFP’s ability to manage its education sector by strengthening the school licensing
system and the support to the DDEs and financing studies, pilots, technical assistance and
consultations contributing to improved programing of public resources and education system
accountability.

Strengthening of the MENFP’s Capacity. In place of supporting ONAPE, this sub-component would
support the MENFP in revitalizing the school licensing system. This would include, inter alia,
financing of the National Consultative Committee for Licensing (NCC) and the development/
revision of licensing standards, methodologies and procedures; provision of training for central level
MENFP and DDE staff, as well as staff at the district and commune levels; provision of equipment;
and training of independent agencies for school evaluation as well as training of schools committees
on developing school improvement plans. Using a program-based budget approach, financing and
technical support would be provided to the DDEs for effective school supervision. The grants to the
DDEs would allow them to finance operational costs of school visits. Technical assistance and
training would also be financed to increase the ability of the DDEs to record and report ba sic data on
schools. This component would therefore re-focus efforts away from the central level to the
departments, in line with the MENFP’s prioritization of decentralization.

This component would also finance thematic studies and pilots aimed at improving budget
programming and education system accountability. The component would contribute to the
implementation of key studies such as a Public Expenditures Tracking Survey (PETS) and other
similar studies on the education sector. It would continue financing the implementation of an ICT-
based pilot experimentation to monitor teacher absenteeism. This would include consultancies,
training for school directors and inspectors, provision of equipment and incentives to schools. An
impact evaluation of the pilot would also be financed through the component.

Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). This sub-component
would finance the carrying out of an impact evaluation of the M Ap Li Net Ale approach (rather than
an impact evaluation of the TWP as planned in the parent Project). M ap Li student learning
outcomes would be assessed at the beginning and end of the 2014-2015 school year using EGRA
(Early Grade Reading Assessment). In addition, other evaluation activities and the provision of
technical assistance to oversee the implementation of Project activities would be financed. The
component would support the costs of consultancies associated with the existing Project Technical
Unit, including the Project Coordinator, the administrative staff, and technical consultants overseeing
the implementation of specific Project activities.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is implemented nationwide. However, as it relates to the safeguards analysis, the


                                              Page 4 of 9
community-based school component is implemented in five geographic departments, focusing on the
most remote areas in the country. The departments of implementation are: Nippes, Grande-Anse,
Sud, Sud-Est, and Centre. The geographic access to the community-based school sites is typically
very difficult, with few roads of any kind. It is not uncommon that footpaths through the mountains
are the only access, requiring several hours of travel. Under the restructured Project, 80 small-scale
community school construction sub-projects would be supported. These sub-projects are in different
stages of readiness: (i) 10 have sites identified and construction activities have begun; (ii) 53 sites
have been chosen but no construction has started; and (iii) 17 sites are yet to be selected.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Amadou Konare (LCSEN)
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The team has triggered this safeguard under the
BP 4.01                                              expectation of including small-scale infrastructure
                                                     works for rural education. An Environmental
                                                     Management Frame work was already prepared
                                                     for the parent Project and focuses on, among
                                                     other issues, how to address the impacts from
                                                     construction and ensure community and worker
                                                     health and safety. Infrastructure incorporates safe
                                                     building designs, essential safety equipment and
                                                     adequate sanitary facilities. For each construction
                                                     site, an Environmental Management Plan would
                                                     be developed and community members trained on
                                                     its implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              This Policy is not triggered as the team does not
                                                     expect to impact natural habitats given the limited
                                                     scale of the investments and any potential for
                                                     impact has been screened-out in the EMF for the
                                                     parent Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              This policy is not triggered given that Project
                                                     activities will not impact the welfare of forests
                                                     nor impact forest dependent communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09              No              This policy is not triggered since the Project will
                                                     not finance the purchase or significant use of
                                                     pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No              This policy is not triggered given that Project
BP 4.11                                              activities are not expected to impact physical
                                                     cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No              This policy is not triggered given that Indigenous
                                                     Peoples as defined by OP 4.10 are not present in
                                                     the project’s area of influence.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes             No involuntary resettlement was expected for the
4.12                                                 parent Project, as it was assessed that the



                                             Page 5 of 9
        construction of community schools could be done
        on public land or with voluntary land donations
        only without the need to resettle affected people.
        However, given the scarcity of available land in
        some of the sub-project locations, OP 4.12 has
        been triggered to allow municipalities to identify
        terrains where minor resettlement would be
        required and to ensure the affected people would
        be provided with the assistance under the policy.
        The screening criteria within the parent Project's
        EMF will be adapted from screening out all
        potential involuntary resettlement impacts to
        minimize resettlement and ensure mitigation of
        negative impacts in accordance with the policy.
        This screening tool will be used for all sites that
        are yet to be selected. If there is any need to
        acquire land on sites currently not known or if it
        is determined that any of the identified sites
        where sub-projects are yet to be developed
        require the involuntary taking of land, the Project
        will apply the Resettlement Policy Framework
        (RPF) that has been prepared as part of the
        Project Restructuring. The RPF requires that land
        acquisition be carried out in accordance with OP
        4.12 and reflects the following principles:
         - Prior to the approval of sub-projects, the client
        will need to ensure that the sites, boundaries and
        ownerships of the relevant land plots are clearly
        identified and confirmed using a community-
        based mapping exercise that goes beyond simply
        checking for legal title.
         - In case resettlement is required, agreement on
        the compensation scheme and its payment or
        realization will be settled prior to the
        commencement of that particular sub-project.
        Sites that were pre-identified using the parent
        Project’s screening criteria will be re-evaluated
        under the new screening criteria, and if necessary
        remedial action (inter alia, consultation,
        compensation, and development of Abbreviated
        Resettlement Action Plans) in accordance with
        the policy and national legislation will be taken.
        For one of the 10 pilot communities for
        community school construction, a site was
        identified that required resettlement of six
        families who had lived on public land. The
        community, the municipality of Rosier, and the



Page 6 of 9
                                                      affected families came to an agreement to resettle
                                                      the families to plots adjacent to the site where
                                                      they originally occupied (that will now be used
                                                      for the school construction) and agreed on a
                                                      number of compensation measures using the
                                                      consultative mechanisms the Project had put in
                                                      place. After this agreement was reached, a
                                                      Remedial Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
                                                      (RARAP) was developed, consulted and
                                                      published in accordance with the Resettlement
                                                      Policy Framework to ensure that all negative
                                                      impacts of resettlement were mitigated and that
                                                      the affected persons are able to enjoy the full
                                                      protection of the safeguards accorded to them
                                                      under Bank policy. Additional supervision
                                                      arrangements, including the recruitment of a
                                                      social and environmental specialist within the
                                                      PTU will ensure that this RARAP will be fully
                                                      implemented and reported on. Due diligence spot
                                                      checks will also be carried out to ensure that other
                                                      cases of land acquisition are not required for the
                                                      other sites already identified.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              This policy is not triggered given that the Project
                                                      will not finance the construction or rehabilitation
                                                      of dams nor will rely on the operations of existing
                                                      dams.
   Projects on International          No              This policy is not triggered since the Project will
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               not finance any activities that impact international
                                                      waterways as defined by the policy.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                This policy is not triggered as the Project will not
   7.60                                               finance activities in disputed areas as defined by
                                                      the policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are associated with the project.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities are expected.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     The Project considered continuing screening out any potential Project sites that might involve
     resettlement and relying on voluntary donation of land where necessary. Given the expansion of
     the program and the availability of such suitable sites, it was necessary to adapt the screening

                                              Page 7 of 9
  criteria to minimize rather than exclude involuntary resettlement to ensure sites could be identified
  in all communities of the Project. Any involuntary resettlement associated with the Project will be
  minimized, compensated and consulted in according with OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The borrower has updated the EMP and has prepared and disclosed an RPF. A social and
  environmental safeguard specialist will be recruited to ensure implementation of the
  environmental and social safeguard policy frameworks.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders are the local community members, the Directorate for School Construction
  (DGS) at the MENFP, the National Program for School Canteen (PNCS) at the MENFP and the
  Ministry of Environment. For the preparation of the EMF, the PTU organized a workshop in order
  to discuss the document with the DGS, the PNCS, the Ministry of Environment and
  representatives of the main local NGOs working in the SHN Program. For the preparation of the
  RPF, the MENFP discussed with local communities and decentralized education and territorial
  administration in selected communes. Both the EMF and the RPF were published on the website
  of the MENFP.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       19-Jul-2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Aug-2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Haiti                                                             27-Jul-2011
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       31-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    01-Apr-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Haiti                                                             31-Mar-2014
  Comments: A Resettlement Policy Framework was produced and published in-country and by
                the Bank. A Remedial Resettlement Action Plan (RRAP) was also produced and
                published in-country (April 10, 2014) and by the Bank (April 11, 2014).
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                             Page 8 of 9
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Patrick Philippe Ramanant
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                             Date: 16-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Reema Nayar (SM)                                  Date: 30-May-2014




                                               Page 9 of 9
