                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA4744
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Macedonia, former Yugoslav                  P128378
                                                                             Project ID:
                                              Republic of
                            Project Name:     Skills Development and Innovation (P128378)
                            Task Team       Bojana Naceva
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       14-Oct-2013                          Estimated   28-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSH2                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Education (40%), Tertiary education (30%), Secondary
                                              education (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Other public sector governance
                                              (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      24.00           Total Bank Financing:                 24.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     24.00
                              Total                                                                                     24.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transparency of resource allocation and
                           promote accountability in higher education, enhance the relevance of secondary technical vocational
                           education, and support innovation capacity in Macedonia.

                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will be comprised of four components, as described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Improving Transparency of Higher Education
                         This component will have three main sets of activities: (i) institutional strengthening and stronger
                         quality assurance in higher education, (ii) reforming the higher education financing model, and (iii)
                         establishing a centralized office to foster mission-oriented research and university-industry
                         collaboration.
                         Quality Assurance in Higher Education. This activity would finance improvement and consolidation
                         of the quality assurance processes at the national and institutional levels. The aim is to put in place
                         appropriate and transparent accreditation procedures that would create a level playing field for public
                         and private institutions. This would include capacity building to the Board for Higher Education
                         Accreditation and Quality Assurance (HEAEB) on the processes, criteria and procedures for external
                         quality assurance in Macedonia and establishing the links between external evaluation and
                         accreditation. The World Bank worked last year with the HEAEB to provide capacity building on
                         trends in Quality Assurance in European Higher Education Area and ENQA Membership
                         requirements. This activity would help to further advance HEAEB work on meeting the standards for
                         the ENQA membership. This activity would also support campus-level data collection regarding
                         quality and performance indicators, in order to support national collection of comparative data to use
                         for effective interventions and policy development.
                         Higher Education Financing Reforms. This activity will follow up on the outputs of the recent higher
                         education technical assistance program aimed at guiding the government's efforts to design and
                         implement a performance-based funding model. Besides outlining the value and key dimensions of
                         this new approach, the technical assistance program would also provide practical tools for designing
                         the new funding formula and defining an elaborated set of performance indicators. The Ministry is
                         now better equipped to manage the process of development a new national funding model, through
                         an inter-university committee and the involvement of other stakeholders in the higher education
                         sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Development of a National Technology Transfer Office. This subcomponent will support the
                         development of a central office which will be the system-wide interface between research
                         community and the industry. It will play a key role in the conversion of the results of research into
                         competitive products and processes, and steer research towards industry needs. The subcomponent
                         would provide technical assistance for establishment and operationalization of the NTTO and would
                         also finance the salaries of experts and the purchase of patent and market intelligence databases.

                         Modernization of Secondary Technical Vocational Education and Training
                         This component will provide technical and financial assistance to the development of a more modern
                         and efficient secondary TVET system that is characterized by delayed track ing of students into
                         vocational pathway, increased relevance of the standards and curriculum for the labor market and
                         improved mechanisms for school-industry collaboration
                         Quality and labor market relevance of TVET provision. This sub-component will contribute to
                         modernization of the secondary TVET system and its relevance for the labor market needs and
                         improving the capacity of TVET secondary schools to deliver quality TVET. Specifically, this sub-
                         component would finance: (i) technical assistance to support the development of an overarching
                         model for transformation of the secondary TVET provision; (ii) development of occupational
                         standards, competency-based curriculum and programs,(iii)efficiency assessment of the secondary
                         TVET school network and development of a proposal for restructuring the network (iv) development
                         of a training program for teachers and other staff, including identification of required skills,


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         development of training materials and rollout of the program; and (v) need analysis and procurement
                         of equipment for school-based practical training.
                          Grants for school-industry collaboration. This subcomponent would finance technical assistance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities aimed at designing and running the grant program for supporting joint projects of TVET
                         schools and industrial enterprises. The grant program will support projects which improve the labor
                         market relevance of vocational education and training by involving industries into the practical
                         training delivery.

                         Innovative capacity of Enterprises and Collaboration with Research Organizations
                         This component will improve the support system for innovation and research commercialization and
                         will stimulate the capacity for innovation and technological upgrading of Macedonian firms and
                         research organizations.
                         Establishment and capacity building for the Fund for Innovation and Technological Development:
                         This sub-component would finance activities required to build up institutional competence of the
                         FITD, in particular, providing support for: (i) planning and designing the programs, strategy,
                         operations and procedures; (ii) training of FITD staff; (iii) selection of the Investment Committee and
                         peer reviewers; (iv) mentoring and training for FITD beneficiary enterprises; and (v) marketing and
                         communications strategy.
                         Piloting financial instruments to support business innovation: Once the FITD is established, it would
                         provide specific funding instruments for each stage of companies’ life cycle to foster innovation.
                         These instruments will include (i) an accelerator; (ii) proof of concept innovation matching grants,
                         including but not limited to IP protection, and business plan preparation for initial capital
                         mobilization; (iii) R&D matching grants; and (iv) sector specific grants in technology development
                         and technology absorption projects for new or improved technologies, products and processes. It is
                         anticipated that the pilot instruments will be introduced in a phased approach starting with the
                         accelerator and proof of concept matching grants.

                         Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation
                          This component will finance the activities in two sub-components to: (i) ensure effective
Public Disclosure Copy




                         administration and implementation of the Bank-financed project; and (ii) develop and put in place
                         effective M&E system.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Under Components 2 and 3, the project will support technical assistance for the FITD with
                         headquarters in Skopje as well as for enterprises, RDIs, secondary and vocational schools that may
                         be based in various locations across Macedonia.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy is triggered because the activities to
                          BP 4.01                                             be financed under Component2 and 3 grant
                                                                              programs might be associated with certain
                                                                              environmental concerns such as use or disposal of
                                                                              hazardous materials (including bio-hazards), use



                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                                                                                 and storage of chemicals etc. The Environmental
                                                                                 Management Framework has been prepared by
                                                                                 the Client, which outlines procedures and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 responsibilities for screening the grant proposals
                                                                                 against environmental and social issues and
                                                                                 ensuring proper mitigation of identified risks.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                Under Component 2 grants will be provided to schools and industrial enterprises for establishing
                              school-industry collaboration and improving practical relevance of vocational education and
                              training. Under Component 3 support will be provided to FITD to build the institutional capacity
                              to stimulate innovative activities, and piloting financial instruments to support innovation and
                              technological development in the enterprise sector. This will involve providing (i) R&D matching
                              grants; and (ii) sector specific grants in technology development and technology absorption
                              projects for new or improved technologies, products and processes. The awardees will include
                              enterprises and research institutions. Specific grant activities can not be pre-determined as will be
                              identified based on the applicants' proposals in the course of the project implementation. These
                              might be associated with certain environmental concerns including use or disposal of hazardous
                              materials (including bio-hazards) as part of some R&D activities, use and storage of chemicals etc.

                              In order to ensure environmental soundness of the financed operations, a number of limitations
                              have been imposed within the prepared Environmental Management Framework (EMF). The grant
                              applications will be screened to ensure that no activities are financed which include (i) activities
                              which are subject of the WB environmental Category A; (ii) activities listed in the WB/IFC
                              exclusion list to be used for this project; (iii) activities which can cause involuntary land

                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           acquisition, and (iv) any type of construction works. The EMF also specifies procedures to be
                           followed for the activities falling under WB Category B. This includes a specific Environmental
                           Management Plan in place, with disclosure and public consultations mechanisms prior to approval
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the grant and release of funds (i.e., befor implementation).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             There are no indirect and/or long-term negative impacts foreseen. The EMF contains provisions
                           to avoid any irreversible and extensive environmental impacts and also to ensure that for all
                           Category B corresponding grant activities all associated environmental impacts are identified and
                           adequately mitigated. Potential positive long-term impacts may be associated with promotion and
                           introduction of innovative and potentially more sustainable technologies as a result of R&D
                           activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower will have in place a review process to screen proposals from grant applicants for
                           environmental and social issues, as defined in the EMF, which has been prepared and publicly
                           disclosed. Particular attention will be paid to ensure that no funds will be used to finance ineligible
                           items (IFC Exclusion List, Category A projects).
                            Due to the limited environmental capacity of the Client, an Environmental Specialist will be
                           engaged through the project to work closely with the FITD and be responsible for screening sub-
                           projects/grants selected for financing and for the review of the compliance of grants/sub-projects
                           with specific EMPs to be developed for the activities assigned WB environmental category B.
                           Depending on the number of grant applications this will be a part-time or full-time consultant.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key project stakeholders are FITD, R&D institutions, secondary and vocational schools,
                           industrial enterprises, ministries. The EMF was disclosed in public on September 13, 2013 with
                           public consultations announced in local media, and targeted invitations sent to relevant
                           institutions, groups and organizations. The public consultation meeting was held on September 16,
                           2013. For all grant activities that may have some associated environmental impacts, specific EMPs
                           will be prepared and disclosed with adequate feedback mechanism.

                           The Project is likely to fund grants involving innovation and technological development which
                           may include sensitive and often potentially profitable information whose disclosure may lead to
                           the loss of business opportunities and therefore undercut the rationale of the investment through
                           project funds. While it is necessary that a certain minimum of such information be made available
                           in order to facilitate meaningful public feedback, some level of confidentiality would need to be
                           exercised. As such, the Grant Applicant/Recipient reserves the right to abbreviate the EMP in a
                           manner where information disclosed will not provide not give away any of the confidential
                           information related to the innovation process itself but will sufficiently explain, or issue a
                           statement as to how the financed activities will mitigate any of the associated environmental and
                           social impacts and ensure that the financed activities are conducted in an environmentally and
                           socially sustainable manner. Due to the nature of the Project, the Grant Applicant may not be



                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                           required to hold a public consultation meeting, as long as the disclosed EMP on a website and in a
                         B.public place provides
                            Disclosure           for an adequate feedback mechanism for comments or queries.
                                        Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           16-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   Bojana Naceva
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)   Date: 09-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 7 of 7
