INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR12413
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Russian Federation         Project ID:  P120219
Project Name: RUSSIA CULTURAL HERITAGE 2 (P120219)
Task Team       Nicolas Perrin
Leader(s):
Estimated       04-Feb-20 10               Estimated    07-Dec-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Other social services (79%), Public administration- Other social services (21%)
Theme:          Regional integration (50%), Analysis of economic growth (25%), Other social
development (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     250.50            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                       150.50
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Financing Gap                                                    0.00
Total                                                         250.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objectives are to: (i) support the conservation, safekeeping, and promotion
of cultural heritage assets in Leningrad, Pskov, Novgorod an                d Tver
Page 1 of 7


﻿oblasts of the Russian Federation and (ii) strengthen regional capacity f
or cultural heritage management so it supports the socio-economic development of
the participating oblasts.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The project development objectives are to: (i) support the conservation, safekeeping, and promotion
of cultural heritage assets in Leningrad, Pskov, Novgorod an                   d Tver
oblasts of the Russian Federation and (ii) strengthen regional capacity f
a        or cultural heritage management so it supports the socio-economic development of
the participating oblasts.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Integrated Heritage Site Development. This component will be implemented through a
demand driven mechanism that will support, on a competitive basis, sub-project proposals made by
oblasts and cultural institutions.
Component 2: Protection of Museum Assets. This component is designed to support the Ministry of
Culture's efforts and to protect and promote the moveable heritage assets of Russia.
Component 3: Project Management and monitoring.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
It is proposed that the Project be implemented in four oblasts lying between St. Petersburg and
Moscow: Leningrad, Pskov, Novgorod, and Tver. This is to create a tourist circuit along the "Red
Road". This area not only can benefit from tourist traffic from and between St. Petersburg and
Moscow, but also serves as Russia's gateway to Europe. The Russian Government hopes that this
Project could serve as a pilot that could subsequently be extended to other regions of the Russian
Federation. The Project Proposal was developed by the RF Ministry of Culture and endorsed by
Ministries of Finance and Economic Development.
0
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Yes
Page 2 of 7


﻿Involuntary Resettlement
tOfdWP   I1ams OP/BP     No
4.37
O
U         Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No changes occur in the safeguard assessment due to the restructuring. The larger footprint than
anticipated for the construction of the Multifunctional Museum Facility (MMF) will remain
within the land already allocated and presents no new safeguard or social issues.
The Project will include rehabilitation and conservation of physical cultural resources but no new
construction with the exception of component 2 (a) with construction of a multifunctional museum
facility for which no land acquisition requiring RAP will be incurred and for which an EMP will
be prepared. Its potential adverse environmental impacts on human populations or
environmentally important areas, if incurred, will be minor and site-specific. Effects on the
environment resulting from construction activities may include dust, noise, and other construction-
related local and temporary nuisances such as temporary increases in heavy vehicle traffic. To
mitigate such adverse environmental impacts, contractors will be required to follow
environmentally sound construction practices and include environmental safety requirements into
the technical specifications and contracts for civil works. Compliance with such instructions will
be closely monitored during implementation. To guide the risk mitigation measures for different
O
U           sub-project sites, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF), which also address
the physical cultural resources safeguard, has been prepared as part of Project preparation. This
EMF defines the environmental impact mitigation measures to be followed by contractors working
on each of the project sites when implementing interventions under the Project.
The entire Project design attempts to protect some of the highest priority cultural heritage from
further deterioration, increase the exhibition and activities capacity of the institutions, improve the
operational safety and efficiency of the facilities for both visitors and personnel; and provide
higher safety of artworks on display and other cultural assets from physical damages, theft or other
hazards. It is expected that the rehabilitation and restoration works will mainly include primarily
repair and upgrading of buildings and may also cover some interior utility networks (electricity,
water, heating, a/c, etc) and landscaping. Each site will be developed and managed in accordance
with principles of good practice in the cultural heritage field. The task team includes specialists
knowledgeable in all aspects of heritage preservation and heritage site management. Every site
will be managed in accordance with an agreed management plan which is based on local
consultation and stakeholder inputs. EMPs under the project will also address physical cultural
resources safeguards.
The project will not include any land acquisition. The absence of Land Acquisition will be a
Page 3 of 7


﻿criteria for approval of sub-projects under component one of the project. However, occupants of
heritage sites (typically small businesses but possibly, in a very few cases, also residents) may be
displaced prior and during works. Therefore a resettlement policy framework has been prepared as
part of Project preparation and will be fully described in the project operational manual.
O
Unoccupied state land has been made available for component 2 (a). No RAP will be required for
the construction of the Multifunctional Museum Facility.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
"Indirect" and longer term negative impacts may be associated with significantly increased
pressure on the environment due to considerable increase of tourism traffic. Mitigation measures
may include the design, construction and/or upgrading of relevant municipal infrastructure (access
roads and parking lots, waste collection sites, wastewater treatment and landfill facilities, etc.) and
recommendations for municipal authorities to minimize negative impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The RF Ministry of Culture, which oversees all federal cultural institutions, is playing a key role
in preparing the Project and is responsible for Project implementation and coordinating efforts of
all other parties and agencies involved. The Ministry of Culture also has proven capacity and
experience in implementing of the investment component of the on-going St. Petersburg Economic
Development Project, working through a very experienced Project Implementation Unit (St.
Petersburg Foundation for Investment Projects - FISP) with a strong track record of
project implementation under a variety of donor-funded projects and a a solid knowledge of
Bank's safeguards policies. So far the FISP has been implementing safeguards policies of the Bank
diligently.
O
As to environmental protection issues, in accordance with existing Federal Government
legislation, environmental management in Russia is a shared responsibility of the Federal
Government and the Regions. The basic legal framework of Environmental assessment or the
State environmental review (expertise) as it is called in Russia was considerably modified in
recent years. This process was accompanied by major re-arrangements of institutional
responsibilities in undertaking Environmental Assessment (EA)/Environmental Impact
Assessment (EIA). Overall these changes have dramatically reduced the scope of investments
which are subject to compulsory state EA and also diminished the national capacity to run EA/EIA
procedures. To this end, a comprehensive EMF for the project (describing the process of EA,
roles and responsibilities of the parties, processing and approval procedures) has been prepared. It
will be supported by adequate capacity at the FISP level and its preparation is coordinated with
respective Russian environmental a uthorities in the participating regions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders are the representatives of the Oblasts (culture department), cultural
institutions involved in the project, municipalities and civil society and private sectors
representatives interested by the project. The versions of RPF and EMF are being displayed on the
internet sites in the four participating oblasts starting from January 13 with a corresponding
announcement in local newspapers. The public consultations took place on January 26, 2010 at the
Page 4 of 7


﻿Ministry of Culture. The interested participants unable to come to Moscow by their own
means will have their transportation costs covered. The notification for the workshop was done in
each oblast, detailed list of participants and proceedings will be then published on Oblasts' and
Ministry of Culture websites. No major issues were raised. Minutes of the public consultation have
O
been attached to the EMF
No RAP/EMP will be conducted before project effectiveness because, the investments supported
by the project are demand-driven and it is impossible to identify precisely the scope and location
of the subprojects before the project starts. During project, preparation, possible sites have been
pre-identified, to provide a scope and nature of possible work and impacts but those sites will only
be confirmed after the project start as part of the competitive subprojects selection mechanisms set
by the project. At this stage, the procedures of the RPF/EMF will be followed and RAP/EMP will
be prepared if/when necessary. Once the scope of the works is identified, the concerned
municipality and other institutions will hold public consultations to discuss the resettlement,
environmental impacts and their implications, to which all property owners and users whose
property will be affected will be invited. For the Multifunctional Museum Facility, EMP will be
prepared before construction.
The project PIU will hire external consultants who will take the lead in ensuring that consultations
are held with affected people and not entirely transfer the responsibility to the concerned
municipalities. The content and results of the consultation will be recorded in minutes that are
maintained in the sub-project files and made available to the project PIU and the Bank team.
The opinion of affected persons and other stakeholders will be sought through public
consultations and incorporated into the RAP & EMP and decision making proce ss. Allocation of
roles and responsibilities among the Project participants/stakeholders is to be adopted in a form of
a multi-party agreement for each sub-project. This multiparty agreement will be reflected in the
RAP/EMP for each subproject as required.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Dec-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                             17-Feb-2010
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                07-Jan-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                             17-Feb-2010
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 5 of 7


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
M4WA416isclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
O
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes  No       NA   X
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nicolas Perrin
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                  Date: 09-Mar-2015
Advisor:
Page 6 of 7


﻿Practice Manager!     Name:                                    Date:
Manager:
>1
0
0
0
Ut
0
Ut
0
>1
0
0
0
Ut
0
0
Ut
0
Page 7 of 7


