                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1424
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Vietnam                           Project ID:    P131825
                            Project Name:     Health Professionals Education and Training for Health System Reforms
                                              (P131825)
                            Task Team         Eva Jarawan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       09-Dec-2013                         Estimated   25-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASHH                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (75%), Tertiary education (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (75%), Education for the knowledge economy (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        121.00                Total Bank Financing:    106.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            106.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                  10.00
                              Total                                                                                  121.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO are to improve the quality of health professionals' education, strengthen management
                           competencies in the health sector, and improve the competencies of Primary Health Care Teams at
                           the grass-roots level.


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Improve the quality of health professionals’ education (US$ 63 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)    Subcomponent 1.1: Improve the quality assurance system of health professionals’ education
                         (US$20 million)

                         1.        The project will support the establishment, by MOH decision, of a quality assurance (QA)
                         Council initially for medical and nursing education which in time could include other health
                         disciplines such as pharmacy, public health. The Council will be initially housed under the ASTT.
                         The scope of the QA system will be two-folds: (i) setting-up a peer review assessment (PRA)
                         initially for medical and nursing programs; and (ii) setting-up a standardized examination system
                         initially for medical and nursing students. The project will finance expenditures to support the QA
                         Council in meeting the requirements stipulated in Ministry of Education and Training circular
                         61/2012/TT-BGDDT dated December 28, 2012 regarding the regulation on registration, licensing
                         and organization of an education accreditation entity to become independent sometime in the future.
                         Standards for basic medical and nursing education are being prepared with the active participation of
                         the schools and professional associations. MOET will review and validate both standards which will
                         be used as the basis for establishing the peer review assessment instruments for medicine and
                         nursing. The project will also support the work of two task forces to set up the PRA system. The first
                         task force will work on the PRA policies and procedures, while the second task force will develop
                         and test the PRA instrument and train the assessors. The project will also support the work of a task
                         force under the QA Council in setting up the standardized final examination initially for medical and
                         nursing students. Throughout the course of project implementation, other institutions for health
                         professionals’ training, such as for pharmacy and public health, will learn from the experience of
                         medicine and nursing and, as they become ready, will also establish their QA system.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 1.2: Supportive measures to meet the standards of medical and nursing
                         education (US$43million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.      The standards for medical and nursing education will be the reference for determining
                         investment needs. Selected medical and nursing schools – and as they become ready, other health
                         professionals’ schools - will receive financial assistance/grants through the project to scale-up their
                         performance and achieve the required standards. Detailed activities covered under the grants program
                         and eligible expenditures are described in Annex 2.

                         Component 2: Strengthen Management Competencies in the Health Sector (US$12 million)

                         (a)     Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthen health management training (US$6 million)

                         3.       The project will support Hanoi School of Public Health and Ho Chi Minh City (HCMC)
                         Institute of Hygiene and Public Health to strengthen their capacity in health management training.
                         These centers are expected to be the leading institutions for delivering management training to health
                         managers nationwide. The financial support to the centers will cover: (i) training of trainers; (ii)
                         minor renovation and repair of existing facilities; (iii) provision of training equipment, office
                         equipment and furniture; (iv) local and/or international consulting services for developing training
                         materials including E-learning; and (v) health management learning resources.

                         4.      The training centers are expected to deliver the training to about 4000 managers at various


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         levels. Disbursement of funds under activity (i) of this component will be output-based (all other
                         activities will be input-based) and centers will be paid on the basi s of managers and health
                         inspectors trained. Unit costs have been defined based on experience and consultations within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MOH and with the provinces and training institutions. They have also been reviewed by the Bank
                         Team and agreed upon (see Table 2.3). A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) between the
                         Central Project Management Unit (CPMU)/MOH and the training institutions will define roles and
                         responsibilities of the centers as well as the MOH. A draft MOU has been prepared and will be part
                         of the draft POM.

                         5.      Evaluation of the training programs under this component will be carried out by the training
                         centers who will certify the successful completion of the training programs. For payment purposes,
                         the project external auditor will verify the number of trained managers.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 2.2: Improve Policy-making in Human Resources for Health (US$6 million)

                         6.      The objectives of this sub-component are to improve coverage and distribution of HRH,
                         particularly in the disadvantaged areas. The project will finance studies leading to improving the
                         HRH policy environment. Studies on HRH management will be conducted to provide policy makers
                         with evidence meant to revise the existing HRH policies. Scientific conferences and consultation
                         workshops will be organized to foster policy dialogue, and inform public opinion on HRH
                         management issues.

                         7.       The project will pilot a program that is meant to improve the distribution of HRH in the
                         disadvantaged areas (about 62 districts). About 500 freshly graduated physicians are expected to
                         volunteer in this program that will finance their training in one of the specialty areas for a district
                         hospital (surgery, pediatrics, ob-gyn, and internal medicine) leading to CK1 (Details in Annex 2). In
                         preparation of the launch of such a program, the MOH needs to conduct the following activities: (i)
                         physician needs assessment in the disadvantaged districts; (ii) information campaign to medical
                         students, young physicians, central hospitals, provincial and district health managers and relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholders at the local level; and (iii) drafting a MOU between the MOH and teaching institutions
                         as well as between the MOH and central and provincial hospitals. Finally, the MOH will need to
                         draft the “commitment” form to be signed by the volunteer, the central or provincial hospital as well
                         as the MOH. The project will finance support to selected teaching institutions and/or hospitals to
                         encourage freshly graduated and/or trained physicians to volunteer to work in the disadvantaged
                         areas. It was agreed that the disbursement for this aspect of the program will be output-based, i.e.,
                         teaching institutions will be compensated on the basis of number of trained young physicians. Unit
                         costs have been defined based on experience and consultations within the MOH and with the
                         provinces and teaching institutions. They have also been reviewed by the Bank Team and agreed
                         upon (see Table 2.3). Details of such an arrangement with a draft MOU will be in the POM.

                         8.       Evaluation of the training programs under this component will be carried out by the training
                         institution who will certify the successful completion of the training programs. For payment
                         purposes, the project external auditor will verify the number of trained young physicians.

                         Component 3: Improve Competencies of Primary Health Care Teams at the Grass-roots Level (US
                         $41 million)

                         9.     This component will address significant HRH issues particularly: (i) the mismatch between
                         the knowledge/skills competencies of existing health personnel at grass-roots level and the burden of

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         disease in the community; and (ii) lack of modern equipment at Commune Health Stations (CHS).
                         The project will prepare health professionals to deliver integrated preventive, curative, and
                         rehabilitative services to better cope with the double burden of disease – communicable and non-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communicable. It will also improve provision of equipment at CHS to support the delivery of PHC
                         services.

                         (a)     Subcomponent 3.1: Train PHC teams at the grass-roots level (US$19 million)

                         10.      This sub-component will support the training of PHC teams at the grass-roots level in the 15
                         selected provinces, through a combination of long-term and short-term modular training courses and
                         on-the job training. This will be in the form of an MOU between the MOH and the training
                         institutions who will be entrusted to provide the training, financed on the basis of outputs. Training
                         institutions will offer a menu of training options to the health professionals. Unit costs have been
                         defined based on experience and consultations within the MOH and with the provinces and training
                         institutions. They have also been reviewed by the Bank Team and agreed upon (see Table 2.3). As in
                         subcomponents 2.1 and 2,2, the project external auditor will verify the number of staff trained for
                         payment purposes. In addition to the training, the project will finance an independent evaluation of
                         the PHC teams’ performance post-training. The EU has expressed an interest in co-financing this
                         project. While it supports in principle the objectives of the project as a whole, it has expressed an
                         interest in parallel co- financing activities under this sub-component only. Relevant documents to
                         firm-up this co-financing are being prepared.

                         (b)     Subcomponent 3.2: Ensure that trained PHC teams have access to basic equipment
                         according to the national benchmarks (US$22 million)

                         11.     In this sub-component, the project will finance the following activities: (i) provisi on of
                         laboratory and medical equipment as well as furniture to PHC teams in project provinces based on
                         national benchmarks for CHS; and (ii) provision of laboratory, medical equipment and medical
                         furniture for clinical training sites. Each project province will prepare an equipment development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plan which will include an assessment of the equipment gap at each CHS as compared with the
                         approved MOH standard list, and the description of the CHS needs. The MOH will prepare the
                         specifications for each equipment item to be procured under the project. In preparing such plans, the
                         province health authorities will take into account the fact that the EU and the Global Fund has
                         financed, or is planning to finance, equipment for CHSs in some of the selected provinces. Delivery
                         of equipment to the CHS is conditional on at least one staff of the center having completed the
                         planned training in the core principles of PHC.

                         Component 4: Project implementation support and coordination (US$5 million)

                         12.      This component will support: (i) the establishment and operation of the Central project
                         implementation unit (CPMU) under the Directorate of Science and Training of the MOH; and (ii)
                         coordination between the MOH and concerned ministries and agencies in the implementation of the
                         project. It will provide the necessary implementation and technical capacity at the Central level to
                         plan and coordinate the implementation of the project. The CPMU will manage the review and
                         approval of grants to training institutions under sub-component 1.2, MOUs between the MOH and
                         the HSPH and the HCMC Institute of Hygiene and Public Health as well as between the MOH,
                         teaching institutions and central and provincial hospitals, under sub-components 2.1 and 2.2
                         respectively, and MOUs between the training institutions and MOH sub-component 3.1 of the
                         Project. It will also be responsible for monitoring and managing the various studies and TA under the

                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         project. This will be done under the oversight of the Steering Committee. The project will finance:
                         support for project management and supervision, procurement, disbursement, financial management,
                         project audit, and project monitoring and evaluation (including training of project coordination staff
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and workshops for the preparation of grants; and incremental operating costs).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will provide support at nationwide coverage with targeted beneficiaries, including: (i)
                         medical and nursing universities; (ii) nursing colleges; and (iii) PHC personnel and facilities.

                         •        Under component 1, the project will provide financial support to the 26 medical and nursing
                         schools.
                         •        Under the component 2.1, the project will support 2 health management training centers in
                         Hanoi school of Public Health and Ho Chi Minh city institute of hygiene and Public Health.
                         •        Under the component 2.2, the project will support the MOH to train and send young
                         voluntary medical doctor to 62 poorest districts according to the Directive 30a/2008/NQ-CP dated
                         27/12/2008 of the Prime Minister.
                         •        Under the component 3, the project will provide training and basic medical equipment to the
                         primary health care teams at the grass-root level in the following provinces: Lai Châu, Điện Biên,
                         Sơn La, Cao Bằng, Lào Cai, Yên Bái, Hà Giang, Gia Lai, Kontum, Đắc Nông, Thái Bình, Nam Định,
                         Khánh Hòa, Đồng Tháp, Lâm Đồng. It is expected that 60% of PHC teams in these provinces will be
                         trained and equipped.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)
                         Thuy Cam Duong (EASVS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project may finance simple rehabilitation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          BP 4.01                                             existing health facilities.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             The project is about improving quality of existing
                                                                              Primary Health Care services and training. It will
                                                                              not finance any new construction.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The project does not plan to finance major civil
                          4.12                                                work. There may be financing of simple
                                                                              rehabilitation of existing facilities.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No




                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social:

                             The Bank’s safeguard policy on Indigenous People (OP 4.10) is triggered. However the project is
                             expected to have no adverse impacts on ethnic minority groups. It is expected that the project will
                             help to improve the quality of medical and nursing education and the competencies and of Primary
                             Health Care Teams, especially in disadvantaged areas. In line with OP 4.10, a Social Assessment
                             has been done to identify and characterize key stakeholders in terms of their importance to and
                             influence over the project objectives and implementation; to identify potential barriers (cultural,
                             institutional, financial, language etc.) for ethnic minority health staff in the project area to access
                             the project benefits and services; and to document the ‘broad community support’ toward the
                             project’s activities and define the processes for ensuring the consultation and participation of these
                             stakeholders (especially ethnic minority health staff) in project design, implementation, and
                             monitoring and feedback. An Ethnic Minority Planning Framework has been developed for the
                             project. The mechanisms for ensuring culturally appropriate intervention and equal access to
                             project’s benefits are addressed in the operational manual and in the EMPF.

                             The Bank’s OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement will not be triggered, given that land/assets
                             acquisition is not envisaged under the proposed project’s components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environment:

                             The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment as it consists of investments which
                             may cause environmental impacts related to: (i) minor building renovations and/or refurbishment
                             for some of the 26 medical/nursing schools under component 1.2 and the 2 training centers under
                             component 2.1; and (ii) use of medical equipment purchased for clinical training sites and a
                             number of commune health stations (CHSs) at 15 participating provinces under component 3. This
                             type of investment will potentially generate impacts typically known for small scale renovation
                             works and are in link with healthcare waste management practices at CHSs. These impacts are
                             small, localized and manageable via good management practice. On the positive side, the project
                             will help to raise awareness on environmental protection as it is proposed to include a training
                             module for health workforce on healthcare waste management. The project is not expected to have
                             significant environmental impacts and therefore is classified as a category B.

                             As part of project preparation, a brief Environmental and Social Management Framework has been
                             developed by the Government to address the potential adverse environmental impacts. The ESMF
                             is in accordance with the national regulations on environmental management as well as with
                             Bank’s safeguard policies and requirements on public consultation and information disclosure.

                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           More details on environmental assessment, ESMF content, public consultation and disclosure
                           process are described in Annex 3 of the PAD.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           No negative potential indirect and/or long term social and environmental impacts due to future
                           activities are anticipated. The long term positive impacts of the project include improved quality of
                           health services in the project areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Social: N/A

                           Environment: N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment:
                           As part of the project preparation, a brief Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           (ESMF) have been developed by the Ministry of Health (MOH) to address the potential adverse
                           impacts. The ESMF is in compliance with the national regulations on environmental management
                           and The World Bank’s safeguard policies. The ESMF comprises of: (i) an ECOP for minor
                           building renovation work to be included in renovation contract; and (ii) a brief waste management
                           plan for PCHs to be followed during implementation. In addition, the ESMF lays out the
                           procedures for safeguard implementation, monitoring and reporting as well as institutional
                           arrangement, training and cost for safeguard implementation.

                           The Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) under the MOH will have the overall
                           responsibility for ensuring safeguard compliance during project implementation. The MOH has
                           carried out several WB funded projects e.g. Mekong Regional Health Support Project, North
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Central Regional Health Support Project, Northern Upland Regional Health Support Project, and
                           therefore has experience of the World Bank’s safeguard policies.

                           The health sector is used to environmental procedures of registration, authorization, monitoring.
                           On the one hand, the challenges for compliance to regulations on healthcare waste management
                           include (i) limited management capacity, (ii) lacking financial resource for investment and
                           operation, (iii) improper maintenance. On the other hand, the measures provided in the ESMF are
                           quite simple, and can readily be followed. The capacity of the borrower to implement the
                           safeguard requirements therefore is assessed as medium. The project will provide necessary
                           training to strengthen the capacity of health workforce in safeguard implementation.

                           Social:
                           Ethnic Minority Development Plan. The Borrower conducted rapid social assessment to identify
                           and characterize key stakeholders’ importance in influencing the project objectives and
                           implementation; to identify potential barriers (cultural, institutional, financial, language etc.) for
                           ethnic minority health staff to access the project benefits and services; and to document their
                           support toward the project’s activities and define the processes for ensuring the consultation and
                           participation of these stakeholders (especially ethnic minority health staff) in project design,
                           implementation, and monitoring and feedback. The findings of social assessment were translated
                           into an Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) in order to (i) ensure an equal access to


                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                           project benefits of ethnic minority health staff; and (ii) propose specific mitigation measure in
                           minimizing the potential barriers. A social staff will be appointed and will be on board at every
                           CPMU and PPMUs to ensure social safeguards implementation and monitoring are in accordance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with project’s safeguard document (EMDP). Implementing agencies are also responsible for
                           setting up an internal M&E system and external evaluation as well.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the preparation of the ESMF, meaningful consultations with relevant stakeholders
                           including the participating 27 nursing/medical schools were conducted. The MOH has sent the
                           draft ESMF via emails to all these facilities on September 30, 2013 and requested for their
                           response. 26/27 nursing/medical schools agreed with the proposed measures. The feedback from
                           the remaining 1 training center was taken into account and reflected in the final version of the
                           ESMF.

                           Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) and the Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF) have been disclosed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards policies
                           (OP4.10) in Vietnamese on the MOH and provincial websites on November 13, 2013 and in
                           English at the World Bank’s Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi and on the
                           Bank’s Infoshop on November 13, 2013.

                           Social
                           Consultation: Consultations with stakeholders have been conducted through a number of
                           activities, including discussion sessions with university, research institutes, relevant department of
                           MOH, and health staff.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          07-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed on the website of the MOH.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          07-Nov-2013
                           Comments: Disclosed on the website of the MOH.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Eva Jarawan
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Toomas Palu (SM)                              Date: 10-Jan-2014




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
