                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA7877

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tanzania                        Project ID:    P149464
                                                     Parent         P098496
                                                     Project ID:
   Project Name:     Additional Financing for Science & Technology Higher Education (P149464)
   Parent Project    Science & Technology Higher Education (P098496)
   Name:
   Task Team         Xiaonan Cao
   Leader:
   Estimated         21-Apr-2014                     Estimated   10-Jul-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTEE                           Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                     Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
   Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:          15.00              Total Bank Financing: 15.00
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                   Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                          15.00
     Total                                                                                15.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)



                                           Page 1 of 6
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objective is to increase the quantity and quality of higher education
   graduates, with special emphasis onscience, technology, and education, through an improved
   learning environment.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   (i) To increase quantity and quality of higher education graduates, with special emphasis on
   science, technology and education, and (ii) to lay the foundations for improved responsiveness of
   tertiary education to the labor market.
3. Project Description
The PDO is amended slightly because the additional Credit will finance some new activities that
relate to the overall tertiary level of education (described below). As a result, this Additional
Financing is accompanied by a level-one restructuring of the original financing.

The proposed additional Credit will finance activities planned under the original Credit that could not
be completed as a result of currency fluctuations during implementation and additional activities for
ensuring the development effectiveness of the operation. The Credit will also enable the Government
of Tanzania to pilot two programs to improve the quality and relevance of higher education as well
as prepare an overall strategy and operational plan for technical/vocational education and higher
education (together comprising tertiary education) to address skill requirements in priority growth
sectors.

Component 1A – Investments in Priority Disciplines for Economic Growth (US$3.71 million) (Part
A.1 under the Credit Agreement). The additional Credit will finance the completion of existing
activities in the areas of staff training, remaining external works and civil works, lab equipment, and
other goods. No new activities are planned under this sub-component.

Component 1B – Expanded Capacity for Teacher Preparation and for Graduate Studies in Education
(US$5.658 million) (Part A.2 under the Credit Agreement). US$0.978 million of the additional
Credit will finance the completion of existing activities under this sub-component in the areas of staff
training, remaining external works and civil works, lab equipment, and furniture. US$4.68 million of
the additional Credit will finance a new activity – to build institutional mechanisms and capacity for
applying information and communications technology (ICT) in teacher training with the introduction
of a pilot training program that upgrades the content knowledge of science teachers in difficult
subject areas.

Component 2A – Strengthening Key Tertiary Education Agencies and Institutions (US$4.632
million) (Part B.1 under the Credit Agreement). US$0.682 million of the additional Credit will
finance the completion of existing activities under this sub-component in the areas of consultancy
services and STHEP-1 operational costs. US$3.95 million of the additional Credit will finance two
new activities: (i) to establish institutional mechanisms and procedures for the Flexible Financing
Facility developed under the original Credit and is a performance-based financing instrument for
fostering greater linkages between higher education institutions and the private sector (US$2.32
million); and (ii) to develop a strategy and operational plan for skills development from the technical/
vocational level to higher education in the priority growth sectors of agribusiness, tourism, and


                                              Page 2 of 6
transport/logistics, in close collaboration with the private sector (US$ 1.63 million).

Component 2B – Investments in System-wide ICT and Libraries (US$ 1.0 million) (Part B.2 under
the Credit Agreement). The additional Credit will finance the completion of the existing activity –
Last Mile Connectivity – to connect the remaining eight higher education institutions with the
National ICT Broadband Backbone. No new activities are planned under this sub-component.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed STHEP-1 AF is for one year (12 months) and is a national program that focused on
tertiary education institutions. It will provide necessary financial and technical support to the
completion of the remaining activities under STHEP-1 which could not be fully completed due to a
Credit loss of US$6.6 million arising from exchange rate fluctuations over the implementation
period. Among these activities, there are some civil works and external works which were appraised
under STHEP-1 but could not be completed due to the Credit loss. The new activities which are to
be funded under the proposed STHEP-1 AF include study visits, workshops, sector-specific studies,
and two pilots (on establishment of institutional mechanisms and procedures for a performance-based
financing instrument and use of ICT for upgrading subject content knowledge of science teachers).
None of these new activities will trigger any additional or change in the existing triggered social and
environmental safeguards policies. The reason for OP 4.12 not being triggered under the original
project, despite inclusion of some civil works, was that all the civil works were done within the
existing higher education institution premises and within the existing foot print of the campuses. No
land needed to be acquired as a result.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy continues to be triggered due to the
 BP 4.01                                              ongoing activity of civil works, including
                                                      construction and rehabilitation of facilities such
                                                      as laboratories, offices and teaching blocks within
                                                      the existing campus boundaries of the project
                                                      institutions. None of these works will be done on
                                                      new land and no acquisition of new land is
                                                      expected.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The original project (STHEP-1) did not trigger



                                              Page 3 of 6
   4.12                                                 the OP 4.12. This was because the civil works
                                                        under the original project were all done within the
                                                        same foot print of the existing campuses and no
                                                        land was needed or acquired and there was no
                                                        resettlement. The AF will finish some of the
                                                        rehabilitation and minor civil works that started
                                                        under STHEP-1. There will be no additional new
                                                        civil works under the proposed AF.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     In general, the nature of activities proposed does not pose large scale or significant/ irreversible
     environmental risks; but there are environmental concerns associated with civil works involving
     new construction/expansion/upgradation of buildings. In addition to doing no harm, specifically
     with regard to sound management and good occupational practices related to construction and
     waste, there is also possibility of improving building design aspects by inclusion of good
     environmental practices, such as (i) improved location and orientation of new buildings to allow
     adequate lighting and ventilation that could minimize the use of electricity; (ii) landscaping and
     greening the building surroundings; (iii) provision of adequate toilet facilities for males and
     females and water and sanitation; (v) improved access facilities for handicapped and also
     improved safety and emergency precautions.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     There are no anticipated long term impacts as long as the environmental due diligence measures
     detailed in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) are strictly followed.
     The STHEP-1 has had a satisfactory record with regard to the implementation of the ESMF.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     This AF will use the existing Environment and Social Management (ESMF) of the parent project,
     which was prepared in the original project and has been implemented satisfactorily over the
     project period. The ESMF includes a screening mechanism to identify key environment and social
     issues and potential impacts; good practices for mainstreaming environment and social issues in
     design of the buildings and construction of civil works with clearly defined mitigatory measures
     for any adverse impacts; monitoring indicators and reporting requirements for environmental and


                                                Page 4 of 6
  social indicators. Borrower capacity has been deemed satisfactory for the implementation of the
  ESMF, with suggestions for improvement in systematizing the institutional structure for
  preparation of the ESMPs, and their disclosure and monitoring (as detailed in the ESMF). There is
  need to have a designated focal point for management of the ESMF at the MoEVT.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders are government and national agencies related to technical/vocational and
  higher education, higher education institutions, teacher training institutions, district education
  offices, schools and teachers. The ESMF builds in disclosure of the planning process of each
  subcomponent, and requires that the mitigation and monitoring actions recommended in the ESMP
  should be developed in consultation with all the affected groups to include their concerns and
  reviews in the design of the ESMP.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       26-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    15-May-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the project cost?



                                           Page 5 of 6
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader:      Name: Xiaonan Cao
   Approved By
   Sector Manager:        Name: Barbara Weber (SM)                        Date: 08-May-2014




                                             Page 6 of 6
