                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA8013

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Mar-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Azerbaijan                       Project ID:    P147861
                                                      Parent         P122944
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Second Rural Investment Project Additional Financing (P147861)
   Parent Project    Second Rural Investment Project (P122944)
   Name:
   Task Team         Daniel P. Owen
   Leader:
   Estimated         10-Mar-2014                      Estimated   30-May-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    ECSSO                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (40%), Other social services (30%),
                     General water, sanitation and flood protection sector ( 30%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Participation and civic engagement
                     (15%), Gender (10%), Social Inclusion (8%), Rural non-fa rm income generation
                     (7%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:              50.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     Borrower                                                                               0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 50.00
     Total                                                                                 50.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         Yes
   Repeater
   project?


                                            Page 1 of 7
 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent


   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The original project is a multi-sector investment loan that scales up AzRIP both geographically into
currently un-serviced Rayons and vertically through the inc                                lusion of
second generation institutional support in previous AzRIP active proje
ct areas. The original project has three components:

 Component A - Rural Community Infrastructure. This component will support demand-driven
micro-projects (MPs) in rural infrastructure. Potential investments incl
ude basic economic (e.g., rehabilitation of secondary roads, potable water syste
ms, irrigation infrastructure, electricity transformers) and social (e.g., schoo
l and clinic rehabilitation
 and construction) infrastructure, based on priority needs identified by communities. The average size
of MPs will be US$ 70,000, while MPs over US$85,000 will r                                     equire
prior review.

 Component B - Technical Assistance for Rural Infrastructure. This component will fund support
services for micro project implementation as well livelihood suppo                             rt
services (SWOT analysis, business plan preparation, legal and institutional a
nalysis, business training).

 Component C - Project Management and Results Monitoring. This component will finance the
administrative and operational project implementation and management co
sts.

 The proposed Additional Financing (AF) would comprise three components which are: (i) to extend
delivery of community rural infrastructure to 2 new Rayons and t o provide additional grants
toexisting AzRIP communities; (ii) to scale up the l               ivelihood pilots; (iii) to pilot a
connector roads concept, with clusters of com                munities and a focus on local
connecting roads under the jurisdiction of the Mun                icipality.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The coverage for the original Project scales up the previous Project to encompass the 11 currently
un-serviced rayons and include 56 rayons in total. With the o                                 riginal
project envelope of roughly US$ 30 million, the project can support appr
oximately 650 sub-projects in 650 communities. Given the almost nationwide cover
age of the project, activities take place in all of the Country's agro-ecologica
l zones (Lowland Plains, Upland Rainfed, and Highlands). The AF will expand to c


                                             Page 2 of 7
urrently unservices areas in Fizuli and Agdam. An additional 4 to 6 areas will b
e selected to participate in the connector road pilot scheme, connecting communi
ties within rayons.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
Kosuke Anan (ECSSO)

6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Due to the scale and nature of the eligible micro-
BP 4.01                                             projects, the project is not expected to result in
                                                    significant environmental impacts. Instead, the
                                                    experience with the activities under the original
                                                    project indicates that many of the micro-projects
                                                    produced environmental benefits (for example,
                                                    reduction in erosion through proper road
                                                    rehabilitation or small-scale wastewater
                                                    treatment.) Since the micro-projects for AZRIP II
                                                    are not pre-identified, specific environmental
                                                    impacts will only be identified in the course of
                                                    project implementation. Therefore, a framework
                                                    mechanism for screening environmental impacts,
                                                    developing mitigation plans and monitoring
                                                    environmental progress is required. Examples of
                                                    potential environmental impacts include
                                                    excessive dust or noise during construction/
                                                    rehabilitation, the removal or disturbance of
                                                    natural vegetation, waste disposal and the
                                                    aesthetic degradation of a landscape.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The project will not finance activities which
                                                    would involve conversion of natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project will not finance activities which
                                                    would involve conversion or use of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project will not provide financing for
                                                    pesticides or for activities likely to lead to
                                                    increased pesticide use.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              The project will not finance activities on cultural
BP 4.11                                             sensitive sites or sites of archeological
                                                    importance. The Environmental Management
                                                    Framework will contain provisions for chance
                                                    finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The project will not finance activities that will
4.12                                                require land acquisition or the displacement of
                                                    livelihoods or residences.



                                            Page 3 of 7
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International           Yes             Since small scale irrigation schemes are eligible
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                for financing under the project, the policy on
                                                       international waters is triggered. Riparian states
                                                       have been notified accordingly when processing
                                                       the original AzRIP-2.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The original project does not raise any significant adverse environmental concerns. Experience
     derived from the first and second AzRIP indicates that positive e
     nvironmental impacts resulted from the implementation of such micro-projects as improved
     irrigation, water supply and sewerage systems. The potentially adverse environmental impacts of
     AzRIP-2 are mainly associated with civil works during micro-projects implementation, and
     include, inter alia, dust, noise, soil and water pollution, generation of waste materials, waste
     disposal (including medical waste), damage to soil by excavation works.

     Environmental Assessment.

     These potential negative environmental impacts trigger the Operational Policy OP 4.01. The
    impacts are minor and can be prevented or minimized through appropriate preventive actions and
    mitigation measures. Therefore, the project is classified as environmental category "B", requiring
    partial assessment. Since micro-projects were not pre-identified and are determined in the course
    of project implementation by applicant communities through intensive participatory processes, an
    environmental management framework is applied which establishes screening mechanisms and
    governs the process of development and implementation of specific mitigation plans. The
    Environmental Management Framework for the first AzRIP was updated by the Borrower to
    address impacts from the AZRIP 2 activities to strengthen rural livelihoods and to reflect the
    expanded geographical coverage. This updated               framework includes screening
    mechanisms to exclude the possibility of land acquisition and resettlement resulting from sub-
    project implementation. The updated EMF for the original project has been discussed with
    stakeholders and publicly disclosed by the Borrower. For the purposes of the AF the EMF has
    been updated again to reflect the expanded geographical coverage and been subject to public
    consultation. Projects in International Waters.

     As was the case with AzRIP and AzRIP-2, the AF will support activities on rehabilitation or
    construction of irrigation and drainage systems,water supply improvement and wastewater
    treatment. Such activities are likely to be developed inter- alia on rivers flowing into theCaspian
    Sea and trans boundary rivers, which are international waterways for the purposes of the World
    Bank Operational Policy on Projects on International Waters (OP 7.50). It is expected (and also
    based on the experience under the original project) that proposed micro-projects would not


                                               Page 4 of 7
  produce a noticeable change for the abstraction volumes of the systems and would not have an
  adverse change to the quality or quantity of river flows, while the works would not change the
  nature of the original systems. With OP 7.50 being triggered, riparian states have been notified
  accordingly when processing the original AzRIP-2.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  The long-term and indirect impacts are expected to be highly positive as will result from better
  rural communal services and infrastructure such as safe drinking water, better sewage systems, etc.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The AF will be implemented by the same PMU which is implementing AzRIP-2 and was
  implementing AzRIP and AzRIP Additional Financing.Capacity for the EMF implementation has
  been built under the previous projects through series of training regularly provided to thePMU, its
  Regional Offices and potential beneficiary communities. The PMU Environmental Specialist is
  responsible for training delivery, assists the Regional Offices and applicant communities
  throughout the whole cycle of micro-project development and implementation and closely
  supervises implementation of specific preventive and mitigation measures by project beneficiaries.
  As a result of the implementation of capacity building assistance, the PMU staff i n the Regional
  Offices are competent to guide project applicants as to the eligibility of proposed activity from the
  environmental perspective, to provide advice on environmental documents and permits to be
  prepared/obtained by applicants. The Environmental Specialist is screening all the proposals for
  potential adverse impacts and provides guidance at a very early stage of preparation of proposals
  with respect to site assessment and selection, potential environmental sensitivities and alternative
  solutions, if any. Only those micro-project proposals meeting all the environmental requirements
  (no sensitivities identified at the early stage, specific EMPs available and of good quality, permits
  obtained) are cleared for further evaluation. Each micro-project has been supervised by the
  Environmental Specialist at least twice during the implementation period. Micro project
  completion is certified by the Environmental Specialist, along with other technical specialists of
  the PMU. Close supervision of micro projects has ensured that proposed mitigation measures are
  properly implemented by contractors and communities (e.g., proper site selection, quick removal
  and disposal of construction and medical wastes, non-use of toxic materials in construction). The
  awareness-raising seminars among potential beneficiaries have been periodically undertaken in the
  project area and have significantly improved communities' understanding o f, and commitment to
  environmental compliance. Community members with appropriate background (medical,
  biological) are selected to monitor contractors' environmental performance. The same good
  practice will continue under AzRIP-2 AF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The primary stakeholders driving this project are the communities themselves, who are actively
  supported in identifying, selecting,planning, implementing and maintaining infrastructure micro-
  projects. Public meetings were held in March 2011 at the rayon level for disclosure of the EMF
  for the original AzRIP-2. The consultation meetings were attended by representatives from
  communities, municipalities, the Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources, Regional NGOs and
  Regional ExComms of the areas where the Project will be active. The updated EMF has been


                                             Page 5 of 7
  publicly disclosed on March 6th and 7th, 2014. The updated EMF will be posted onthe official site
  of the implementing agency, prior to the AF appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         07-Mar-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      07-Mar-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Azerbaijan                                                          04-Mar-2011
  Comments: The EMPF for the original project AzRIP 2 P122944 was duly disclosed on
                04/15/2011. The EMPF updated for the purposes of the Additional Financing was
                disclosed in-country at the public consultation meetings held during between March
                4 and 7, 2014.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
 Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
 Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies




                                           Page 6 of 7
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Daniel P. Owen
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 10-Mar-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Elisabeth Huybens (SM)                         Date: 11-Mar-2014




                                             Page 7 of 7
