                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8346
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Zambia                             Project ID:    P147343
                            Project Name:      Public Financial Management Reform Program Phase I (P147343)
                            Task Team          Pazhayannur K. Subramania
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Feb-2014                        Estimated   21-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTME                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         30.00                Total Bank Financing:       0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Zambia Public Financial Mgmt Reform Program                                               30.00
                              Total                                                                                     30.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to improving the efficiency and
                           accountability of public resources.
                            3. Project Description
                           The following is a brief description of the components which the project will support.



                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1: Integrated Planning and Budgeting and Revision of PFM Legal Framework:

                         The objective of this component is to improve the development planning and budgeting processes to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhance the development and service delivery impact of the public sector. It will help enhance the
                         legal basis for robust PFM arrangements to strengthen the linkage of budgetary allocations with
                         policy objectives of the government. The government has prepared a policy paper for Planning and
                         Budget. The Program will complement this work by providing additional financial support for
                         consultations and sensitization workshops on the proposed planning and budget law. The program
                         will include review of the Public Finance Act and related laws and regulations covering fiscal
                         decentralization, management of public debt, management of government investments [including in
                         state owned enterprises (SOEs)], internal audit, external audit, and monitoring. Regulations will need
                         to consider the design of the fiscal framework and transfer systems for local government. There will
                         be a need to strengthen the Medium Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF) and policy-based budget
                         and implement the PFM legal framework through developing and implementing a set of manuals
                         covering all relevant topics. The activities will be concurrent with the development of the legislative
                         changes and there will be strong stakeholder consultation. The manuals will become the basis for
                         building capacity and initiating change management in ministries on the revised procedures and
                         administrative adjustments. This component will also support the ongoing and proposed initiatives of
                         the Budget Department to rationalize program classification with better linkage to plans, pilot testing
                         and potential roll out of budget module in IFMIS, and enhancing staff capacity for improved
                         challenge function as well as other mutually agreed new initiatives that the Budget Department may
                         want to pursue.

                         Component 2: Strengthening IFMIS and Cash Management

                         The objective of this component is to enhance financial management systems and standards in order
                         to promote good financial management and corporate governance practices in the public service. It
                         will help ensure that: (a) the budget is executed as planned; (b) the quality and timeliness of financial
                         reports is improved for better fiscal management; and (c) the efficiency of cash management is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhanced to reduce borrowing. Strengthening IFMIS will involve various substantial activities. It
                         will strengthen TSA and improve the efficiency of cash and debt management by providing for
                         necessary Technical Assistance (TA), manuals, hardware, software, organizational changes, training
                         and change management. The plan is to expand the centralization of the government cash balances
                         held in various bank accounts through the creation of a unified bank account structure of linked
                         accounts. The Treasury will have full control over this TSA to use the overall liquidity of the
                         government to reduce borrowing and associated interest charges. It will strengthen fiscal controls
                         through extension and enhancement of IFMIS and improved debt management arrangements. This
                         component will build on the work done under the current IFMIS project (supported by DFID) and
                         support the roll out of the SAP-based budget preparation, execution and fiscal reporting modules to
                         remaining MPSAs and to large donor-funded projects. The component will also support update of the
                         accounting manual to harmonize it with IFMIS and changes arising from other components. It will
                         establish treasury functions and processes to strengthen financial and fiduciary controls at the de-
                         concentrated levels in line with the government’s policy. Basic centralized payment processing and
                         associated accounting and reporting function will also be established at devolved levels in line with
                         the evolving policy. The government will prioritize the roll-out of IFMIS at sub-national level in a
                         phased manner.

                         Component 3: Public Procurement Reforms



                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         The main objectives of this component are to: (a) establish and strengthen ZPPA’s oversight and
                         regulatory role in public procurement; and (b) strengthen ZIPS’s capacity to establish and maintain
                         quality standards of purchasing and supply professionals.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-Component 3.1: Institutionalizing Procurement Capacity Development: This sub-component
                         will support improved compliance of procurement guidelines and procedures as well as enhance
                         decentralization by identifying and addressing the capacity needs of the Public Enterprises (PE) and
                         MPSAs by targeted training including for complex and specialized procurement.

                         Sub-Component 3.2: Furthering Procurement Policy Reform and Strengthening Capacity of the
                         ZPPA: This sub-component will address the institutional policy reforms and capacity development
                         needs of ZPPA and Procurement and Supplies Units (PSUs) through capacity assessment, training,
                         and review of appeals processes and the Procurement Law.

                         Sub-Component 3.3: Introducing Information Technology in the Procurement System: This sub-
                         component will be carried out on a phased approached to improve transparency and efficiency. The
                         sub-component will provide development of a web-based procurement portal, an e-Framework
                         Agreement for procurement of commonly used goods and services, and a system allowing e-bidding,
                         e-purchasing, and e-contract management. The e-government procurement development package
                         will include the data center, back-up power arrangement, and user training. Under the scope of the
                         program, the system will be piloted on a limited scale in selected agencies.

                         Sub-Component 3.4: Enhancement of the Capacity of ZIPS and its Educational Program: This sub-
                         component will address ZIPS local institutional capacity by developing a national professional
                         curriculum and training materials at Certificate, Diploma and Graduate Diploma levels, and
                         enhancing the institutional and staff capacity of ZIPS.

                         Component 4: Enhanced Internal Audit and Control
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will strengthen and promote internal control systems in order to enhance
                         transparency and accountability in the use of public resources. It provides for developing a local
                         curriculum for public sector internal auditors, upgrading internal audit work and quality assurance
                         procedures to international standards, strengthening Audit Committees in ministries, and greater use
                         of IT auditing tools and skills.

                         Component 5: Increasing the Effectiveness of Revenue Administration

                         The objective of this component is to increase the effectiveness of revenue administration by the
                         Zambia Revenue Authority. This component includes supporting major ongoing change initiatives
                         funded by Government and enhancing the professionalism and productivity of the workforce. The
                         underlying aim is to generate increased revenue for Government.

                         Subcomponent 5.1: Implementation of Mining Sector Monitoring Mechanism: This subcomponent
                         takes a multifaceted approach to monitoring production, costs, sales and revenues in a manner that is
                         reliable and independently verifiable. As such it will enable the ZRA to fulfill its regulatory
                         requirements of verifying the accuracy of mining tax returns and improving ZRA’s monitoring
                         capabilities. It will also bring into one system all the reporting obligations of mining companies to
                         Government oversight institutions. The Government has provided much of the required project costs
                         and this project will provide support for parts that are unfunded – primarily for the creation of the

                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         integrated information portal and an Integrated Service Centre.

                         Subcomponent 5.2: System for Monitoring Balance of Payments: This sub component is primarily
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the costs of engaging an UNCTAD ASYCUDA technical expert to make the necessary changes to
                         the base ASYCUDA World software. This would facilitate the use of the single window concept
                         capabilities of the system to enable data exchange and operational integration between Customs and
                         Other Government Agencies (OGA).

                         Subcomponent 5.3: Transit Tracking and Suspense Regime: This sub component seeks to use new
                         technology to put in place improved control systems and procedures for goods that are in transit
                         across Zambia or are moving within Zambia without remitting duties and taxes. This will provide for
                         a vehicle tracking system with a control room to monitor movements.

                         Subcomponent 5.4: Capacity Building Program for Medium Taxpayer Office (MTO) staff: This
                         subcomponent will support tax audit and tax debt collection. For audit, the consultancy assistance
                         will include training and mentoring auditors, as well as reviewing audit manuals and procedures. In
                         addition, a start will be made on producing audit sector notes and training staff on their use. For debt
                         management, the consultancy assistance will review the current policies and procedures and train
                         staff in debt management skills. The support will relate to sector specific work, on procedures, on
                         the audit notes as well as capacity building. This support will need to be closely coordinated with
                         GIZ and Norway.

                         Subcomponent 5.5: Support for Investigation and Internal Affairs: The ZRA is embarking on a wide
                         range of initiatives to enhance the capabilities of its Investigative arms – both tax/customs
                         investigation and Internal Affairs (the ZRA anticorruption unit). This subcomponent will provide
                         specialist equipment (including a computer forensics lab); radios and base station; protective vests;
                         surveillance equipment; cameras, audio recording, binoculars etc. The US Treasury is providing TA
                         and the support will closely coordinated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 5.6: Bulk Intelligence Data Analysis Capability: The ZRA is enhancing its
                         Intelligence Unit so that it can collect and disseminate information on apparent discrepancies on tax
                         or customs to audit and investigation staff. This sub component seeks to develop the capability to
                         automatically analyze and compare third party and ZRA data in order to identify specific areas and
                         cases of revenue interest. This support is for the Intelligence Unit and sits within Investigation.

                         Subcomponent 5.7: Electronic Records Management System: This subcomponent will provide for
                         introducing scanning technology into the Central Registry and at all offices so that all remaining
                         documentation can be captured and stored digitally. This will make the ZRA more efficient and
                         ensure that required documentation can be accessed quickly (thus giving improved turnaround times
                         etc.).

                         Component 6: Strengthening Tax Policy Formulation

                         The objective of this component is to enhance the capacity and capabilities of the Tax Policy Unit in
                         the Ministry of Finance and will support the following three types of activities which will be closely
                         coordinated with OECD:
                         •        Give support to the Unit in undertaking a range of studies and research projects to support
                         tax policy formulation
                         •        Enhance the capacity of staff in the Tax Policy Unit through specific training and mentoring

                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                         support on general business taxation policy; taxation of multinationals; and on reviewing the
                         effectiveness of double taxation agreements.
                         •       Improve the access to information to aid tax policy formulation to help the Unit source that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         material needed to support their tax policy analyses.

                         Component 7: Program Management

                         The objective of the component is to manage the agreed development program, provide additional
                         procurement and financial management support to the implementing departments and to monitor the
                         objectives and performance against the indicators. A PFM Reform Unit mainstreamed in MoF under
                         a senior level Project Coordinator will be responsible for the management of the overall reform
                         program and projects under the same as part of overseeing GRZ’s PFM reform strategy
                         implementation. Capacity building is required both in terms of staff training and also additional
                         appointments to support the main functions (procurement, financial management and monitoring &
                         evaluation) of the Unit. Main activities will include; (i) procurement of full complement of
                         professional staff required for the Unit either through transfer from other units or through contract
                         appointment; (ii) purchase of any office equipment urgently required and incremental operating
                         costs; (iii) training in program and project management and procurement and/or financial
                         management as required; (iv) annual audit of the project by Auditor General or independent auditors;
                         (v) providing detailed program/project implementation reports; (vii) taking action as necessary to
                         keep the project implementation on target and reporting to the Steering Committee on any deviations;
                         and (viii) providing detailed reporting on a quarterly basis on project M&E indicators and taking
                         action as necessary to keep the project implementation and achievements on target.

                         Component 8: Other PFM Functions

                         This component provides some funds for ad hoc or new reforms that may develop in the next few
                         months such as MoF restructuring and fiscal decentralization. Other emerging needs may also come
                         up within existing components as well as others such as, from oversight bodies or service delivery
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sectors which are not covered through other funding arrangements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project focuses on soft technical assistance/advisory efforts such as capacity building, taxation
                         reforms and improving effectiveness of revenue administration. The project will not finance any
                         physical works, and therefore is not likely to have any adverse environment and social footprints on
                         the ground.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No




                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project components are not expected to have any adverse environmental impacts but have
                              positive social impacts through improved government financial management contributing to better
                              service delivery, enhanced accountability and reduced corruption. Transparent and accountable
                              management of public resources will lead to increased civic confidence in government. The
                              computerization of transactions and processes would lead to better and faster public services
                              delivery.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Not applicable
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              No adverse impact expected from the project.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Pazhayannur K. Subramania
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 13-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Mc Kenzie (SM)                        Date: 13-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
