                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC6121

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nicaragua                        Project ID:      P147006
                            Project Name:      NI Sustainable Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (P147006)
                            Task Team          Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          08-Jan-2014                      Estimated        17-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSWS                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (40%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                               (30%), Sanitation (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Other public sector governance (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%),
                                               Rural policies and institutions (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     32.00                     Total Bank Financing:         30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            2.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  14.30
                              IDA Grant                                                                    15.70
                              Total                                                                        32.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9.       The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are: (a) to increase the access to sustainable
                           WSS services in selected poor rural areas of Nicaragua through the consolidation of rural WSS sector
                           institutions and the provision of adequate infrastructure; and (b) to improve Nicaragua’s capacity to
                           respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project would implement four components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Strengthening of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector (US$7.00M)

                         Sub-component 1.1: Institutional strengthening of the FISE to support its stewardship role. This sub-
                         component would (i) support FISE’s internal re-organization and strengthen its capacity to lead the
                         sector, (ii) support FISE in the development of policies, norms, planning instruments, and approaches
                         to enhance coordination and articulation across all sector institutional levels, (iii) support knowledge-
                         sharing activities to share international best practice and promote harmonization across all sector
                         actors.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Strengthening of an integrated structure for sustainability (“sustainability
                         chain?). This sub-component would finance (i) the elaboration of municipal and/or territorial plans
                         for rural WSS, which will serve to define municipal and community-level needs ; (ii) institutional
                         strengthening of municipal or territorial WSS units; (iii) capacity building of community WSS
                         boards. The sub-component would also enhance coordination between FISE and sub-national actors
                         (regional, territorial and municipal governments and non-governmental organizations).

                         Sub-component 1.3: Project management, monitoring, and evaluation. This component would
                         finance the general operating costs of the Project’s implementing agency (FISE) in the
                         implementation of the entire Project,. Funds would also support the development of an impact
                         evaluation for the Project.

                         Component 2: Increase Sustainable WSS Coverage in Rural Areas (US$20.00M): This component
                         would support municipalities, territories, and other local actors to increase coverage of rural WSS
                         services through the financing of investments included in their respective plans (developed under
                         Sub-component 1.2). This would involve works to increase the sustainable coverage of WSS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services, including construction or rehabilitation of WSS systems, equipment of systems, and water
                         quality improvements. These investments will follow the principles and funds allocations
                         mechanisms defined in the MEPAS, which will be updated to revise the project cycle and the funds
                         allocation mechanism by introducing pro-poor eligibility criteria at the municipal and community
                         levels, and would include the sanitation marketing option in the general menu of interventions .

                         Component 3: Innovations in Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (US$3.00M): This component
                         would finance various pilot projects, which may include: (i) training of youth in social
                         accompaniment of rural WSS projects, water board administration, and plumbing, (ii) carrying out of
                         climate change vulnerability studies in selected municipalities , (iii) design and implementation of
                         management models for small municipal firms in concentrated rural areas, and (iv) other initiatives
                         to be defined.

                         Component 4: Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) Contingency (US$0.00): The proposed
                         Project would support Nicaragua to improve its capacity to respond promptly and effectively to
                         emergencies through an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) Contingency Component, as part of
                         the IRM established for Nicaragua . Implementation arrangements and fiduciary and safeguard
                         policies, detailed in an IRM Operations Manual, will seek to ensure smooth implementation based on
                         rapid and effective disbursement of availa ble funds.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will increase access to water and sanitation services in rural areas of Nicaragua and in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         municipalities with populations of less than 5,000 inhabitants that are not served by the national
                         utility, ENACAL. The project will increase access to water and sanitation services particularly in
                         poverty stricken and poor areas according to national poverty data. . The implementation of the
                         project would generate positive health impacts such as decreased incidence of waterborne diseases
                         among the beneficiary communities.

                         The investments involve dispersed and small-scale minor infrastructure works, such as small wells,
                         gravity augmented pumps and/or electric pumps, water storage tanks, aqueducts, household
                         connections and on-site sanitation in communities are distributed across the entire country. Most of
                         the systems rely on groundwater sources (wells with hand pumps, gravity augmented pumps and/or
                         electric pumps). There will be no disposal of sewers (treated or untreated) in any waterways (mostly
                         on-site sanitation solutions are contemplated). On an exceptional basis, the Project may also finance
                         small sewerage (condominial) systems, and in this case, the effluent will be treated in a manner
                         acceptable to the Bank before its disposal in any waterways.

                         In very few cases, the investment could coincide with natural habitats such as wetlands or native
                         forests. The nature of works, including small excavation could eventually expose cultural property.
                         Furthermore, none of the Project activities will take place in disputed areas.

                         There will be no direct water use from transboundary waterways by investments under the proposed
                         operation, and total estimated additional water abstraction is therefore null. If some systems were to
                         use surface water from small tributaries, the extraction would be non material, since the estimated
                         average flows per project for the entire portfolio of similar projects ongoing in the country
                         (PRASNICA and Additional Financing) ranges from 0.01 l/s to 20 l/s; with an average of 3.4 l/s
                         (while the flow of the Rio San Juan that is shared between Nicaragua and Costa Rica, for example, is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         about one million times that amount). The OP-BP 7.50 (Project on International Waterways) will be
                         triggered.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower has a system of environmental management to manage minor and expected project
                         impacts which has been strengthened during the implementation of the Rural Water Supply and
                         Sanitation Project – PRASNICA (P106283). Therefore, FISE has the experience to manage the
                         environmental impacts of this Project. Currently, FISE employs a qualified ecologist and in 2012,
                         FISE hired an environmental consultant to reinforce the environmental management unit. FISE also
                         has experience coordinating with at least 20 technical specialists (architects and engineers) in their 17
                         regional offices throughout Nicaragua. While FISE is responsible to ensure safeguards compliance
                         and implementation, the on-going management system relays many technical decisions to
                         decentralized units in municipalities led by municipal experts whose capacity is not known in detail.
                         During preparation, an assessment will be conducted in order to scope the institutional strengthening
                         at the municipal levels.

                         Overall, central technical capacity within FISE is adequate; however the Environmental Management
                         Unit needs to deepen the technical analysis of the proposed interventions considering their impacts in
                         a broader scale, taking into account the level of degradation of watersheds as well as the area of
                         influence of the interventions and their eventual effect on the environmental flows. These specific
                         technical aspects will be strengthened by including specific requirements in the project’s ESMF. In
                         addition, this wider approach for environmental issues at a micro basin level will be adopted during
                         the elaboration of municipal and/or territorial plans for rural WSS (under subcomponent 1.2) which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         may be available at earlier stages of the Project to guide investments under the Project’s other
                         components. It is expected that these plans exploit the environmental restrictions and opportunities
                         for WSS in rural areas.

                         In terms of specific experience with implementation of World Bank safeguards, FISE has adopted an
                         ESMF which has been prepared for an on-going Bank financed operation (P106283) and was
                         updated and revised during the preparation of Adaptation of Nicaragua’s Water Supplies to Climate
                         Change Project (P127088). This process also included a Safeguards Diagnostic Review which found
                         FISE environmental management as satisfactory. Overall safeguards compliance remains
                         Satisfactory. FISE has been carrying out environmental supervision visits to sub-project sites, and
                         has also been quite proactive in securing environmental documentation for the purposes of different
                         project. No remedial actions have been identified. Some gaps have been identified in the definition of
                         the technical scope in terms of references (baseline studies, definition of area of influence, ecology of
                         water bodies, wetlands conservation) and in the effective capacity to supervise a project in the field
                         which involves multiple interventions in remote and non-accessible areas.

                         FISE’s capacity to follow up and supervise the implementation of social safeguards, particularly
                         OP4.10 for Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples, is adequate. The Indigenous Peoples Plan
                         implemented for the PRASNICA project included a Diagnosis of the status of the water and
                         sanitation systems in the Indigenous Communities of Pacific, Center and North. During preparation
                         of the PRASNICA, FISE consulted with the Indigenous authorities and organizations in those
                         regions and delivered training to them. The PRASNICA’s Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples
                         Plan (IAPP), covering the entire Country, was elaborated by the GoN in consultation with the
                         Regional and Territorial Governments, including through consultations carried out by an
                         interdisciplinary team in 15 communities in the Project area, 10 of which are Indigenous or Afro-
                         Nicaraguan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Additionally, during PRASNICA implementation, OP 4.10’s requirements for free, prior and
                         informed consultation and broad community support were operationalized through the PRASNICA’s
                         social intervention scheme, which requires social specialists (both within FISE and within the team
                         of the sub-project’s contractor) to support: (a) community organization, particularly related to the
                         establishment and/or legalization of the community WSS committees (CAPS); (b) effective
                         participation of women in key CAPS positions; (c) community selection of their preferred water
                         option (hand-pumps, automated pumps, etc); (d) family selection of individual sanitation schemes,
                         allowing enhancements to the unit according to personal preference; and (e) good hygiene practices.
                         As part of the process, after being informed about the sub-project, its alternatives, costs and
                         approach, the community registers its agreement to the sub-project in the form of an act (Acta),
                         registering also the alternative selected and the agreement to contribute, operate and maintain the
                         intervention. The community is also trained to manage and maintain the systems. In indigenous
                         areas, the social intervention is carried out by locally-hired staff, in the language of the beneficiaries.
                         Also as part of PRASNICA implementation, the Regional Governments of RAAN, and RAAS, and
                         the Territorial Governments of Alto Wangky and Bocay participated actively in the selection of
                         communities, and the elaboration of the Operational Manual customized for the Caribbean Coast
                         (MEPASH).Institutional strengthening of the Water Boar ds, Regional Advisors (ARAS), Municipal
                         Units (UMASH), Territorial Boards, and Delegations were carried out by FISE’s ORID department.
                         Investment funds for Alto Wangky y Bocay’s WSS projects were earmarked and implementation
                         procedures were tailored to their needs. Due diligence has been exercised by FISE to ensure
                         consultants’ and contractors’ careful management of projects in Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan
                         communities. Thus, through its experience with PRASNICA, FISE has proved to be capable of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consulting with authorities and communities, and of formulating and implementing projects in
                         Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan communities.

                         For the preparation of the new operation, a social assessment is being carried out by FISE, which
                         takes into account several assessments, consultations, forums and other activities that were carried
                         from 2011 to 2013 on the Pacific, Center and Northern regions as part of the execution of the
                         Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Plan (IAPP) for PRASNICA, and also incorporates new
                         consultations in communities on the Caribbean Coast (Oct 2013). It includes: (a) a 2011 Diagnostic
                         study based on informed consultations leading to community support of Indigenous communities
                         within the Pacific, Center and North regions on management of watersheds protection and utilization
                         of WSS systems; (b) The results of the Forum for free, prior and informed consultations with
                         Indigenous Authorities of the Pacific, Center and North regions, on access and utilization of WSS
                         systems, traditional social organization for the protection of watersheds, and (in)equity in the
                         distribution of water. Additionally, for the Caribbean Coast, two activities are being carried out as
                         part of the social assessment: (a) consultations with Indigenous authorities of 5 Indigenous
                         communities and municipal authorities of 3 non-indigenous municipalities, to present them with the
                         project, and consult their opinions and views with regard to the administration of resources and
                         management of the new projects; and (b) free, prior and informed consultations with community
                         groups (focus groups of men and women separately) to ensure broad community support to the new
                         operation, and to capture particular concerns and preferences by men and women with regard to the
                         social management methodology used by FISE, particularly for Community-managed projects
                         (PGC). Some topics of discussion include access to WSS, monetary and labor contributions, people’s
                         opportunity to select their favorite design options of water and sanitation systems, system for setting
                         up tariffs, and gender-related topics. Terms of reference and questionnaires were revised by the Bank
                         team including gender specialists. Coordination with the gender team will continue during
                         Preparation and Implementation to ensure that meaningful gender mainstreaming takes place
Public Disclosure Copy




                         throughout the Project, including in the design of its proposed impact evaluation.

                         The results of the social assessment will inform the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF)
                         which will be prepared by FISE. Indigenous Peoples Plans will be elaborated by the social teams of
                         the UMAS and FISE’s social promoters. Those will be revised by FISE and approved for financing.
                         Once approved, the plans will be published on the FISE website, and in the Bank’s website. This
                         implementation will contribute to building on FISE’s acquired experience in this area.

                         Some of the lessons learned from the implementation of the Indigenous Peoples Plan for
                         PRASNICA, which will be incorporated in the design of the proposed Sustainable Rural WSS
                         project are:
                         (a)      Institutionalization of differentiated treatment of Autonomous Regions, Indigenous
                         Territories, and improved communication with Indigenous Authorities require time and are costly but
                         are essential for the provision of equitable water and sanitation services country-wide. Activities
                         initiated with the IAPP which will be continued with the new IAPPF are (a) promotion of research,
                         and field consultations of remote communities and their authorities, particularly on the Pacific,
                         Center and North and the Indigenous Territories of Alto Wangki and Bocay; (b) Adaptation of the
                         Operational Manual for Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (MEPASH) and the Manual of Community-
                         Managed Projects (PGC) for the Caribbean Coast, in consultation with authorities and community
                         leaders of Indigenous communities on the Caribbean Coast; (c) Adaptation of training modules such
                         as the AVAR and FECSA through consultations and piloting of instruments. The above have
                         provided both FISE and the Indigenous authorities the knowledge, tools and mechanisms to commit
                         to the provision of WSS systems, despite high costs, remoteness, and intercultural differences of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities.
                         (b)      Given the remoteness, poverty conditions, poor communication mechanisms, and isolation of
                         most Indigenous communities, particularly on the Caribbean Coast, the costs of implementing public
                         works, providing training, organizing and implementing meetings and consultations are significantly
                         higher than in most areas of the Pacific. Therefore, the cost table elaborated by the GRAAN and
                         GRAAS should continue to be used and adjusted. The USD5 million targeted to the Caribbean Coast
                         under PRASNICA were insufficient to begin to cover the demand.
                         (c)      The Indigenous peoples of the Caribbean Coast stressed the importance of “hygiene? when
                         they included the “H? to all Manuals, training modules, and instruments.
                         (d)      The Sanitation Menu elaborated by the Water Boards (Mesas de Agua) and approved by the
                         Governments of GRAAN and GRAAS should be piloted and tested for application on the Caribbean
                         Coast and Indigenous Territories.
                         (e)      Despite poverty conditions, Indigenous communities as well as poor remote non-indigenous
                         highly value having running water close to the household, and are willing to pay their share in cash
                         and in kind to ensure not only a water system, but also a decent sanitation system.
                         (f)      Mayors (Indigenous and Non-indigenous) in remote areas need to be educated by FISE
                         through sensitivity trainings, to ensure they acknowledge and prioritize proposals originating in
                         Indigenous communities in their Municipal Plans. FISE should continue this trend particularly with
                         new Mayors resulting from new elections in 2014.
                         (g)      In poor and remote communities, the level of education is more important than ethnic
                         background when it comes to selection of the sanitary system they choose. Also, the level of
                         education is key to correct utilization and maintenance of the WSS systems. Thus, community
                         training should continue to be emphasized on a permanent basis, and articulated with the schools.
                         Under the new scheme, community training in hygiene will be responsibility of the UMAS with the
                         stewardship of FISE.
                         (h)      Installation of toilets without hand-washing facilities should be mandatory, not optional,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         particularly in Indigenous and poverty stricken communities. A hand-washing campaign is essential
                         to promote a healthy environment particularly for children and the elderly.

                         Participation scheme in the Sustainable Rural Water and Sanitation Project. The IAPPF under the
                         ESMF will provide general guidance on the articulation of the social and environmental issues in
                         Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan communities in the project area. For component 1 (Strengthening
                         of the Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Sector), the IAPPF will indicate the role played by
                         Regional and Territory Governments in the management and supervision of the sector, to ensure a
                         culturally-adequate handling of processes and procedures. The IAPPF will explain how Regional and
                         Territory Governments have been consulted during preparation and how they will be consulted
                         throughout the life of the project, to ensure they participate in the sustainable development of the
                         W&S sector in their regions. Under component 2 (Increase Sustainable WSS Coverage in Rural
                         Areas), the IAPPF will address the targeting mechanisms for the selection of eligible communities
                         under the project, ensuring that the Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan communities are prioritized. It
                         will also provide guidance for elaborating the individual Indigenous Peoples Plans, in compliance
                         with the OP4.10. For component 3 (Innovations in Rural Water, Sanitation and Hygiene) and
                         component 4 (Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM) Contingency) the IAPPF will explain the role
                         of Regional and Territory Governments as well as community organizations for promoting and
                         monitoring the opportunities offered by the components for their youths, Water Boards, small
                         municipal firms, and those involved in the IRM Contingency plans.
                           In terms of the OP4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, FISE acquired some experience under
                           PRASNICA in this area, as they were required to systematically collect land titles and ensure land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           registration under the community water board (CAPS) or FISE. For the proposed Project, OP4.12
                           Involuntary Resettlement will be triggered and FISE will prepare an Involuntary Resettlement Policy
                           Framework in the event of land acquisition or involuntary resettlement under the new operation. The
                           RPF will state how the institutional arrangements for screening of affected beneficiaries, the
                           preparation and implementation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be done, and who will be
                           responsible for financing of land acquisition and involuntary resettlement. It has been agreed that
                           land acquisition will not be financed with the loan.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (LCSSO)
                           Marcelo Hector Acerbi (LCSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Project is expected to generate positive
                           BP 4.01                                            impacts on environmental sustainability in the
                                                                              future target areas by improving the access to
                                                                              potable water and sanitation. The Project will
                                                                              support rural, dispersed and small scale civil
                                                                              works to provide water and sanitation,
                                                                              potentially also including small condominial
                                                                              sanitation schemes. The Project is classified as
                                                                              Category “B,? requiring a partial assessment of
                                                                              the potential environmental and social impacts
                                                                              and mitigation measures to prevent and reduce
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              adverse or negative impacts. The proposed
                                                                              project interventions - dispersed and small scale
                                                                              civil works to provide water and sanitation,
                                                                              including small condominium sanitation
                                                                              schemes - are not likely to result in significant
                                                                              negative impacts on human populations and/or
                                                                              environmentally important areas. This is mainly
                                                                              due to the small scale of the interventions, their
                                                                              dispersed locations and nature of the potential
                                                                              impacts which are easily identifiable, mostly
                                                                              temporary, and easily mitigated with known
                                                                              management techniques. The implementation of
                                                                              the project would also generate positive health
                                                                              impacts such as decreased incidence of
                                                                              waterborne diseases among the beneficiary
                                                                              communities. As the Project will include civil
                                                                              works, there will be minor environmental
                                                                              impacts such as digging trenches to install pipes
                                                                              or clearing small, vegetated areas to install a
                                                             latrine, tanks, etc. Since these are small-scale
                                                             systems for rural, often dispersed populations,
                                                             no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             are likely or expected. Any sub-projects
                                                             considered as Category A according to the
                                                             definition of the Bank are not eligible for
                                                             funding by the Project. The policy is triggered
                                                             and an already existing Environmental and
                                                             Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                                                             prepared for P106283 will be updated to screen,
                                                             assess, and mitigate environmental and social
                                                             impacts related to site selection, construction
                                                             and operation of the water and sanitation
                                                             facilities. The existing ESMF will also be
                                                             updated to reflect the full range of new
                                                             interventions eligible for financing under this
                                                             project. The ESMF will include the institutional
                                                             provisions for preparing and implementing the
                                                             ESMF given the limited environmental and
                                                             social management capacity of the
                                                             implementing agencies, above all at the
                                                             municipal level. The FISE is currently preparing
                                                             an institutional strengthening plan in order to
                                                             ensure that the participating municipalities and
                                                             communities are fully prepared to implement
                                                             FISE’s ESMF. The ESMF will take into account
                                                             this plan and clearly define in detail the actions
                                                             to be taken for institutional strengthening (e.g.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             training, technical assistance, etc.).
                                                             The ESMF will harmonize with the assessments
                                                             prepared and participatory processes
                                                             undertaken. These assessments and outcomes of
                                                             the consultation process will be incorporated in
                                                             consistency with the ESMF. Finally, the ESMF
                                                             will present the relationship between the
                                                             interventions proposed under Component 2 and
                                                             the elaboration of municipal and/or territorial
                                                             plans for rural WSS (under sub-component
                                                             1.2.). These plans may be available at earlier
                                                             stages of the Project to guide investments under
                                                             other components of the project. The ESMF will
                                                             reflect such key relationships to guide priorities
                                                             and investments.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The policy is triggered since some small works
                                                             could coincide with natural habitats. However,
                                                             these works will not represent a significant
                                                             conversion, loss or degradation of natural
                                                                 habitats directly or indirectly. The
                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                 Framework will contain guidance on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 selection of the minor works in this Project as
                                                                 well as information on the location of protected
                                                                 areas, both of which should minimize any
                                                                 impacts on the coastal ecosystems. No civil
                                                                 works will be eligible which may have adverse
                                                                 impacts on natural habitats. The screening
                                                                 process for reviewing proposed sub-projects
                                                                 will include criteria which explicitly excludes
                                                                 such works from Project support.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   The project will have no impact on the
                                                                 management, utilization or protection of any
                                                                 forested areas. However, this policy is triggered
                                                                 because small areas with native forest, which
                                                                 cannot be identified now due to the framework
                                                                 nature of the operation, could be slightly
                                                                 affected by the set-up of the proposed
                                                                 interventions. For these cases, the ESMF will
                                                                 include the procedures and measures to be
                                                                 followed to avoid unnecessary impact on native
                                                                 vegetation and to carry out restoration activities
                                                                 in the eventually affected sites.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    This policy is not triggered because there are no
                                                                 interventions of the Project involving the use of
                                                                 pesticides. If there is a possibility of small
                                                                 amounts of pesticides being used as part of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 construction works, the ESMF will include
                                                                 measures for pest management. This will
                                                                 include non-chemical measures for pest
                                                                 management and guidelines for proper
                                                                 selection, application, storage, handling,
                                                                 transport and disposal of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered because the type of
                         BP 4.11                                 work, including small excavations, could
                                                                 eventually expose cultural property.
                                                                 The ESMF will contain measures and
                                                                 instructions in the case of any “chance finds? of
                                                                 archeological materials. A screening mechanism
                                                                 will be included in the ESMF to screen for and
                                                                 mitigate potential impacts on cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered due to the presence of
                                                                 Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples in the
                                                                 project area. An Indigenous and Afro-
                                                                 Nicaraguan Peoples Planning Framework
                                                                (IAPPF) will be prepared by FISE, and
                                                                Indigenous and Afro-Nicaraguan Peoples Plans
                                                                (IAPP) will be submitted for approval prior to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                the construction of any public works. A process
                                                                of free, prior and informed consultation leading
                                                                to broad community support has been carried
                                                                out in the Pacific, Central and Northern Regions
                                                                (under the IAPP for PRASNICA), and new
                                                                consultations with Indigenous authorities of the
                                                                Regional Governments of RAAN and RAAS,
                                                                and the Indigenous Territories will be carried
                                                                out as part of the social assessment. Under the
                                                                FISE project cycle, consultations with
                                                                communities in general take place at different
                                                                points during preparation, implementation and
                                                                post-works. This aims to ensure full
                                                                participation of stakeholders and beneficiaries,
                                                                and to ensure that project benefits are delivered
                                                                in a culturally-adequate manner.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   This policy is triggered. Land acquisition and
                         4.12                                   involuntary resettlement will be avoided to the
                                                                extent possible. However, FISE will be
                                                                preparing an Involuntary Resettlement Policy
                                                                Framework to ensure proper land acquisition/
                                                                donation procedures, and due diligence in
                                                                resettlement of social units (families) or
                                                                economic activities in the event that the land
                                                                needed for the Project is occupied, or needs to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                be acquired.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The Project will not finance the construction of
                                                                new or rehabilitation of existing dams nor will
                                                                the Project rely on the operation of existing
                                                                dams. The water systems supported by the
                                                                Project largely use wells as primary water
                                                                source. There are also some proposedsystems
                                                                that catch water in local streams, but without the
                                                                need of a dam. Any type of dams would be
                                                                ineligible under this project.
                         Projects on International        Yes   This policy is triggered considering that some
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   beneficiary communities could be located in
                                                                transboundary watersheds. The main areas of
                                                                influence of OP 7.50 are the Alto Coco and Rio
                                                                San Juan watersheds. A riparian notification
                                                                will be sent to the governments of Costa Rica
                                                                and Honduras in compliance with this Policy. In
                                                                addition, the Project team will consider any
                                                                                                                                 potential transboundary impacts of these
                                                                                                                                 proposed investments.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered because there are no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60                                                                                            interventions of the Project in Disputed Areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Carry out social diagnostic based on consultations: October 2013
                                      Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, ESMF, Involuntary Resettlement Policy Framework:
                                      Launch work on in October 2013 (first drafts to the Bank by week of October 28), finalization of
                                      documents following preparation mission of October 28, consultations together with Project
                                      document on November 5-15 (revised drafts to the Bank by November 20), No Objection to final
                                      versions November 30, Publication December 5 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Lilian Pena Pereira Weiss

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 04-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (SM)                                                                                               Date: 07-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
