                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8307

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                          Project ID:      P149872
                            Project Name:      Mexico Municipal Energy Efficiency Project (P149872)
                            Task Team          Janina Andrea Franco Sala
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Feb-2015                     Estimated        15-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (100%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Climate change (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       130.00                Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     30.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Total                                                                       130.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.     The development objective of the proposed project is to support large-scale demonstration of
                           energy efficiency investments in the municipal service sector and in public buildings, and improve
                           national and local capacity in designing and implementing municipal energy efficiency programs.
                           C. Project Description
                           SENER has requested Bank support to design and implement a national municipal energy efficiency
                           program. The proposed operation would seek to reduce energy consumption in municipalities by
                         increasing their capacity to integrate energy considerations into planning functions, in order to
                         identify priority sectors and support the implementation of energy efficiency investments. To this
                         end, SENER would liaise with the National Institute for Federalism and Municipal Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (INAFED) to help select and establish the relationship with the local governments. The operation
                         would focus on sectors typically under municipal control or in which the municipality can influence
                         policy-making. The proposed US$100 million investment operation would be implemented by
                         SENER over a six-year period and would comprise two components:

                         Component 1: Policy development and institutional strengthening (IBRD US$ 10 million). This
                         component would help create an enabling environment for energy efficiency in the municipal sector
                         by supporting the development of, inter alia, policies, norms, energy efficiency diagnostics, and
                         capacity building. CONUEE has issued various energy efficiency norms at the national level that are
                         not being complied with at the local level as they are not included in the local norms, such as the
                         energy efficiency codes for buildings. Municipalities and SENER also lack of information on
                         municipal energy use and on priority areas and interventions with high energy savings potential.
                         Furthermore, there is limited capacity at the municipal level for energy planning, including the
                         capacity to assess energy efficiency projects, and monitor and verify energy savings.

                         The component would therefore be articulated around activities such as: (i) energy efficiency
                         diagnostics to assess energy use and identify energy saving priority areas, focusing on public
                         lighting, water and sanitation, municipal buildings, transport, solid waste management, and power
                         sub-sectors; (ii) capacity building, including an energy efficiency certification program for municipal
                         and national level staff; (iii) support in developing an urban energy management system to facilitate
                         monitoring and verification of EE interventions; (iv) policy development to support local adoption of
                         the national building energy efficiency codes; (v) a communication strategy to raise awareness of the
                         municipal EE program among relevant stakeholders and constituencies; and (vi) project
                         management, including monitoring, reporting and financial audits. Project preparation includes the
                         development of the EE diagnostics for the first 30 cities with funding from an active Bank operation
                         (Efficient Lighting and Appliances Project, P106424). During implementation the Project would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         continue performing energy efficiency diagnostics for municipalities to support building local level
                         capacity among municipalities.

                         As SENER’s technical energy efficiency arm, CONUEE would play a key role in the development of
                         the Component 1 given its technical expertise and experience working with municipalities on energy
                         efficiency policy, capacity building and certification.

                         Component 2: Municipal energy efficiency investments (IBRD US$ 90 million). This component
                         would support energy efficiency investments in public lighting, water and wastewater pumping, and
                         municipal buildings. The Component would also include the preparation of feasibility studies and
                         tender documents for the identified priority investments with a bundled approach per technology.
                         The objective of the Component is to demonstrate that municipal energy efficiency investments can
                         be performed through the use of a bundled approach to reduce energy consumption at the municipal
                         level and CO2 emissions while maintaining or enhancing quality of service. The EE investments are
                         expected to have a demonstrational impact from an economic, financial and environmental
                         standpoint, thereby creating a sustainable framework beyond the Project’s lifespan.

                         Subprojects would be prepared based on the results of the EE diagnostics and selected based on a
                         number of criteria, which would include, among others: cost per unit of energy saved, O&M costs,
                         useful life, payback period, and dedicated staff for energy efficiency. The specific selection method
                         will be defined during Project preparation, in coordination with other entities already involved in
                         supporting energy efficiency initiatives, in order to ensure complementarity and avoid potential
                         market distortions. Under the proposed approach, municipalities would only be able to participate in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the program after energy efficiency diagnostic has been performed and feasibility studies prove the
                         relevance of the proposed subprojects. The interventions would be bundled to provide synergies and
                         economies of scale. Feasibility studies and bidding documentation would be prepared accordingly. In
                         order to accelerate Project implementation, feasibility studies for initial investments already
                         identified in the pilot EE diagnostics implemented in León and Puebla would be prepared during
                         project implementation. Capital costs would be financed by IBRD resources with a minimum co-
                         financing from municipalities which would also have to provide funding for operation and
                         maintenance costs or through the use of performance based contracts to ensure the sustainability of
                         the investments. To that end, the use of t he federal fund portion of the municipal budget would be
                         used to guarantee payment for the performance based contract.

                         This Component will be implemented by FIDE given its: (i) technical capabilities and experience in
                         service provision in the three mentioned sub-sectors; (ii) regional presence throughout the country;
                         (iii) opportunity to achieve economies of scale by launching integrated bidding processes; and (iv)
                         experience in Bank-financed energy efficiency operations and their capacity to follow fiduciary
                         guidelines.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project would be implemented in cities across the 31 States of Mexico and the Federal District.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         In Mexico, the Environmental and Natural Resources Secretariat (SEMARNAT for its acronym in
                         Spanish), the National Water Commission (CONAGUA), the National Forest Commission
                         (CONAFOR), the Natural Protected Areas Commission (CONANP) and the Federal Environmental
                         Protection Attorney Office (PROFEPA), amongst others, are all federal level institutions that have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the responsibility for guaranteeing the adequate application of Mexican law regarding environmental
                         impact and pollution control.

                         Concerning environmental legislation, Mexico has accumulated a great number of laws, regulations
                         and statutes that span every single aspect of environmental management. Amongst these, the General
                         Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection Law is the one that will regulate the expected
                         subprojects to be supported by this project.

                         Since 1986 the General Ecological Equilibrium and Environmental Protection Law has established a
                         mandatory Environmental Impact Assessment for every project, whether privately or publicly
                         financed. The procedure is detailed and explained in the Rulebook for such Law concerning
                         Environmental Impact and its correlation with the wide existing regulations, and the guidelines for
                         the development of environmental impact assessment carried out in Mexico, are consistent with
                         World Bank operational directives for Environmental Assessment (Safeguard 4.01).

                         The monitoring of the prerequisites on environmental impacts resolutions are guaranteed by the
                         Federal Environmental Protection Agency (PROFEPA) which depends directly upon the
                         SEMARNAT and enforces the environmental legislation for which it has specialized offices in every
                         state. PROFEPA is a 20-year-old organization with a noble and effective entrustment, but with very
                         limited resources for operation. Therefore, there is a risk of non-compliance of local legislation and/
                           or Bank 4.01 safeguard, due to lack of knowledge or applicable legislation by the beneficiaries. This
                           risk is expected to be mitigated with the use of the instruments to be developed for the project (an
                           ESMF including a screening process of subprojects).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The existing SENER Project Implementation Unit (PIU) has some capacity to manage social and
                           environmental safeguards issues, as it is currently implementing a large number of infrastructure-
                           intensive Projects in the energy sector, such as solar farms for remote communities, as well as wind
                           farms. In addition, FIDE (which will implement component 3) also has extensive experience with
                           environmental safeguards policies, as it has been developing energy efficiency actions since its
                           creation, including for the Bank-financed Efficient Lighting and Appliances Project, (P106424),
                           which included exchange and proper environmental management of more than 2 million refrigerators
                           and air conditioning equipment

                           Since the proposed Project would not finance new infrastructure projects, the Bank would provide
                           training to key personnel at SENER, the PIU and FIDE, in the proper application of the safeguards
                           instruments for the proposed Project. Additional environmental and/or social consultants - whose
                           qualifications should be acceptable to the Bank - will be hired as needed for the Project.

                           Personnel would be required to fulfill the following tasks:
                           •        screen potential subprojects for environmental and social risks and impacts;
                           •        ensure that subprojects proponents (municipalities, utilities) carry out an environmental and
                           social assessment for their respective subproject; and
                           •        verify that subprojects comply with local laws and are consistent with Bank Safeguards
                           Policies.

                           The safeguards instrument would be an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                           The ESMF would be prepared by SENER, with support from World Bank environmental and social
                           specialists. In practice, the ESMF would be a screening tool to help key personnel to identify which
                           projects to exclude, and for approved projects with some perceived environmental and or social risks,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and how to manage them.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alonso Zarzar Casis (GURDR)
                           Jose Luis Calderon Bartheneuf (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This project has an environmental risk Category
                           BP 4.01                                               B as it is unlikely to result in significant
                                                                                 negative impacts, and to the contrary, adverse
                                                                                 impacts are identifiable, mostly temporary and
                                                                                 easily mitigated with known management
                                                                                 techniques.

                                                                                 As the sites, types and scale of the subprojects
                                                                                 to be financed is not known, an ESMF will be
                                                                                 prepared, consulted and disclosed in country
                                                            and on the Bank’s website prior to appraisal.

                                                            It is important to note that since there will be an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            exclusion list of subprojects and no category A
                                                            subprojects will be supported, the potential
                                                            subprojects will fall into either B or C
                                                            categories. In addition, Component 1 is also
                                                            expected to fall under these two categories. All
                                                            sub projects would be subject to screening by
                                                            SENER. This screening process will be
                                                            supported by the ESMF, which will be
                                                            developed by a consultant hired by SENER. The
                                                            ESMF would be applied by proponents when
                                                            they submit to SENER their subprojects for
                                                            evaluation and possible funding. This consultant
                                                            would also train FIDE's designated personnel
                                                            (FIDE is responsible for component 3) in the
                                                            use and follow up of this ESMF, with Bank
                                                            support.

                                                            This ESMF would determine, if any, the legal,
                                                            environmental, social and cultural resources
                                                            protection requirements that may apply to the
                                                            subprojects (Component 2) and/or the activities
                                                            in Components 1 (TA), and compliance actions,
                                                            if any, which would be mandatory for project
                                                            funding. The typical type of subprojects to be
                                                            financed under Component 2 are: Public
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Lightning, Energy efficiency in water supply
                                                            and sanitation processes and Energy efficiency
                                                            measures in public buildings, like efficient
                                                            lightning and thermal insulations.

                                                            The ESMF will also provide guidance for
                                                            preparing subproject-specific and simplified
                                                            Environmental and Social Impact Assessments
                                                            and Management Plans. The team's
                                                            environmental and social specialists will
                                                            supervise the proper application of this ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   The project activities to be financed would not
                                                            affect natural habitants as defined in Annex A
                                                            of OP 4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   The project has not foreseen activities that
                                                            would affect forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No   No activities would include pest use or
                                                            procurement of pesticides.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           This policy is triggered because some of the
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         public buildings where actions would be
                                                                                                                                 implemented might be in a “historic” or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 “artistic” protection status by federal or local
                                                                                                                                 authorities and specific authorizations might be
                                                                                                                                 necessary. The ESMF would consider this issue
                                                                                                                                 in its screening process.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            This policy is not triggered because subprojects
                                                                                                                                 would only be implemented in urban
                                                                                                                                 municipalities where there are no indigenous
                                                                                                                                 peoples that meet the requirements of OP 4.10,
                                                                                                                                 in particular a collective attachment to a distinct
                                                                                                                                 habitat or ancestral territory. Furthermore the
                                                                                                                                 project would focus in public infrastructure such
                                                                                                                                 as municipal buildings, public lighting and
                                                                                                                                 water infrastructure. For all the above reasons,
                                                                                                                                 OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples policy) is not
                                                                                                                                 triggered.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The Project would not finance any activities that
                                 4.12                                                                                            would require the involuntary taking of land that
                                                                                                                                 result in physical displacement, loss of assets or
                                                                                                                                 access to assets or economic displacement.
                                                                                                                                 Subprojects to be supported under the Project
                                                                                                                                 would be in already existing infrastructure such
                                                                                                                                 as public lighting, existing water structures and
                                                                                                                                 existing municipal buildings. If for any
                                                                                                                                 circumstance there is need to use land this will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 only be done under a voluntary donation to the
                                                                                                                                 project. The project’s ESMF will include
                                                                                                                                 criteria to ensure that any necessary transaction
                                                                                                                                 is carried out voluntarily
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project would not support the construction
                                                                                                                                 or rehabilitation of dams, nor would support
                                                                                                                                 other investments which rely on the services of
                                                                                                                                 existing dams.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project would not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways as defined under this policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project would not affect disputed areas as
                                 7.60                                                                                            defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF should be completed at the end of January 2015.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:   Name: Janina Andrea Franco Sala
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)         Date: 06-Aug-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager/   Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (PMGR)   Date: 03-Sep-2014
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
