                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6798
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:    P101525
                            Project Name:     CN Yunnan Honghe Prefecture Diannan Center Urban Transport (P101525)
                            Task Team         Fei Deng
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         01-Nov-2013                        Estimated   06-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (90%), General transportation sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       353.15                 Total Bank Financing:      150.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 203.15
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    150.00
                              Total                                                                                    353.15
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to improve the safety, accessibility, and
                           efficiency of people’s daily trips in the core urban area of Mengzi City and Jianshui County.
                            3. Project Description
                           Mengzi Part



                                                                      Page 1 of 12
                         Component M1: Road Network Re-functioning and Improvement. This component will rehabilitate
                         Honghe Avenue and fill some gaps in the existing road network to optimize the functional hierarchy
                         and overall efficiency of the road network in Mengzi City. It includes (i) road re-functioning of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Honghe Avenue to transform it from a fast road to an urban arterial road; (ii) extension of Jinhua
                         Road to provide a new north-south link in the city; (iii) extension of Zhaozhong Road to fill the
                         missing east-west road linking the old and new parts of the city; and (iv) construction of a bypass to
                         divert the through traffic on Xuefu Road which currently bisects the campus of Honghe University.

                         Component M2: Integrated Corridor Management. This component will improve safety, accessibility
                         as well as public transport operations through integrated corridor management (ICM) approach on
                         the following three corridors: (i) Tianma Road; (ii) Beijing Road; and (iii) Yinhe Road. The ICM
                         approach will comprise a package of integrated measures including civil works, Intelligent Transport
                         System (ITS) and road safety design, education and enforcement interventions covering bus priority
                         lanes, bus stops, junctions and mid-block pedestrian crossings, parking management and e-bike
                         management.

                         Component M3: Public Transport Priority. This component will provide the infrastructure and
                         equipment for Mengzi to improve public transport services. It includes: (i) construction of 5 bus
                         facilities that provide depot and/or terminal functions; (ii) construction of bus stops and bus bays;
                         and (iii) development of a bus locating and monitoring system and a real-time passenger information
                         system.

                         Component M4: School Transport Safety Improvement. This component will develop safe school
                         transportation demonstration programs in Mengzi, which includes: (i) “model school transport zone”
                         that pilots transport management plan for primary schools and middle schools; (ii) “home to school
                         transportation demonstration” that provides designated school transport services to the vulnerable
                         population of No. 4 primary school as a pilot and equipping the existing buses with school transport
                         safety facilities; and (iii) public campaign, trainings and technical assistance which focus on
                         awareness raising, behavior and policy advocacy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component M5: Institutional Strengthening. This component will enhance the institutional capacity
                         of Mengzi City, through carrying out: (i) urban transport related studies; (ii) consultancy for project
                         management and technical support; (iii) trainings and study tours; and (iv) public communication and
                         education campaigns.

                         Jianshui Part

                         Component J1: Core Urban Area Integrated Transport Improvement. This component will implement
                         ICM improvements on the three corridors in Jianshui’s core urban area, including: (i) Jianshui
                         Avenue; (ii) North Chaoyang Road; and (iii) Yinhui Road; as well as the adjacent areas. The ICM
                         approach will comprise a package of integrated measures including civil works, ITS and road safety
                         design, education and enforcement interventions covering bus priority lanes, bus stops, junctions and
                         mid-block pedestrian crossings, parking management and e-bike management.

                         Component J2: Public Transport Priority. This component will provide the infrastructure and
                         equipment for Jianshui to improve public transport services, which includes: (i) construction of 2 bus
                         facilities; and (ii) development of a bus locating and monitoring system and a real-time passenger
                         information system.



                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         Component J3: Urban Road Network Improvement. This component will construct the South Bypass
                         in order to alleviate through traffic from the historical downtown.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component J4: Institutional Strengthening. This component will enhance the institutional capacity of
                         Jianshui County, through carrying out: (i) urban transport related studies; (ii) consultancy for project
                         management and technical support; (iii) trainings and study tours; and (iv) public communication and
                         education campaigns.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is in Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous Prefecture (HAP) in the South of Yunnan
                         Province. The proposed project includes Mengzi city and Jianshui county. The project is in the urban
                         and peri-urban area in Mengzi City and Jianshui County. Mengzi City is located 289 km in the
                         South of Kunming, capital of Yunnan Province. It has an area of 2,228 square kilometers and a
                         population of 241,000 inhabitants. Jianshui County is located approximately 60 km northwest of
                         Mengzi, with an area of 3,789 square kilometers and a population of about 500,000 inhabitants.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Youxuan Zhu (EASCS)
                         Feng Ji (EASCS)
                         Patricia Maria Fernandes (EASER)
                         Meixiang Zhou (EASCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). The
                          BP 4.01                                             project proposes to finance the construction of
                                                                              small scale urban roads, bus depots and bus
                                                                              interchanges, and the improvement of selected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              bus corridors. The project will be in the urban
                                                                              areas of Mengzi City and Jianshui County where
                                                                              the land has been heavily influenced by human
                                                                              activities. There is no ecological sensitive (e.g.
                                                                              nature habitat) site in the project influence area.
                                                                              The project triggers Environmental Assessment
                                                                              (OP4.01) and Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                              (OP4.11), and is classified as Category B project.

                                                                              The project will bring about positive impacts such
                                                                              as the improvement of road safety, reduction of
                                                                              traffic congestion and accidents, and contribution
                                                                              to the reduction of vehicle emission in the
                                                                              selected area of Mengzi and Jianshu. But it will
                                                                              also cause general construction related impacts, e.
                                                                              g. nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater and
                                                                              spoil disposal, disturbance to traffic and local
                                                                              communities. During operation there will be
                                                                              some adverse impacts: (i) disposal of waste and
                                                                              wastewater generated at the bus interchanges and


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                                                                         bus depots, and safety issues related to gas filling
                                                                         facilities at bus interchanges and depots; and (iii)
                                                                         noise from the newly constructed roads. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         potential impacts are small scale, site-specific,
                                                                         and can be readily mitigated with good
                                                                         engineering design and good construction
                                                                         management practice.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The project will be in the urban areas of Mengzi
                                                                         City and Jianshui County where the land has been
                                                                         heavily influenced by human activities. The
                                                                         project will not convert, degrade or restore any
                                                                         natural habitats or critical natural habitats, and
                                                                         hence this policy is not triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The project will not finance activities that would
                                                                         involve significant conversion or degradation of
                                                                         critical forest areas or related critical natural
                                                                         habitats as defined under the policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The project will not support procurement of
                                                                         pesticides or pesticide application equipment, or
                                                                         lead to substantially increased pesticide use and
                                                                         subsequent increase in health and environmental
                                                                         risk, or maintain or expand present pest
                                                                         management practices that are unsustainable.
                                                                         This policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The component (J1) for Jianshui will implement
                         BP 4.11                                         ICM improvements. The ICM approach will
                                                                         involve small scale civil works on three existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         roads, of which two roads (i.e. North Chaoyang
                                                                         Road, and Yinghui Road) are in the vicinity of
                                                                         Jianshui Old Town. Site investigation and
                                                                         consultation have been conducted by PCRs
                                                                         specialists together with the EA consultants. The
                                                                         EMP concluded that project will not have any
                                                                         significant impacts on the PCRs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              A social screening has been conducted in the
                                                                         project affected areas, which cover both
                                                                         resettlement areas and project benefitted areas.
                                                                         Although both Mengzi and Jianshui Cities are
                                                                         located in Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous
                                                                         Prefecture with minority population accounting
                                                                         for 55 percent and 39 percent respectively, since
                                                                         all proposed components are located in urban
                                                                         areas, the share of ethnic minority among project
                                                                         benefit population is less than half of city
                                                                         average, with 30 percent for Mengzi and 10
                                                                         percent for Jianshui. Such proportion is even



                                                                 Page 4 of 12
                                                                        lower in those urban communities where
                                                                        significant demolition and relocation will take
                                                                        place. Most of affected minorities in project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        affected villages are Yi, Hani, and Zhaung
                                                                        nationalities.

                                                                        Detailed analysis was conducted on those
                                                                        minority communities in two cities based on
                                                                        social economic survey and consultations with
                                                                        stakeholders. As part of urban and peri-urban
                                                                        communities, there appears no special
                                                                        vulnerability on the part of members of Yi, Hani
                                                                        and Zhuang ethnic minority groups who are
                                                                        included in the PAP. Little difference is found in
                                                                        terms of income and social economic conditions
                                                                        between those Hans and ethnic minorities in
                                                                        project affected villages. In addition, individuals
                                                                        included in the PAP do not speak different
                                                                        languages, have no special dress or body
                                                                        ornaments and decorations, housing styles or
                                                                        house locations, modes of production, special
                                                                        symbols, and world views or self-identification
                                                                        that distinguishes them from one another or from
                                                                        their local area Han neighbors. Based on the
                                                                        outcome of social assessment, it is decided that
                                                                        OP4.10 will not be triggered for the Project. The
                                                                        analysis and rehabilitation for potential impacts
                                                                        of land acquisition and resettlement among
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        affected minority population has been included in
                                                                        the RAP document based on consultation with
                                                                        affected communities. The implementation of
                                                                        such measures will be carefully included in
                                                                        resettlement monitoring and evaluation program.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             Among proposed components for Mengzi and
                         4.12                                           Jianshui, both road network component and
                                                                        public transit component will involve in certain
                                                                        amount of land acquisition and demolition.
                                                                        According to impact survey, a total of 749 mu of
                                                                        land areas would be acquired permanently, and
                                                                        80 percent of acquired lands are farmland
                                                                        affecting 622 households. Along with land
                                                                        acquisition, about 96,489 square meters of
                                                                        buildings will be demolished. About 73 percent
                                                                        being residential houses, causing relocation of
                                                                        265 households and 54 small shops; and 27
                                                                        percent as non-residential structures affecting 14
                                                                        enterprises or institutions in Mengzi. In total, land



                                                                Page 5 of 12
                                 acquisition and resettlement will affect 944
                                 households and 3339 persons from 18 villages/
                                 communities in two cities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 For such land acquisition and resettlement
                                 impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has
                                 been prepared for each city in accordance with
                                 relevant Chinese laws, regulations, and World
                                 Bank Operational Policy (OP4.12). The proposed
                                 compensation for land is set at CNY50,000 to
                                 CNY60,000 per mu. For lost rural houses,
                                 compensation is set at CNY1000-2000 per square
                                 meter plus replacement housing plots equipped
                                 with on-site infrastructure. For affected urban
                                 houses, the compensation rate will be based on
                                 market value appraised at about CNY3500-4000
                                 per square meter, which will allow purchase same
                                 amount of urban housing in the same locations.
                                 There are a range of new housing developments
                                 in the project areas that could accommodate the
                                 needs of resettlement and rehabilitation. These
                                 policies have been implemented in two cities and
                                 generally acceptable to local villagers and
                                 residents.

                                 Public consultations had been conducted during
                                 RAP preparation including social economic
                                 survey and public meetings with project affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 people. Information about the project impacts,
                                 compensation policies, rehabilitation options and
                                 grievance procedures have been provided to the
                                 affected people through distribution of
                                 resettlement information booklet to affected
                                 villages and disclosure of RAP in local city PMO
                                 and affected town or sub-district offices.

                                 Focus group discussions and key informant
                                 interviews have been used to consult with
                                 potentially affected persons and obtain views and
                                 preferences regarding resettlement impacts,
                                 compensation policies, and rehabilitation
                                 measures. These views and preferences have been
                                 taken into account during RAP revision, and the
                                 majority of potentially affected persons agree that
                                 the resettlement and rehabilitation measures
                                 planned under the RAP would be adequate to
                                 address and mitigate any adverse impacts.



                         Page 6 of 12
                                                                                 The project management offices in Mengzi and
                                                                                 Jianshui will lead resettlement operations under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 the oversight of the resettlement leading groups in
                                                                                 two cities. They will work closely with
                                                                                 resettlement implementation agencies in two
                                                                                 cities with cooperation with local governments at
                                                                                 district and town levels. An experienced external
                                                                                 monitoring agency will be contracted by two
                                                                                 cities to conduct independent monitoring and
                                                                                 evaluation over the course of the project
                                                                                 implementation. The monitoring results will be
                                                                                 regularly reported twice a year and, if needed,
                                                                                 remedial actions will be designed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No                The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                 policy. This policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International        No                    The project will not involve trans-boundary
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 rivers. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            7.60                                                 The policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). The project proposes to finance the construction of small
                              scale urban roads, bus depots and bus interchanges, and the improvement of selected bus corridors.
                              The project will be in the urban areas of Mengzi City and Jianshui County where the land has been
                              heavily influenced by human activities. There is no ecological sensitive (e.g. nature habitat) site in
                              the project influence area. The project triggers Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) and Physical
                              Cultural Resources (OP4.11), and is classified as Category B project.

                              The project will bring about positive impacts such as the improvement of road safety, reduction of
                              traffic congestion and accidents, and contribution to the reduction of vehicle emission in the
                              selected area of Mengzi and Jianshu. But it will also cause general construction related impacts, e.
                              g. nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater and spoil disposal, disturbance to traffic and local
                              communities. During operation there will be some adverse impacts: (i) disposal of waste and
                              wastewater generated at the bus interchanges and bus depots, and safety issues related to gas
                              filling facilities at bus interchanges and depots; and (iii) noise from the newly constructed roads.
                              These potential impacts are small scale, site-specific, and can be readily mitigated with good
                              engineering design and good construction management practice.

                              Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11). The component (J1) for Jianshui will implement ICM
                              improvements. The ICM approach will involve small scale civil works on three existing roads, of
                              which two roads (i.e. North Chaoyang Road, and Yinghui Road) are in the vicinity of Jianshui Old


                                                                         Page 7 of 12
                         Town. Site investigation and consultation have been conducted by PCRs specialists together with
                         the EA consultants. The EMP concluded that project will not have any significant impacts on the
                         PCRs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Among proposed components for Mengzi and Jianshui,
                         both road network component and public transit component will involve in certain amount of land
                         acquisition and demolition. According to impact survey, a total of 749 mu of land areas would be
                         acquired permanently, and 80 percent of acquired lands are farmland affecting 622 households.
                         Along with land acquisition, about 96,489 square meters of buildings will be demolished. About
                         73 percent being residential houses, causing relocation of 265 households and 54 small shops; and
                         27 percent as non-residential structures affecting 14 enterprises or institutions in Mengzi. In total,
                         land acquisition and resettlement will affect 944 households and 3339 persons from 18 villages/
                         communities in two cities.

                         For such land acquisition and resettlement impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been
                         prepared for each city in accordance with relevant Chinese laws, regulations, and World Bank
                         Operational Policy (OP4.12). The proposed compensation for land is set at CNY50,000 to
                         CNY60,000 per mu. For lost rural houses, compensation is set at CNY1000-2000 per square meter
                         plus replacement housing plots equipped with on-site infrastructure. For affected urban houses, the
                         compensation rate will be based on market value appraised at about CNY3500-4000 per square
                         meter, which will allow purchase same amount of urban housing in the same locations. There are a
                         range of new housing developments in the project areas that could accommodate the needs of
                         resettlement and rehabilitation. These policies have been implemented in two cities and generally
                         acceptable to local villagers and residents.

                         Public consultations had been conducted during RAP preparation including social economic
                         survey and public meetings with project affected people. Information about the project impacts,
                         compensation policies, rehabilitation options and grievance procedures have been provided to the
                         affected people through distribution of resettlement information booklet to affected villages and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disclosure of RAP in local city PMO and affected town or sub-district offices.

                         Focus group discussions and key informant interviews have been used to consult with potentially
                         affected persons and obtain views and preferences regarding resettlement impacts, compensation
                         policies, and rehabilitation measures. These views and preferences have been taken into account
                         during RAP revision, and the majority of potentially affected persons agree that the resettlement
                         and rehabilitation measures planned under the RAP would be adequate to address and mitigate any
                         adverse impacts.

                         The project management offices in Mengzi and Jianshui will lead resettlement operations under
                         the oversight of the resettlement leading groups in two cities. They will work closely with
                         resettlement implementation agencies in two cities with cooperation with local governments at
                         district and town levels. An experienced external monitoring agency will be contracted by two
                         cities to conduct independent monitoring and evaluation over the course of the project
                         implementation. The monitoring results will be regularly reported twice a year and, if needed,
                         remedial actions will be designed.

                         Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10). A social screening has been conducted in the project affected
                         areas, which cover both resettlement areas and project benefitted areas. Although both Mengzi and
                         Jianshui Cities are located in Honghe Hani and Yi Autonomous Prefecture with minority

                                                                    Page 8 of 12
                          population accounting for 55 percent and 39 percent respectively, since all proposed components
                          are located in urban areas, the share of ethnic minority among project benefit population is less
                          than half of city average, with 30 percent for Mengzi and 10 percent for Jianshui. Such proportion
Public Disclosure Copy




                          is even lower in those urban communities where significant demolition and relocation will take
                          place. Most of affected minorities in project affected villages are Yi, Hani, and Zhaung
                          nationalities.

                           Detailed analysis was conducted on those minority communities in two cities based on social
                           economic survey and consultations with stakeholders. As part of urban and peri-urban
                           communities, there appears no special vulnerability on the part of members of Yi, Hani and
                           Zhuang ethnic minority groups who are included in the PAP. Little difference is found in terms of
                           income and social economic conditions between those Hans and ethnic minorities in project
                           affected villages. In addition, individuals included in the PAP do not speak different languages,
                           have no special dress or body ornaments and decorations, housing styles or house locations, modes
                           of production, special symbols, and world views or self-identification that distinguishes them from
                           one another or from their local area Han neighbors. Based on the outcome of social assessment, it
                           is decided that OP4.10 will not be triggered for the Project. The analysis and rehabilitation for
                           potential impacts of land acquisition and resettlement among affected minority population has
                           been included in the RAP document based on consultation with affected communities. The
                           implementation of such measures will be carefully included in resettlement monitoring and
                           evaluation program.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           For the feasibility study preparation, alternatives of bus depots/terminals have been conducted
                           taking into account of environmental, social, technical and economic factors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Assessment (OP4.01). Mengzi PMO and Jianshui PMO have engaged EA
                           consultants to prepare EMPs for their proposed project activities, based on the relevant IFC
                           Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines and Chinese EA laws/regulations. The EMPs include,
                           among others, the following mitigation measures:

                          a)       For new bus depots and interchanges, mitigation measures for construction contractors
                          have been developed and will form part of bidding documents. The measures address issues such
                          as solid and wastewater management system, source and transportation of construction materials,
                          and disturbance to local communities.

                          b) For re-allocation of road space, mitigation measures for construction contractors have been
                          developed and will be included in bidding documents. The measures include requirements for
                          notification of public civil works, restoring local businesses during construction, on-site traffic
                          safety management, and mitigation of other construction related nuisances.

                          c)       For the construction of bypass road, mitigation measures have been developed for both
                          general construction impacts and site-specific environmental impacts. Special considerations have


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           been given to the connectivity of rural communities and to avoid disturbance to local communities
                           and irrigation system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           d) Mitigation measures have been proposed for operation phase, such as collection and disposal of
                           wastewater and waste generated at the bus depots and interchanges, road noise management
                           measures, and safety measures for the gas filling facilities.

                           Physical Cultural Resources (OP4.11). Taking a precautionary approach, specific measures for
                           PCRs protection have been proposed in the EMP, including that (i) the design and construction
                           plan will be sent to the PCRs agency for further review and comments; and (ii) construction will
                           be designated in the area out of the PCRs’ protection area; and heavy machinery will be strictly
                           restricted.. In Mengzi there are household graves to be relocated. Compensation measures have
                           been included in the RAP. Chance Find Procedures for Physical Cultural Resources are also
                           included in the EMPs.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). For potential land acquisition and resettlement impacts in
                           Jianshui and Mengzi Cities, a RAP has been prepared by each city or county. Both RAPs are based
                           on detailed impact survey, social economic survey, and consultations with affected people. They
                           include compensation policies, rehabilitation measures, grievance procedures, and institutional
                           setup, as well as arrangement for implementation and monitoring.

                           A Project Steering Committee (PSC) has been established at the prefecture level (consisting of
                           deputy governors and directors of relevant prefecture government agencies, the mayor of Mengzi
                           and the governor of Jianshui) guiding and supervising the project preparation and implementation.
                           A Project Management Office (PMO), established at the Honghe Prefecture Housing and Urban-
                           Rural Development Bureau, manages and coordinates with Mengzi and Jianshui governments to
                           prepare and implement the project. The PMO has received safeguards trainings and project
                           management. A Project Execution Office (PEO) at the city or county levels, consisting of the
                           directors of relevant government agencies and professionals, are responsible for preparing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementing all the subcomponents related to Mengzi or Jianshui. Their duties include the
                           management of the engineering designs, social and safeguard document preparation and
                           implementation, monitoring and evaluation, as well as financial management and procurement in
                           accordance with Bank guidelines.

                           The EMP and RAP reports have been prepared by the professional institutions with the required
                           qualification and experiences on Bank projects in China. Safeguards training have been provided
                           to the prefecture PMO and Mengzi/Jianshui PEOs during project preparation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project stakeholders are the local communities and institutions in the project influence area in
                           Jianshui and Mengzi. For the preparation of project design, feasibility study and EMP, public
                           consultations with project-affected public have been conducted. Their feedbacks have been
                           incorporated in the project design, feasibility study, and RAP and EMPs.

                           Jianshui EMP was disclosed at local villages and website on August 28, 2013; while Mengzi EMP
                           was disclosed at local villages in August, 2013, and at Mengzi Government’s website on
                           September 30, 2013. RAP for Jianshui was disclosed at local villages and website on September



                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                           13, 2013; and RAP for Mengzi was disclosed at local villages and website on October 8, 2013,
                           The EMPs and RAPs were sent to the Bank InfoShop on October 10, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            30-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            08-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Fei Deng
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                        Date: 09-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
