                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA5273
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                        Project ID:    P131864
                            Project Name:      Kabul Urban Transport Efficiency Improvement Project (P131864)
                            Task Team          Luquan Tian
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                        Estimated   14-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Urban Transport (70%), Public administration- Transportation (20%), General
                                              transportation sector (8%), General water, sanitation an d flood protection sector
                                              (2%)
                            Theme(s):         Other urban development (90%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      85.50           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                       85.50
                              Total                                                                                       85.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Improve road condition and traffic flows on selected corridors and strengthen the capacity of Kabul
                           Municipality to deliver transport services



                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                          3. Project Description
                         C. Project Description [from section 3 of PCN]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project design structure consists of three (3) components:

                         Component A - Road infrastructure: This component will be implemented through road
                         infrastructure LOS recovery on four selected corridors. This will focus on rehabilitating 32 km of
                         selected road links on the four priority road corridors. Civil works will constitute rehabilitating the
                         road surfaces and pedestrian walkways, installing street lightings, traffic control measures, and
                         rehabilitating roadside drainage system. Other civil work related consulting tasks included in the
                         subcomponent are “design review and site supervision” and “performance indicator surveys.
                         Component “A” comprises of two subcomponents (“A1” and “A2”). Subcomponent “A1” relates to
                         the civil works planned for the rehabilitation of selected roads and the drainage works of District 4
                         Area, Subcomponent “A2” involves studies for “design review and site supervision”.

                         Component B - Transport improvement measures: This sub component will focus on a wide range of
                         transport improvement measures in support of Component A. These include: (1) improving KM’s in
                         house maintenance capacity through training and investment (2) implementing road safety and traffic
                         management engineering measures e.g. junction channelization, signalization, engineering measures
                         for pedestrian safety; (3) conducting studies for Bus Rapid Transit services, including a feasibility
                         study for two potential BRT lines and a business plan for the BRT system; and (4) other designs and
                         studies, including potential BRT detailed designs, natural disaster assessment of city transport
                         infrastructures, other road rehabilitation and construction designs.

                         Component C - Capacity building and Project Management Support: This component will enhance
                         KM’s human resources and institutional capacity for infrastructure project management and develop
                         sustainable urban transport system through: (a) provision of external consultants to enhance the PMU
                         operation; (b) support to KM staff through “on-the-job” training, thematic long term training and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         short term training); (c) carry out seminars, workshops and study tours; (d) provision of incremental
                         cost support for project management.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan. The civil works are focused on the
                         deteriorated road sections of about 32 km on the selected four corridors, already designed, plus some
                         key junction improvement works along these corridors:

                         I.      Corridor 1:       Khair Khana - Kabul Polytechnic University - Old Palace, which the Bank is
                         responsible for pavement overlay/traffic management of the section of “Charahi Polyitechnic to Koti-
                         Sangi section”)
                         II.     Corridor 2:       Khair Khana – Airport – Macrorayan – Jalalabad Road, which the Bank is
                         responsible for 3 or 4 links The new link between Airport Roundabout and Jalalabad Road is to be
                         determined with the KM. in Macrorayan area, between Airport Road to Jalalabad Road;
                         III.    Corridor 3:       Nandare (including Kabul Nandare Area) – Southeast, and
                         IV.     Corridor 4:       Khair Khana – Shah-r-Naw, which the Bank will extend the KURIP-1 roads
                         to Khair Khana Area.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         Asta Olesen (SASDS)
                         Mohammad Yasin Noori (SASDS)
                         Obaidullah Hidayat (SASDI)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes            The project is not expected to have significant
                         BP 4.01                                      impact on the environment. All planned physical
                                                                      works are limited to rehabilitation of the existing
                                                                      alignments. Overall long term social and
                                                                      environmental impacts will be positive, while
                                                                      negative impacts will be of minor scope and
                                                                      duration, and typical for any small to medium
                                                                      size road rehabilitation activity. The project is
                                                                      therefore classifiedas environmental Category B.
                                                                      A framework approach has been adopted and an
                                                                      Environmental and Social Management
                                                                      Framework (ESMF) has been prepared.

                                                                      The ESMF provides an overview of the expected
                                                                      environmental and social issues, which may arise
                                                                      during the project implementation. It also offers
                                                                      comprehensive guidance on the site-specific
                                                                      ESMP to be carried out by the client for all road
                                                                      sections to be proposed for the project
                                                                      intervention. The ESMF also guides preparation
                                                                      of EIA/SIA for subcomponent “A2” and lot-5, a
                                                                      road section that may involve land acquisition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The client agency has also disclosed summary of
                                                                      the ESMF on KM’s website for consultation.
                                                                      Public consultation meeting with participation of
                                                                      the relevant stakeholders, and community leaders
                                                                      held on September 22, 2013. The final version of
                                                                      the ESMF was re-disclosed in-country and
                                                                      through the Infoshop on Nov, 04, 2013.
                                                                      Site-specific ESMP was prepared for the civil
                                                                      works financed through retroactive financing.
                                                                      They were disclosed to the affected communities
                                                                      and discussed with them. The client has also held
                                                                      a series of public consultations with communities,
                                                                      particularly in relation to mitigating the social
                                                                      impacts. The site specific ESMP was approved
                                                                      and disclosed on the KM’s PMU website on
                                                                      September 18, 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No




                                                              Page 3 of 9
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes            The Project does not finance construction of any
                         BP 4.11                                         new roads, therefore it is unlikely to impact any
                                                                         known historical and cultural monuments.
                                                                         However, the ESMF and site-specific ESMPs will
                                                                         comprise guidelines for Chance Find Procedures
                                                                         according to national law.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             OP 4.12 is triggered because of the possibility of
                         4.12                                            land acquisition and resettlement. The ESMF
                                                                         comprises a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                         (RPF) complaint to OP 4.12 and relevant national
                                                                         laws.
                                                                         The RPF sets out the general principles and
                                                                         policies to be followed in connection with any
                                                                         land acquisition and resultant resettlement which
                                                                         will occur during the implementation of KUTEI.

                                                                         Draft final RPF satisfactory to the Bank was
                                                                         disclosed in-country on September 22, 2013, and
                                                                         consulted upon with the project stakeholders on
                                                                         September dd/ 2013. The final version of RPF
                                                                         was re-disclosed in-country and through the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         InfoShop on Nov. 04, 2013.

                                                                         Once the detailed designs for specific sites are
                                                                         finalized and if resettlement/land acquisition is
                                                                         foreseen, a first draft of the Resettlement Action
                                                                         Plan (RAP) will be prepared by a consultant firm,
                                                                         finalized by the Kabul Municipality (KM) and
                                                                         submitted to the Bank for approval. The
                                                                         consultant firm will also conduct EIA/SIA for the
                                                                         sub-projects involving land acquisition. The KM
                                                                         will be responsible for implementing the RAPs
                                                                         prior to commencement of civil works. A
                                                                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared,
                                                                         in accordance with the approved Resettlement
                                                                         Policy Framework (RPF).
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              KUTEI project is not expected to have significant environmental and social impacts. The proposed
                              physical works under sub-component A1 are limited mostly to rehabilitation of the existing
                              alignments. Overall long term social and environmental impacts will be positive, while negative
                              impacts will be of minor scope and duration, and typical for any small to medium size road
                              rehabilitation activity. The envisaged civil works under subcomponent A2 are unlikely to exert
                              any significant negative impact on the social and physical environment too. On the contrary, the
                              principle aims of the proposed activities under subcomponent A2 (mini waste water treatment
                              facilities, plant water pumps and retention ponds etc.) are to improve water quality and to control
                              flooding and adjust hydraulic profile.

                              An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the Project has been
                             prepared. It provides general guidelines for applying environmentally sound practices to roads
                             rehabilitation. Site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be
                             produced for all road sections to be upgraded with the Project support. Site-specific ESMPs
                             specify environmental risks associated with rehabilitation works to be carried out in respective
                             locations, recommend respective mitigation measures, and provide monitoring schemes for
                             tracking adherence to the mitigation plans. Adherence to the ESMPs in the course of civil works
                             will be sufficient for keeping environmental impacts of the Project at the acceptable minimum
                             level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             However, to improve the ditch water quality, KUTEI is planning to install a few mini water
                             treatment facilities at the road sides. The exact location for facility installation is unknown during
                             the appraisal stage, but there is some potential to establish these facilities along the drainage canal
                             in district 4, district 15 and lot-5 of Karta-e-Naw area of Kabul City.
                             The planned ESIA study will further investigate the detailed negative impacts of these facilities
                             while the most likely risks associate with the mini water treatment facilities would be health
                             hazards, water borne diseases, risk of victor borne diseases, solid waste accumulation including
                             sludge related nuisance and smell etc. The envisaged risks from the installation of the facilities are
                             of short term, local and limited by nature. Moreover, the installation of these facilities will have
                             long term positive social and environmental benefits in the project area and its surroundings.

                             In order to mitigate the potential environmental and social impacts of the stated risks a subproject
                             specific EMP will be developed by the consultant firm as well as to settle minor land take or
                             related impacts, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) is prepared by the Kabul Municipality as
                             a precautionary measure. Overall, the potential social impacts of the project investments are
                             expected to be small scale and site-specific; and thus easily remediable typical of category B
                             projects. Any project related social or economic displacement will be handled through the
                             Resettlement Action Plan (if needed).

                             PMU has hired a Safeguard focal point with a clear ToR, who will be responsible for day to day


                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                           monitoring, reporting, supervision and conducting safeguards training and capacity building to
                           both PMU and contractor’s relevant staff.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           No indirect and long term negative impacts are anticipated due to future activities in the project
                           area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The proposed project does not include new developments; it will be rehabilitating existing roads,
                           therefore no alternatives were considered. It will improve sections of the existing lifeline road the
                           selected priority road segments.
                           The initial screening of sections of roads to be improved under retroactive financing confirmed
                           that there would be no land acquisition or resettlement, as all project physical activities are
                           envisaged to be carried out on existing sites and structures.
                           To improve the road service up to “all season” level, various drainage engineering options of
                           project road sections in district 4, district 15 and lot-5 of Karta-e-Naw area of Kabul City are
                           compared and assessed. Given the available information relevant to drainage at this stage, 2
                           options have been selected for further appraisal in implementation stage, a) Base Option, which is
                           just to raise up road bed above flood level, and b) Comprehensive Option, which includes
                           retention ponds and water pumps at government land or existing right of way of roads and some
                           mini water treatment facilities to improve the quality of ditch water. Base Option has the
                           advantages of restore road function timely; but leaves the ditch water untreated and surrounding
                           area still flooded. Comprehensive Option has abundant of social environmental benefits, and,
                           however, additional successive works on ESIA/EMP. In the Comprehensive Options, the exact
                           locations for the facility installation are unknown at this stage; and risks associate with the mini
                           water treatment and associated facilities are envisaged to be water borne diseases, solid waste
                           accumulation including sludge related concerns etc. But keeping in view the nature of
                           Comprehensive Option, which about 5m3 /hour of mini water treatment facility, is predicted to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           install, the envisaged risks from the facilities would be of short term, local and limited by nature.
                           Moreover, the installation of these facilities will have long term positive environmental impact in
                           the project area and its surroundings. In case, Comprehensive Option have been chosen as
                           preferred option, an ESIA study will be conducted prior to the implementation of the roads, where
                           further detailed impacts of the facilities will be identified and the mitigation measure will be
                           designated in site specific ESMPs.
                           In addition, since the project details including land acquisition remains known at appraisal stage,
                           therefore, OP/BP 4.12 is triggered as precautionary measure as well as the RPF is prepared and
                           disclosed to mitigate negative social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The KM’s PMU has hired a Safeguard focal point with a clear ToR, who will be responsible for
                           day to day monitoring, reporting and conduct safeguards training and capacity building to both
                           PMU and contractor’s relevant staff. The KUTEI’s PMU will also hire a consultant firm to
                           conduct an Environmental Impact Assessment and Social Impact Assessment (EIA/SIA) as part of
                           the feasibility study for the two projects under subcomponent “A2”.
                           The consultant firm will also conduct an EIA/SIA for a road widening project in Karta-e Now
                           during the preliminary stage to identify likely environmental and social impacts.
                           The consultant firm will also prepare a RAP, in case of subprojects where land acquisition is


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           unavoidable. Kabul Municipality will be responsible for implementation of RAP. No physical
                           works will be initiated until a RAP has been undertaken and implemented (i.e. compensation to
                           affected people being fully paid).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Consultant firm will also conduct training sessions to KM, PMU and Contractors Staff. The
                           contents and levels of the training will be decided jointly with the Consultant.
                           During supervision of the project, the World Bank will assess the implementation of the
                           Framework, and if required, will recommend additional strengthening.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the Kabul Municipality, PMU, relevant KM’s districts, Department of
                           Istimlak/KM, Traffic Department/MoI, Mili Bus Department/MoT, National Environmental
                           Protection Agency (NEPA), local community, shops owners and mobile vendors playing their
                           trade within the road.

                           In all subprojects which require consultations with relevant stakeholders, consultations will be
                           conducted to elicit the views of both the male and the female population.

                           The ESMF and RPF were disclosed in Afghanistan in Dari and Pashto in relevant places and in the
                           KM website, and in English at the World Bank InfoShop. A public consultation meeting with
                           participation of the relevant governmental agencies, NGO, and community was held on Aug, 13,
                           2013. The documents, with the minutes of public consultation attached, were re-disclosed in-
                           country and posted in the World Bank Infoshop.
                           Site-specific ESMP was prepared for the sections of roads (lots No. 1, 2, 3, & 4), approved by the
                           WB and disclosed through Infoshop on Sep, 30, 2013. The site-specific ESMP was also disclosed
                           to the affected communities and discussed with them.
                           The same procedures will be applied to all sub-projects to be covered in the subsequent stages of
                           the project implementation prior to commencement of works in each of these sites. Site-specific
                           RAPs, if required, will be prepared, disclosed, discussed with the affected communities, finalized,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and implemented by the Government prior to commencement of works in the specific road
                           sections.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     18-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        18-Sep-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                        18-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        26-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     26-Sep-2013




                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                      26-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Luquan Tian
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                     Date: 27-Nov-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                 Date: 27-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
