                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1044

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mauritania                       Project ID:      P150430
                            Project Name:      Mauritania Social Safety Net System (P150430)
                            Task Team          Aline Coudouel
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          09-Mar-2015                      Estimated        14-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSPDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         29.00              Total Bank Financing:             25.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  25.00
                              Free-standing TFs AFR Human Development                                       4.00
                              Total                                                                        29.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objectives of the proposed Project are to provide targeted cash transfers to extreme poor
                           households and to support the establishment of some building blocks of the national social safety net
                           system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Government of Mauritania has decided to complement its food-based emergency programs with
                         a more sustainable long-term strategy for poverty reduction. The national social protection strategy
                         highlights the need for a national social safety net program, a need expressed by key social sector
                         stakeholders, from civil society to the highest levels of the national administration, and technical and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financial partners. The national social safety net program responds directly to the desire to better
                         channel resources to the poor and vulnerable and have a greater impact on poverty than untargeted
                         programs have had to date. The program also responds to the government’s wish to gradually replace
                         existing untargeted programs with a more effective, targeted, alternative. Furthermore, the national
                         social protection strategy establishes the rationale for the development of core instruments for the
                         social protection sector – including strong coordination mechanisms and a national social registry to
                         better target the poorest households and coordinate interventions.

                         Accordingly, the proposed Project is organized around two components: a first component that
                         supports the development and implementation of the national social safety net program and a second
                         component supporting the development of the building blocks of Mauritania’s national social
                         protection system.

                         Component 1 – Support to the national social safety net program (US$ 22 million)

                         The first component will support the development and implementation of a national social safety net
                         program, targeted towards Mauritania’s poorest households. Ultimately, the national program aims to
                         reach all the poorest households (estimated at about 100,000 households, with 600,000 members)
                         across Mauritania. The national social safety net program will be built around three core elements:
                         (1) predictable and regular cash payments, (2) promotion, broadly understood as the set of
                         information, communication and education measures designed to encourage the adoption of positive
                         behaviors among beneficiary households and communities, and (3) reinforced provision of basic
                         social services (demand for which is stimulated via the increase in purchasing power of beneficiary
                         households, the conditionalities, and the promotion activities).

                         The program will be implemented in phases, with a goal of national coverage. The program will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         prioritize the poorest regions (in terms of extreme poverty rate and absolute number of extreme
                         poor). Identification and targeting will be undertaken through the National Social Registry, which
                         will ensure data collection and beneficiary identification through community targeting and PMT
                         verification (see component 2). A grievance and redress mechanism will be implemented to handle
                         potential inclusion/exclusion errors and guard against possible fraud or malpractice.

                         The proposed social safety net program focuses on chronic poverty, and so is designed with a long-
                         term vision. The duration of inclusion of a beneficiary household is planned to be five years. After
                         this period, a re-certification process will be put in place to re-assess the eligibility of beneficiary
                         households (as well as that of new potentially eligible households). Should a beneficiary be found to
                         be above the threshold, they will be considered to have graduated from the program, and may be
                         referred to other social services, such as micro-credit.

                         The level of transfer will be finalized in the coming months, but is currently estimated between
                         MRO30,000 and MRO60,000 per household per year (US$100-200). This corresponds to between
                         7-13 percent of extreme poor households’ annual consumption (the mean consumption of extreme
                         poor households in Mauritania is estimated at MRO448,900/hh/year, or USD1,500/hh/year [EPCV
                         2008]). The Government is currently undertaking economic and impact simulation analyses to
                         provide a precise picture of the costs and expected benefits (in terms of reductions in poverty,
                         extreme poverty, local economic activity etc.) from different levels of transfers.
                         In terms of implementation, the program would be implemented under the direction of the Steering
                         Committee for the National Social Protection Strategy and the associated Technical Committee and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social Protection Unit, which ensures the daily coordination of activities for the Strategy’s
                         implementation. The program will identify its beneficiaries from the Social Registry implemented by
                         Ministry of Economic Affairs and Development (MAED) and Ministry of Social Affairs, children
                         and families (MASEF) (see component 2).

                         The core activities of the national program would be implemented by the Agence Nationale
                         Tadamoun. Promotion activities to promote behavioral changes will be defined and implemented by
                         the relevant government agencies (MASEF, Ministry of Health, Ministry of education, etc.). These
                         institutions will also be responsible, as part of their regular activities, for the supply of basic services.
                         Finally, decentralized administrative structures will coordinate locally and supervise the program’s
                         implementation; while local actors will mobilize the population, ensure training and promotion, and
                         contribute to the monitoring of the program.

                         The proposed Project would finance monetary transfers for a selected number of beneficiary
                         households, the promotion activities implemented by the sectoral institutions, the development of
                         core program instruments, as well as core operational costs of the program.

                         Component 2 – Support to the National Social Protection System (US$ 7 million)

                         The second component will support the central government’s capacity for the establishment and
                         coordination of the national social protection system.

                         Mauritania adopted a National Social Protection Strategy (SNPS) in 2013. The strategy was
                         developed under the joint leadership of the MAED and the MASEF, with technical support from
                         UNICEF. The strategy offers a long-term vision for the country and a roadmap for creating a
                         coherent and integrated national social protection system. The strategy has five main pillars: (i) food
Public Disclosure Copy




                         security and nutrition, (ii) access to health and education, (iii) social security and employment, (iv)
                         improving the living environment, and (v) social assistance and support to vulnerable populations.

                         This component will be led by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Development and the MASEF,
                         in their role as leaders of the Steering Committee of the national social protection strategy and its
                         Technical Committee. However, the implementation of the component will involve other actors who
                         are central to the implementation of the strategy – including, among others, the Food Security
                         Agency (CSA, Commissariat à la Sécurité Alimentaire), the Ministry of Education, the Ministry of
                         Health, the Ministry of Agriculture, and development partners.

                         One of the instruments central to the implementation of the national social protection strategy is a
                         registry of vulnerable households. The Social Registry will be initially developed with a view to
                         provide beneficiary identification, selection and tracking for the national social safety net program.
                         However, it will be developed with a view to serve as a common database of vulnerable households
                         open to all other targeted social programs in Mauritania. The construction of a national social registry
                         is critical to ensure transparency in the selection of beneficiaries, especially since Mauritania holds
                         significant divisions between lines that are both tribal/ethnic and socio-economic (pastoral, pastoral-
                         nomadic, rural-agricultural, urban, etc.).

                         The national registry will rely on a targeting methodology, which has been developed and consulted
                         among government and the Technical Committee, and was approved by the Government Steering
                         Committee in March 2014. For this reason, the national targeting methodology relies on national data
                         (EPCV 2008, soon 2014) and follows Mauritania’s official poverty thresholds and definitions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support the development of the various instruments for the social registry,
                         including its management information system (MIS), equipment, software and hardware. It will also
                         support the implementation of the social registry – the definition of quotas and proxy-means test, the
                         organization of the various committees to prepare lists of potentially eligible households, the
                         implementation of the questionnaires and their processing, as well as the preparation of lists of
                         eligible households. Finally, it will support potential additional activities required to ensure identity
                         cards are provided to all registered households.

                         Other instruments for the implementation of the national social protection agency that will be
                         supported by component 2 include the central coordination mechanisms, analytical inputs to strategy
                         and program design. This component will contribute to the strengthening of the capacity of the
                         central actors responsible for spearheading the national social protection system and implementing
                         the national strategy.

                         A first set of activities will reinforce central coordination mechanisms and the capacity of the
                         government institutions designated to coordinate the implementation of the national social protection
                         strategy, including the Steering and Technical Committees and the Social Protection Unit (Cellule
                         Protection Sociale). Training and technical support will be provided, as well as assistance with
                         coordination and management costs.

                         A second set of activities will focus on analytical services to help the various actors involved in the
                         implementation of the national strategy plan their investments and design their programs in the most
                         effective way. These will likely include analysis of options for targeting of potential beneficiaries,
                         analysis of the supply of basic services to identify gaps in supply, and analysis of patterns of
                         vulnerability to better design responses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The NSPS also calls for Mauritania’s to strengthen its response to shocks and crises, through (i) the
                         development of a multi-risk Early Warning System and (ii) the development and operationalization
                         of a national contingency plan. A third set of activities will therefore support the design of an early-
                         warning mechanism, which would flag crises and trigger the response from programs. This
                         mechanism would build on existing early-warning systems, expanding them to capture more fully the
                         vulnerability of the population in particular areas (beyond the traditional measures mostly based on
                         agricultural production). This will require a review of existing regional, national and local warning
                         systems. It will be implemented in coordination with teams supporting the pastoralists and working
                         on disaster-risk management and the strengthening of early warning systems at the regional and
                         national levels. The proposed Project, through its DFID funded grant, will also finance the
                         implementation of the activities needed to broaden the existing early warning system to make it
                         relevant for the triggering of adaptive social assistance activities. This would include data collection,
                         capacity building for data analysis and the production of the different types of warnings, and
                         purchase of software or hardware as needed.

                         A fourth set of activities would, through the DFID-funded grant, support the design of the
                         contingency plan, which would specify the response that the safety net system would provide in case
                         of crises. The contingency plan could include scaling up or down some programs, modifying some of
                         existing programs’ characteristics (e.g. to simplify procedures, to increase amounts, to increase
                               coverage, to kick in particular programs, etc.), or implement temporary additional programs. In th is
                               context, the project would also support the design of a mechanism for the financing of the
                               contingency-triggered activities. The mechanism would define the amounts to be mobilized, the rules
Public Disclosure Copy




                               for their release, and their financing.
                               D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                               analysis (if known)


                               E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                               F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                               Zarafshan H. Khawaja (GSURR)
                               Hocine Chalal (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      No
                                 BP 4.01
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      TBD in consultation with the safeguards specialists
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Aline Coudouel

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 06-Oct-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)    Date: 06-Oct-2014
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
