                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA7570
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jan-2014, 29-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lao People's Democratic                        P128393
                                                                              Project ID:
                                              Republic
                            Project Name:     Protected Area and Wildlife Project (Regional APL) (P128393)
                            Task Team       Jean-Michel G. Pavy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       16-Jan-2014                          Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASTS                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal         Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (60%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (60%), Environmental policies and institutions (35%), Climate
                                              change (5%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      25.23           Total Bank Financing:                 17.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         1.40
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               12.50
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  4.50
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          6.83
                              Total                                                                                     25.23
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                      Page 1 of 15
                         2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            To strengthen the management systems for national protected areas conservation and for
                            enforcement of wildlife laws
                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                            Same as the PDO

                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1 and Component 2 will be implemented through a sub-project mechanism administered
                         by the Environment Protection Fund (EPF). EPF would provide grants to sub-project delivery
                         agencies (SDA). Component 3 will help the EPF Office administer the Project and expand/
                         strengthen its own capacity. The design of most sub-projects will be completed during year 1 of
                         implementation. Five provinces are eligible: Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, Houaphan, Luang Prabang
                         and Xiengkhouang. All sub-projects must (a) support a Government of Lao People PDR (GoL)
                         policy and an official plan, (b) contribute to at least one outcome indicator and at least one
                         intermediary outcome indicator, and (c) contribute to a regional outcome such as cross border
                         cooperation, knowledge transfer or prevention of illegal wildlife trade. About US$13.9 million from
                         the IDA credit/grant and the GEF grant has been allocated to an initial portfolio of sub-projects. A
                         reserved budget of about US$6.4 million will either support the scale up of successful initial sub-
                         projects or new sub-project that meet selection criteria.

                         Component 1: National institution development and capacity building (US$6.60 million of which
                         World Bank US$6.20 million (IDA Credit US$3.33 million, IDA Grant US$1.05 million, GEF US
                         $1.82 million) and GoL US$ 0.4 million)

                         This component seeks this Intermediary Result: improved capacity of national protected area (PA)
                         and wildlife law enforcement departments to implement and monitor national conservation laws,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regional/international commitments, and operate according to a clear national plan. These sub-
                         projects are implemented through the EPF window Policy, Institution and Capacity Enhancement
                         (PICE).

                         1.1 Capacity building for national biodiversity planning and monitoring
                         1.2 Capacity/institution building for PA management and wildlife conservation
                         1.3 Capacity building for addressing regional wildlife trafficking,
                         1.4 Human resources development for wildlife and PA management,
                         1.5. Constituency building of high level officials,
                         1.6. Constituency building of public administration,

                         Component 2: Management of wildlife and protected areas (US$9.00 million of which World Bank
                         US$8.20 million (IDA Credit US$4.40 million, IDA Grant US$1.40 million, GEF US$2.4 million)
                         and GoL US$0.8 million)

                         This component seeks this Intermediary Result: improved local departments and agencies,
                         communities and other stakeholders’ capacity to conserve national PAs (NPAs) and protect wildlife
                         in five provinces against threats from infrastructure development and illegal use or trade of natural
                         resources. These sub-projects are implemented through the EPF window Community and
                         Biodiversity Investment (CBI). Some of them may need a year of preparation before launch.


                                                                      Page 2 of 15
                         2.1 Management of the Nakai Nam Theun NPA,
                         2.2 Management of the Nam Et Phou Louey NPA,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.3 Coordination of NPA management in Bolikhamxay Province,
                         2.4 Coordination of NPA management in Khammouane Province,
                         2.5 Coordination of NPA management in Houaphan Province,
                         2.6 Coordination of NPA management in Luang Prabang Province,
                         2.7 Coordination of NPA management in Xiengkhouang Province,
                         2.8 Wildlife law enforcement in Bolikhamxay Province,
                         2.9 Wildlife law enforcement in Khammouane Provinces,
                         2.10 Wildlife law enforcement in Houaphan Province

                         Component 3: Project administration and technical assistance (US$3.2 million of which World Bank
                         US$3.00 million (IDA Credit US$1.57 million, IDA Grant US$0.55 million, GEF US$0.88 million)
                         and GoL US$ 0.20 million)

                         This component seeks this Intermediary Result: Project’s outputs are delivered within the allocated
                         time frame and with satisfactory planning, procurement, financial management, monitoring, and
                         communication. Component 3 will support the administration of the sub-project mechanism by EPF.
                         It will include capacity building of EPF staff and systems including fund raising, compliance with the
                         Bank’s fiduciary requirements, especially procurement, and environment and social safeguards,
                         monitoring and evaluation, communicating with stakeholders, and facilitating effective coordination
                         and cooperation among SDAs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         All sub-projects in Project component 1 will support national level’s institutions in Vientiane capital
                         city. Five provinces are eligible for Sub-project support in Component 2: Khammouane,
                         Bolikhamxay, Luang Prabang, Xiengkhouang and Houaphanh. In those provinces, two National
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Protected Areas (NPAs) have already been selected for a sub-project although details of activities are
                         not yet known: Nakai Nam Theun National Protected Area (NNT NPA) 3,450 km2) and NEPL NPA
                         (5,959 km2). Other NPAs may be selected at a later stage during implementation. As most NPA
                         support projects, it is envisioned that these will build management capacity, which could include
                         small scale civil works (such as construction of staff house, fence, trail rehabilitations which could
                         have minor environmental and social impacts if proper mitigation measures are not well considered
                         as part of the respective sub-projects designs), and stimulate community incentive for conservation.
                         These NPAs are located in two of Lao PDR’s most distinctive ecological regions: the Northern
                         Indochina Sub-Tropical Moist Forests and the Annamite Range Moist Forests. Together they are
                         globally distinguished by containing the last confirmed breeding population of Indochinese Tigers in
                         Lao PDR, by having the largest remaining population of the critically endangered Northern White-
                         cheeked Gibbon, and one of the densest concentrations of small carnivores in the world. The
                         Annamite Range (shared between Vietnam and Lao PDR) contains the most species endemism of
                         any non-island ecosystem in the world and new species are regularly discovered. Adjacent to the
                         Nam Theun 2 Hydropower Station, the NNT NPA is located in the heart of this region, containing
                         populations of the critically endangered Saola (identified in 1993), and endangered Giant Muntjac
                         (identified in 1994). The watershed forest protects the NT2 reservoir area. The dam operator is
                         financing the protection of the watershed and the proposed project will provide incremental
                         financing. Other Sub-projects of component 2 will work complimentary to component 1 in
                         provinces. These sub-projects will support the capacity building, development and implementation of


                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         local government of policies and small-scale civil works such as office building and renovation,
                         which could have minor environmental and social impacts if proper mitigation measures are not well
                         considered as part of the respective sub-projects designs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)
                         Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (EASTS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project and sub-projects will not involve any
                         BP 4.01                                            major civil works. Sub-project includes the
                                                                            following three types of interventions that would
                                                                            have safeguards implications: (i) sub-projects in
                                                                            support the formulation, and/or capacity building
                                                                            for implementation, of studies, surveys, strategies,
                                                                            policies, regulations, decrees and laws on
                                                                            protected area conservation and wildlife
                                                                            protection at regional, national, and local level;
                                                                            (ii) sub-projects to strengthen the forest and
                                                                            wildlife conservation practices in NPAs starting
                                                                            with NE-PL and NNT NPAs (NPA site level) by
                                                                            supporting the preparation and implementation of
                                                                            NPA management plans and annual plans,
                                                                            participatory demarcation of NPA boundaries and
                                                                            internal zoning; and (iii) supporting community
                                                                            livelihood development activities (community
                                                                            level) in the selected NPAs. These impacts are
                                                                            expected to be positive and adverse effects minor,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            known and readily mitigated through
                                                                            implementation of mitigation measures and
                                                                            proper monitoring activities.

                                                                            Given the unknown location of the proposed
                                                                            subprojects before project appraisal, an
                                                                            Environmental and Social Management
                                                                            Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to
                                                                            describe the process and guidance to address
                                                                            environmental impacts once investments are
                                                                            selected and their location defined during project
                                                                            implementation. The ESMF includes screening
                                                                            criteria for selecting investments that could be
                                                                            financed by the Project; lists potential impacts
                                                                            and relevant mitigation measures (Environmental
                                                                            Code of Practice (ECOP) and Physical Cultural
                                                                            Resources (PCR) chance find forms are annexed);
                                                                            describes implementation arrangements for
                                                                            environmental management aspects; and includes
                                                                            the Project consultation and disclosure process.


                                                                    Page 4 of 15
                                                                     During project preparation, stakeholders in
                                                                     particular of the two NPAs have been regularly
                                                                     consulted on sub-project proposed design,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     potential impacts and procedures toward sub-
                                                                     projects preparation and implementation.
                                                                     Activities under subprojects type (i) will support
                                                                     the implementation of existing laws and decrees
                                                                     by formulating specific rules and regulations. The
                                                                     impacts of such regulatory development are
                                                                     overall positive, both on environment and social,
                                                                     because they will help improve the sustainability
                                                                     of natural resources. Such rules and regulations,
                                                                     however, may not be developed with sufficient
                                                                     consultations with stakeholders, including ethnic
                                                                     groups and local communities, and may
                                                                     inadvertently restrict their access to natural
                                                                     resources. Also, experience in other countries
                                                                     indicates that the exploitation of natural resources
                                                                     may temporarily increase prior to the introduction
                                                                     of stricter enforcement. In order to address such
                                                                     risks, the draft rules and regulations will be
                                                                     consulted with key stakeholders including ethnic
                                                                     groups and local communities, and their
                                                                     perspectives will be addressed in the regulations
                                                                     before official adoption. Also, NPAs will be
                                                                     alerted of the temporary increase in the
                                                                     exploitation of natural resources during the
                                                                     development of regulations and support will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     provided so they step up enforcement. The draft
                                                                     ESMF has been disclosed in country with national
                                                                     and local stakeholders on December 9, 2013 and
                                                                     has been publicly consulted on December 17,
                                                                     2013, and disclosed in English at the World Bank
                                                                     Infoshop on 18 December 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           Project or sub-project activities will not create
                                                                     significant degradation of natural habitats but will
                                                                     provide positive benefits (strengthening
                                                                     combating illegal logging) to NPAs including the
                                                                     two initially selected NE-PL and NNT NPAs.
                                                                     However, minor disturbance and site specific
                                                                     impact may occur during the construction and
                                                                     operation of small conservation facilities, such as
                                                                     substations and checkpoints construction
                                                                     proposed for financing under the Project.
                                                                     However, the impact is expected to be minor and
                                                                     site specific and it can be mitigated through
                                                                     measures incorporated in the ECOP (annexed to



                                                             Page 5 of 15
                                                            the ESMF). Also, Participatory Land Use Plans
                                                            (PLUP) will be developed to clearly deliniate
                                                            areas of critical natural habitats and incentives for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            protection of critical and non-critical natural
                                                            habitats are provided through community grants
                                                            based on community compliance with forest
                                                            conservation contracts. The ESMF includes
                                                            screening procedure to (i) determine whether the
                                                            proposed facilities are in a critical or non-critical
                                                            natural habitat and (ii) avoid any significant
                                                            conversion or degradation of any critical natural
                                                            habitat. Areas demarcation under PLUP will be
                                                            subject to management measures within criteria
                                                            considered by the policy to avoid, minimize,
                                                            mitigate, restore, and offset. Review of sub-
                                                            projects will also ensure that invasive exotic
                                                            species are not introduced or promoted within and
                                                            in the buffer-zones of protected areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36   Yes           This policy is triggered as the proposed activities
                                                            involve changes in management of forest areas in
                                                            NPAs (financing NPA management plans), which
                                                            may then affect the rights and welfare of people
                                                            and their dependence on the forests (i.e. the
                                                            NPAs). The project is expected to have beneficial
                                                            impacts and reduce the deforestation rates of
                                                            targeted NPAs. The ESMF includes screening
                                                            procedures (anda negative list) for project
                                                            investments so that interventions which could
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            have the potential to adversely impact upon
                                                            forested areas are not eligible for financing under
                                                            the Project. Participatory Social Assessment and
                                                            PLUP under the Community Engagement
                                                            Framework (CEF) process will ensure relevant
                                                            government agencies and communities work to
                                                            delegate protection/ production forests from
                                                            community use areas, and communities will be
                                                            supported to develop alternative livelihoods to
                                                            reduce dependency on forest resources for
                                                            livelihood. Conservation Agreements will be
                                                            made with communities that include restriction of
                                                            forest resource use and incentives for community
                                                            compliance provided through community grants.
                                                            The village agreement will include forest and non
                                                            timber forest product (NTFP) management
                                                            programs with small-holders, which will be based
                                                            on the principles of the policy for achieving
                                                            sustainability though a time-bound plan.



                                                    Page 6 of 15
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           The project will not finance procurement of
                                                                         pesticides. However, support to agriculture
                                                                         activities compatible to NPA purposes is eligible
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         as a community grant that might increase the use
                                                                         of pesticides or present pest management
                                                                         practices. Impacts of pesticide use will be
                                                                         assessed during each subproject screening. If
                                                                         pesticides will be used, the project impact is
                                                                         expected to be minor and can be mitigated
                                                                         through a simplified Pest Management Plan
                                                                         (PMP) (developed and annexed to the ESMF).
                                                                         The plan includes criteria to ensure that the
                                                                         pesticides used have negligible or minimal impact
                                                                         on environment and are listed as allowed to be
                                                                         used in country in line with World Health
                                                                         Organization and World Bank standards.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project will not affect any known Physical
                         BP 4.11                                         Cultural Resources (PCRs)(e.g., historical,
                                                                         cultural, and/or archaeological, paleontological,
                                                                         religious, or unique natural values of national
                                                                         and/or regional cultural importance). However,
                                                                         the Project area covers Ethnic Minority groups
                                                                         such as Hmong, Mien, Lao Tai and Khmu; there
                                                                         could be a limited number of graves, village
                                                                         cemeteries, and/or communal properties in
                                                                         spiritual forests in the subproject sites that may be
                                                                         affected by project activities. ESMF includes
                                                                         provisions for screening of PCRs during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         subproject investments and sites’ location as well
                                                                         as “chance find” procedures, so that suitable
                                                                         mitigation measures are implemented and
                                                                         incorporated into the corresponding NPA
                                                                         management plan(s).
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Many project beneficiaries are expected to be
                                                                         Ethnic Minorities who are known in Lao PDR as
                                                                         Ethnic Groups and meet eligibility criteria under
                                                                         OP 4.10. For example, Hmong, Khmu, Mien,
                                                                         Makong, Bru and others are living in and around
                                                                         the two pre-selected NE-PL and NNT NPAs.
                                                                         These are considered to be vulnerable ethnic
                                                                         groups in Lao PDR as their livelihood is heavily
                                                                         based on subsistence agriculture and forest. The
                                                                         presence and involvement of these Ethnic Groups
                                                                         triggers this safeguard policy. The impact of the
                                                                         Project on these communities is anticipated to be
                                                                         generally positive, however, any negative impacts
                                                                         that may occur are addressed under the


                                                                 Page 7 of 15
                                                                        Community Engagement Framework that
                                                                        includes an Ethnic Group Planning Framework.
                                                                        Where their broad community support is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        ascertained based on free, prior and informed
                                                                        consultations, sub-projects will not be
                                                                        implemented.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The policy is triggered because the Project will
                         4.12                                           support a stricter enforcement of protected areas
                                                                        management which will restrict the current access
                                                                        of local communities and people to natural
                                                                        resources inside protected areas. Local people
                                                                        affected by the Project will benefit from more
                                                                        sustainable access to forest and other natural
                                                                        resources and project support for alternative
                                                                        livelihoods which seeks to enhance their
                                                                        livelihoods sustainably. Nonetheless, short-term
                                                                        loss of livelihood could be unavoidable because
                                                                        adaptation to changes in resource allocation and
                                                                        livelihoods may be a longer-term process. Project
                                                                        impacts due to access restrictions to natural
                                                                        resources will be addressed under a Process
                                                                        Framework (PF) that is contained in the
                                                                        Community Engagement Framework (CEF). It is
                                                                        developed in line with OP 4.12, to allow
                                                                        meaningful participation of affected people in
                                                                        developing a plan of action (Community Action
                                                                        Plan - CAP) to enhance livelihood in the long run
                                                                        and mitigate short-term livelihood losses, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        grant financing will be provided to support
                                                                        implementing the CAP. The project will not
                                                                        involve physical relocation. However, minor land
                                                                        acquisition may be required under community
                                                                        livelihood activities and/or small repair,
                                                                        rehabilitation or new construction of office
                                                                        buildings and other facilities on public land. The
                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was also
                                                                        developed that set out policies and procedures for
                                                                        the limited land acquisition. RPF is attached to
                                                                        CEF. During the Project implementation, if land
                                                                        acquisition is required, an abbreviated
                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan(s) (RAP) will be
                                                                        prepared and implemented for any activities that
                                                                        require involuntary land acquisition.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No            The NNT NPA which will receive funds under
                                                                        this project is located in the area of the Nam
                                                                        Theun 2 (NT2) dam and hydropower station.
                                                                        However, none of the Project activity is


                                                                Page 8 of 15
                                                                                dependent and/or affect the existing dam as the
                                                                                Project area is upstream of the dam.
                            Projects on International        No                 The project interventions ill not affect the quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                or quantity of any international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not located in disputed areas
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No large scale or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts (at the level of Category A
                              projects) are anticipated, given the Project objective to strengthen participatory management of
                              NPAs which, in the context of Lao PDR, require a development of sustainable livelihood of local
                              people who depend on natural resources in and around NPAs for livelihood. Most of the sub-
                              projects are to develop legislative and regulatory frameworks, provide training to and develop the
                              capacity of government agencies at national and provincial levels to increase their ability to
                              effectively (a) implement and monitor the NPA management system, and conservation of wildlife,
                              and (b) conserve and protect forest resources and wildlife in NE-PL and NNT NPAs. The
                              legislative and regulatory frameworks to be developed are anticipated overall to have positive
                              impacts although they may have some low environmental and/ or social adverse impacts. An
                              Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by the Client to
                              address potential environmental and social issues that may result from such institutional
                              development activities as well as relevant mitigation measures. The ESMF includes relevant
                              Environment Code of Practices (ECOPs), Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) chance finds
                              provisions and a Pest Management Plan (PMP).
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The sub-projects under the component 2 will support enforcement of national and international
                             good practice conservation laws and the development of sustainable protected areas management,
                             which may result in a short-term loss in livelihood of local people who will not continue carrying
                             out some of the livelihood activities they traditionally engaged in before the Project. The initial
                             assessment conducted during project preparation did not find significant potential negative impacts
                             that may be caused by project activities. This is partially because the Participatory Land Use
                             Planning (PLUP) will be carried out which will help preserve the current patterns of land and
                             natural resource use.

                             OP4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources is triggered given the potential impacts on PCR and the
                             unknown location of the sub-projects. Chance find provisions are presented in the ESMF and
                             inserted in contractors’ contracts.

                             OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats is triggered given the high biodiversity value and protected area
                             status of project area and the positive benefits provided by the Project interventions in the targeted
                             natural protected areas.

                             OP 4.09 on Pest Management is triggered as subproject activities in NPA may include
                             interventions that could further lead to increased use of pesticides or of current pest management
                             practices. Screening procedures (and negative list) are in place to prevent any use of pesticides that

                                                                        Page 9 of 15
                         would impact the Project area of intervention. A PMP has been developed and included in the
                         ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The CEF through its Process Framework (PF) will address potential impacts of access restrictions
                         under the Project, by providing detailed steps to ensure a full and informed participation of local
                         people in PLUP process and in the development of alternative, sustainable income streams. Free,
                         prior and informed consultations will be carried out with affected people, and their broad
                         community support to project activities will be ascertained. Community Action Plan (CAP) will be
                         developed based on a participatory process, and the Project will provide grant funding to
                         implement part of the CAP, in order to at least maintain pre-project level of livelihood after the
                         Project. Potential presence of the PCRs will also be identified through PLUP and verified through
                         field visits. PA Management Plans will place emphasis on conservation and management of
                         endangered wildlife. Villagers will continue to be consulted on and participate in the Project
                         throughout implementation through participatory social assessment, PLUP, CAP and CA
                         processes at the village level, and through participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) at the
                         NPA level.

                         Indigenous Peoples (who are called Ethnic Groups in Lao PDR) will constitute the majority of
                         affected people and project beneficiaries under the sub-projects of component 2. The overall
                         project impacts on Ethnic Groups are expected to be positive, however, care will be exercised so
                         their precarious land/ natural resource tenure will not be adversely affected by the Project. CEF
                         provides detailed steps to ensure that free, prior and informed consultations will be conducted with
                         ethnic groups leading to their broad community support, and that they meaningfully participate in
                         a culturally appropriate manner in land and natural resource use planning and zoning, and the
                         development of alternative, more sustainable income streams.

                         Baseline livelihood data especially of vulnerable households, including women headed
                         households, will be collected based on participatory Social Assessment to be carried out during
                         implementation, and their livelihood status will be regularly monitored th roughout the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation under the participatory M&E. Where villages consist of hamlets that previously
                         constituted independent villages but are now consolidated into larger villages, participatory
                         planning process will start at the hamlet level.

                         In order to address minor land acquisition that may be required for community livelihood
                         development and the construction of office buildings and facilities, a Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF) was developed in line with OP 4.12 as part of the CEF. An abbreviated
                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be developed during implementation should involuntary land
                         acquisition become necessary.

                         In order to address project risks with regard to the ongoing GoL program of village consolidations,
                         the project will distinguish between villages that have been consolidated in the past, and those
                         scheduled or proposed for consolidation. The project will apply the following criteria:

                         a) in villages consolidated in the past the project will identify such villages and:
                         (i)       determine through participatory social assessment if land and tenure issues associated with
                         the consolidation have been resolved to the satisfaction of communities;
                         (ii)      ascertain if adequate land for agriculture or other means of livelihood to improve, or at
                         least maintain their livelihoods, has been made available;
                         (iii)     exclude such villages if outstanding issues related to land for agriculture and natural

                                                                   Page 10 of 15
                          resource are identified, and convey findings to Provincial Authorities for appropriate action; and
                          (iv)    excluded villages can subsequently become project beneficiaries if: (a) Provincial
                          Authorities demonstrate that issues have been resolved, (b) communities confirm such resolution
Public Disclosure Copy




                          met standards of free, prior and informed consultation, and (c) communities provide their broad
                          community support for participating in PAW project.

                          b) Villages scheduled or proposed for consolidation during the life of the project are excluded
                          from participation in the Project.

                          In cases where project participating villages consist of multiple hamlets including those of Ethnic
                          Groups, separate CAPs may be developed for respective hamlets. Elected representatives will
                          represent such hamlets both in village-wide and district level meetings to present views and
                          opinions collected at the hamlet-level meetings. The project will utilize the map of concessions
                          granted in the previous few years and continuously engage with provincial governors to avoid
                          project risks due to allocation of land concessions.

                          Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) will be developed to address site-specific
                          environmental impacts that may occur in targeted NPAs as a result of minor civil works and other
                          activities implemented under subcomponents under Component 2.

                           The project will use indigenous leadership and conflict resolution mechanisms as the first tier
                           grievance mechanism but will significantly strengthen their capacity including on safeguards
                           requirements, gender equity, existing legal and administrative frameworks and land management.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           All PAs in the country are subjected to a form or another of infrastructure/concession overlap. But
                           all must comply with the Environment impact legislation, some of which, such as Social and
                           Environment Standard for Operation (SESO), are supported by the Bank and IFC under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Hydro-Mining Technical Assistance project. Still, the improving/upgrading funded by GoL of
                           existing roads passing through NE-PL (roads No. 1C, No. 3204, and Phathi road) and NNT (8B or
                           1E) are likely to degrade some natural habitat and increase the threats to both NPAs by facilitating
                           access to remote area. There is a plan for hydropower development outside of the NE-PL NPA,
                           which could flood a portion of the NPA as well as increase boat access and threat to the NE-PL
                           NPA. The development of hydro-power projects in NE-PL NPA is at feasibility stage.
                           Construction is unlikely for several years. The upgrading of other roads in NE-PL NPA is also at
                           the stage of plan. There is a gold mine concession adjacent to the NNT NPA which, if not
                           monitored, may impact the NPA in the future. The Bank is not involved in any of these projects or
                           concessions. However, the Bank will raise the issue of large infrastructure development in highly
                           valued biodiversity PAs and provide advice to the Government as well as support if requested.

                          The linkage to these activities and any associated impacts will be assessed as part of sub-projects
                          preparation and approval. The project will help MONRE contribute to the discussion on
                          environment law compliance, build the capacity of PA team to monitor such projects, help the
                          Department of Forest Resources Management (DFRM) develop a database of large projects so
                          they can better anticipate their environmental and social impacts and feasibility, and prepare
                          guidelines for biodiversity offsets. These potential developments will be taken into account, in the
                          NPA management plan, which will be developed and implemented during the Project
                          implementation. Also, other World Bank projects such as NT2, Hydro-mining TEchnical


                                                                    Page 11 of 15
                           Assistance (HMTA), 2nd Laos Environment and Social Project (LENS2) are helping the GoL
                           capacity with national laws on safeguard compliance.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           The 5 provinces selected are the most relevant in terms of wildlife trafficking and biodiversity.
                           Alternative provinces or PAs are less relevant in terms of biodiversity although within these
                           provinces additional PAs meet global biodiversity importance criteria. In terms of alternative
                           design, the Bank considered a strictly-NPA support project as many have been done in the past.
                           However, because undoubtedly infrastructure driven by economic development will accelerate
                           degradation, the Project has decided to allocate more than half of its resources to institutional and
                           human resources development to gradually enable the country to make trade off that are more
                           conducive to greener growth.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental and social safeguard issues have been mainstreamed in project design, planning,
                           and implementation. Safeguard instruments include an ESMF and a CEF which includes an Ethnic
                           Group Planning Framework (EGPF), an access restriction Process Framework (PF), and a
                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).

                           The Bank portfolio in Laos focuses on natural resources management and environment. In other
                           project such as the HMTA, with the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the World Bank is
                           helping the Ministry of Energy and Mines develop guidelines for environment compliance. The
                           LENS project, just closed, assisted the development of resettlement curriculum in the faculty of
                           sociology as well as grievance mechanism and Ethic Group consultation guidelines. The LENS2
                           will scale up this work by focus on compliance monitoring and human resources development.
                           The Project does not intend to carry work on safeguard policies other than possibly helping the
                           Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) develop guidelines for biodiversity
                           offsets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key potential stakeholders for the sub-projects are included national (EPF, DFRM of MoNRE;
                           Department of Forest Inspection (DOFI); National University of Lao (NUoL), provincial
                           environment and inspection offices of Houaphanh, Bolikhamxay, Luang Prabang, Xiengkhouang
                           and Khammouane provinces), and site (starting with NE-PL NPA and NNT NPAs) levels. Free,
                           prior and informed consultations had been held during preparation with provincial and site level
                           stakeholders as well as local people in the Project NPAs as part of social assessment development
                           process, which ascertained broad community support to the Project. In particular, the need to
                           combine conservation with livelihood support and allow local people to participate in conservation
                           activities was emphasized and supported. The result of such consultation meetings which covered
                           the entire scope of the Project is provided in SIA. The draft ESMF and CEF will undergo one
                           public consultation on December 17, 2013. Additional consultation of ESMF and CEF has been
                           completed for NNT NPA on January 6 and 7, 2014 (for Nakai district, Khammouane province and
                           Khamkeut districts in Bolikhamxay province); for both NNT and NE-PL NPAs at national level
                           on January 9 and 10; for NE-PL NPA on January 13 and 14 in Viengkham, Phonexay and
                           Phonethong districts, Louangphrabang province; on January 14, 15 and 16 in Viengthong,
                           Samneua and Houamouang districts, Houaphanh province; and January 17 in Phoukout district,
                           Xiengkhouang province. In general, the meetings were supportive of documents, training has been


                                                                     Page 12 of 15
                           proposed to provide for sub-projects implementing unit during the Project implementation to
                           improve the performance of safeguard implementation. The meetings were announced in the local
                           newspaper in capital Vientiane. They were organized by the Ministry of Natural Resources and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environment in Vientiane as well as in the capital of three of the Project five provinces
                           (Houaphan, Bolikhamxay and Khammouane). The results of this public meeting are reflected in
                           the final ESMF which has been redisclosed to Infoshop and on the MONRE website. Affected
                           communities will directly participate in project implementation through the process described in
                           CEF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     11-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                   09-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The draft ESMF and CEF will undergo one public consultation on December 17,
                                         2013. Additional consultation of ESMF and CEF has been completed for NNT NPA
                                         on January 6 and 7, 2014 (for Nakai district, Khammouane province and Khamkeut
                                         districts in Bolikhamxay province); for both NNT and NE-PL NPAs at national level
                                         on January 9 and 10; for NE-PL NPA on January 13 and 14 in Viengkham,
                                         Phonexay and Phonethong districts, Louangphrabang province; on January 14, 15
                                         and 16 in Viengthong, Samneua and Houamouang districts, Houaphanh province;
                                         and January 17 in Phoukout district, Xiengkhouang province. In general, the
                                         meetings were supportive of documents, training has been proposed to provide for
                                         sub-projects implementing unit during the Project implementation to improve the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         performance of safeguard implementation. The meetings were announced in the local
                                         newspaper in capital Vientiane. They were organized by the Ministry of Natural
                                         Resources and Environment in Vientiane as well as in the capital of three of the
                                         Project five provinces (Houaphan, Bolikhamxay and Khammouane). The results of
                                         this public meeting are reflected in the final ESMF which has been redisclosed to
                                         Infoshop and on the MONRE website.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                   09-Dec-2013
                           Comments: A Community Engagement Framework replaces the Process Framework and
                                         includes also a Resettlement Policy Framework
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-Dec-2013




                                                                   Page 13 of 15
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 09-Dec-2013
                           Comments: The Ethnic Group Framework is an integral part of the Community Engagement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Framework.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 09-Dec-2013
                           Comments: A simplified Pest Management Plan in included in the ESMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?


                                                                   Page 14 of 15
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jean-Michel G. Pavy
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 28-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                              Date: 29-Jan-2014


                                                                       Page 15 of 15
