                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC8327

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burkina Faso                   Project ID:      P148062
                            Project Name:      Education Access and Quality Improvement Project (EAQIP) (P148062)
                            Task Team          Adama Ouedraogo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          14-Oct-2014                    Estimated        25-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Secondary education (60%), Tertiary education (20%), Primary education
                                               (15%), Pre-primary education (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for the knowledge economy (80%), Education for all (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                    Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
                              Total                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           Project Development Objectives (PDOs) of the Education Access and Quality Improvement Project
                           (EAQIP) are to (i) increase access and quality of secondary schools (grades 7-13) in five of the
                           poorer regions with a special focus on girls; and (ii) contribute to strengthening the education
                           institutional capacity at national, regional, and school level.

                           To help achieve these objectives, the project would support further development of ECD and
                         curriculum development in primary education, both of which are critical for increased access and
                         improved quality of secondary education, but are not now adequately financed through other
                         interventions. In addition to further development of ECD, it is expected that interventions at this and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the primary level would positively impact primary education during the life of the project and
                         secondary education in the short to medium term .
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will focus primarily on the five poorest regions in the country, but will also contribute to
                         the further development of some national programs. The latter include curricula reform, teacher
                         training (pre- and in-service training), improved student assessment and monitoring, and institutional
                         capacity strengthening and development.

                         The expansion of secondary-level access, including specialized classrooms, would create additional
                         capacity to accommodate the growing number of students coming from the primary level. The
                         lowering of the costs of education to the poorest households in the five regions would make it easier
                         for families to enroll their children in school. Involvement of School-Based Management
                         Committees (SBMCs) will also stimulate demand by ensuring keener focus on some of the non-
                         financial and contextual constraints to access. The design of the SBMC would build on earlier
                         successful outcomes with COGES, including the use of School Improvement Plans (SIPs).

                         Quality & relevance of learning and teaching would be improved through support to strengthen
                         curricula reform, SBMCs and SIPs, student assessment & monitoring, and expansion of better quality
                         of teacher training. “Lycées Scientifiques” (focusing on excellence in math and sciences) would
                         serve as “living laboratories” for other secondary schools to emulate to further improve their school-
                         environments and to adopt more appropriate teaching methods, especially for math and sciences.
                         Strengthening the institutional and management capacity in selective areas at the national, local and
                         school levels, including greater use of modern computer and technology tools would also enhance
                         efficiency and effectiveness in the secondary education sub-sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Expanding equitable access to secondary education (US$20.00 million)

                         The objective of component 1 is to contribute to increased and equitable access to secondary
                         education by tackling supply and demand constraints to enrollment in the five poorest regions. On
                         the supply-side, the EAQIP would support the expansion of lower and upper secondary education,
                         through increasing: (i) public and private secondary education access; and (ii) equity in lower and
                         upper secondary education, especially for girls and children from low income families. This would
                         be achieved through reduced school costs by providing subsidies to selected students and introducing
                         other support mechanisms to tackle specific local constraints on education demand. This component
                         consists of three sub-components.

                         Subcomponent 1. Increasing public secondary school places, especially in the five covered regions.
                         This sub-component will finance construction and equipment of new lower (CEG) and upper
                         secondary (Lycée) schools/classrooms in underserved areas. The construction will also include 2
                         “pilot” lycées scientifiques located in suburban areas to allow easier access for secondary schools
                         that would want to emulate their best practices. Based on the schema used for previous projects
                         (PEPP II), the MESS will hire full time teachers for each new school, while communes will hire
                         contractual teachers to supplement pedagogical staffing needs where needed.
                         Subcomponent 2. Increasing private secondary school places in urban areas. This sub-component
                         would support the construction and equipment of new private lower (CEG) and upper secondary
                         schools (lycées) and the expansion of existing private secondary schools using the public-private
                         partnership (PPP) practices adopted in the previous education project. The MESS would build and
                         lease ownership and management of schools to private education providers selected through a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         competitive process. Expansion of existing schools will include high achieving “religious private
                         secondary schools” based on agreed and specific eligibility criteria which would include an
                         agreement that they would enroll promising students sponsored by MESS.

                         Subcomponent 3. Targeted support to girls and the poorest households. This subcomponent will
                         contribute to tackling education demand constraints through combined actions aimed at increasing
                         enrollment and retention of girls and/or the poorest students. The policy of fee reduction started in
                         the PPEP2 would be continued to help lower the direct household costs of secondary education and
                         make it easier for girls and poorest households to participate in secondary education. Subsidies
                         would also be provided to selected students, mainly girls, from poor households to help with
                         additional schooling costs. Specific criteria would be established to identify promising students who
                         successfully complete primary or lower secondary education, but for socio-economic reasons would
                         not be able to afford lower or upper secondary education. The identification “targeting” system
                         would build on the mechanisms prepared by the Social Protection team in the proposed Safety Net
                         Project. This approach would be launched on a pilot basis in 5 Communes selected within the
                         covered five regions. The third action would consist of targeted support for the implementation of the
                         School Improvement Plans (SIPs) led by the SBMC (see Component below). The project will
                         contribute to financing, within the SIP, specific activities related to promoting enrolment and
                         retention of girls and poorest students. This intervention would help address two key issues
                         identified in the preliminary results of the gender study on factors limiting girls and poor students’
                         enrolment: (i) housing of students living away from their home villages to attend school and (ii) early
                         pregnancy and accommodation for students’ newborn babies. The project would also support within
                         the SIP, locally identified solutions to address these issues.

                         Component 2: Improving the quality and relevance of Secondary Education (US$22.00 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of component 2 is to contribute to improved quality & relevance of teaching &
                         learning in secondary schools in the five poorest regions, focusing on Mathematics, the Natural
                         Sciences, Languages and computer sciences. This component would consolidate and scale up
                         achievements from the previous Post-Primary Education project (PPEP2) and support the GoBF
                         reforms for improving the quality, relevance and efficiency of secondary education. The component
                         consists of four sub-components.

                         Subcomponent 1. Targeted activities for efficient transition from primary to lower secondary
                         education.

                         Assessment of the results of PPEP2 showed that many secondary schools students had not attained
                         the expected level of achievement. The explanation was largely because students entering from the
                         primary cycle had not acquired the minimum academic requirements needed to embark on the
                         secondary school program. This issue will be addressed by two structural actions which could have a
                         profound impact on the quality of primary education and beyond. The project would provide
                         continued support for the targeted activities under the PDSEB. The targeted activities include:
                         (i)      Curriculum reform: Building a quality basic-education curriculum by upgrading the
                         programs for the ECD and streamlining the primary and lower secondary school curricula. This
                         would ensure coherence in the curriculum throughout the basic education cycle, particularly to
                         correct the discontinuity in learning objectives at the transition point from primary to lower
                         secondary education. The specific activities would include (i) development and adoption of good
                         quality early childhood education programs; and (ii) streamlining the curricula for the primary and
                         secondary levels to ensure a systematic progression between grades and transition between the two
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cycles.

                         Implementation of the basic education curriculum reform which was launched in 2013 is expected to
                         be completed by the 2020-2021 academic year. To date, the following activities have been
                         completed, financed by national budget and other donor partners: (i) Reference document for the
                         curriculum reform; (ii) Determination and organization of basic education contents; (iii)
                         Organization of curriculum contents per sub-cycle; (iv) Rewriting of programs per sub-cycle in a
                         curriculum format; (v) Development of framing instruments; (vi) Development of an experimental
                         Protocol. Under this strategy, the key remaining activities to be undertaken include: (i) Development
                         and approval of teaching programs, teacher training modules and didactical instruments for the
                         curriculum pilot and generalization phases; (ii) Training of teachers and pedagogic supervisors to
                         ensure smooth implementation and monitoring of the pilot and for scaling up the new curriculum;
                         (iii) Revision, development and approval of textbooks and other didactical materials. The
                         Government created a Directorate to conduct the curriculum reform, relying on national expertise
                         within the ministry organized in specialized committees, supported by international expertise. Based
                         on the implementation schedule, it is projected that by end of 2018, which is also the expected
                         closing date of the project, the new curriculum for the first two sub-cycles of primary education,
                         ECD, and all grades of lower secondary education would have been piloted and generalized. The
                         project will contribute to the financing of the curriculum reform, including development of
                         instruments, teacher training for the first two sub-cycles of primary education, ECD, and the first
                         three grades of lower secondary education.

                         (ii)     Further Development of Early Childhood Development. Research shows that investments in
                         quality early childhood education programs are effective in achieving improved educational
                         outcomes at higher levels of the education system. ECD helps provide the required psycho-motor and
                         basic literacy and numeracy skills that promote on-time entry and improved learning at the primary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level. This in turn leads to improved retention and completion rates at the primary and secondary
                         levels. Students who learn more in primary schools are better able to master the lower secondary
                         curriculum and would enter lower secondary at a younger age. This latter is important since younger
                         students are less likely quit school for marriage or employment in contrast to older students. To
                         support Government’s efforts to further develop ECD, the project will invest in increasing access to
                         early childhood care and education through parenting education and in improving the quality of
                         existing ECD services through teacher training. Parenting education will better prepare parents to
                         play a critical role in their child’s development by providing early stimulation and appropriate health
                         and nutrition care for them. This component will be based on the UNICEF supported Government
                         Parent Education Strategy that is currently being implemented. This str ategy includes selected low-
                         cost, good quality and highly scalable models of parent education currently in operation in the
                         country, run by the non-profit sector.

                         Subcomponent 2. Development of school-based quality initiatives

                         This component would strengthen the administrative arrangements and management capacity of
                         secondary schools to help achieve improved student learning outcomes. It would build on the
                         Presidential Decree of 2010 authorizing nation-wide establishment COGES in all primary schools by
                         2015. Following this Decree, the Government and the Bank agreed to pilot the use of COGES in
                         lower secondary education to complete coverage for the basic education cycle. The composition and
                         functions of the SBMCs would be designed to ensure that they operate effectively. Recent evidence
                         shows that the school based management approach can be an effective strategy to increase parental
                         participation in school decisions that would help reduce dropout, repetition and failure rates and,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         under certain conditions, increase learning outcomes . outcomes. Therefore, the project will focus on
                         creating the conditions (local capacity building, SIP preparation, resources transfer and management,
                         incentives) within which the school based management policy, can be translated into improvements
                         in the quality of education service delivery. The three following key tools will be used to achieve
                         success in quality improvement at this level: (i) support for establishing School Based Management
                         Committees; (ii) supporting School Improvement Plans (pedagogic support and materials); and (iii)
                         piloting incentives for performance improvement.

                         (i) Promoting School Based Management Committees. The project will support the establishment of
                         SBMCs in each lower secondary school and provide training for its members. The design and
                         implementation will build on the successful experiences of using SBMCs in Niger and the JICA
                         financed pilot programs on SBMCs at the primary level in Burkina. The existing guides clarifying
                         the roles, responsibilities and modalities for their establishment and operations, as well as training
                         programs for members are available and will be adapted for use in Burkina. The first project year
                         will be used for adapting the various tools and for piloting SBMC in one region.

                         (ii) Development of School Improvement Plans (SIPs). Each lower secondary school will have a SIP
                         prepared by the SBMC focusing on quality improvements, notably better learning outcomes and
                         performance in national examinations. The SBMC will lead the process of preparing the SIP, from
                         diagnostics to implementation, including managing resource allocation. The existing guides for the
                         preparation of SIPs at the primary level will be adapted for use at the lower secondary level.

                         (iii) Incentives for performance improvement. Two types of incentives will be financed for schools.
                         The first, which will vary based on the size of the school, will be provided for 2 years to allow time
                         for these resources to be included in the government’s recurrent budget. The second will be linked to
                         existing annual school performance competition already being run by MESS. This initiative is based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on agreed criteria that will be incorporated in the Project Implementation Manual. Under the MESS
                         initiative, the best performing schools are included in a Circle of Excellence. Schools that do not
                         maintain their performance levels annually will be re-evaluated and, if performance does not
                         improve, dropped from the “Circle of Excellence”. The ranking of all schools will continue to be
                         published in the regional and national press, as well as on the web sites of the Education Ministries.

                         Subcomponent 3. Improve teacher management and Pre- and In-service Training in secondary
                         Education
                         This subcomponent aims at improving both the initial and In-service training of secondary school
                         teachers. Toward this end, the project will support the government’s teacher tr aining policy.

                         Initial training: Currently the two institutes responsible for teacher training, the ENS-UK, (covering
                         all subjects) and the IDS (which trains teachers only for math and science), produce only around
                         1,400 teachers per year against the need for about 2000 teachers, with the highest deficits being in
                         math and science. The project will support progressive expansion of teacher output to meet all the
                         needs and to facilitate teacher assignments to rural areas where the needs for qualified teachers are
                         greatest. In addition, the project will support use of improved teaching methodologies in the training
                         institutions especially for math and science. The current training strategy comes from reforms
                         undertaken in 1990s piloted and implemented by previous Bank financed projects (PEPP1 and
                         PEPP2). The project will also support improving the contents of the training program. An evaluation
                         of the pre-service training programs will be carried out to identify the specific areas of need. Support
                         for improving the pedagogical methods would be done through technical assistance. In addition, the
                         project will finance equipment to improve the curricula programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In-service training. Continuous pedagogic support and advice are necessary to improve the quality of
                         instruction and to update teaching capacity. The PPEP2 supported the revision of the in-service
                         training system. The strategy for upgrading the skills of teachers is designed and implemented on a
                         three-pronged approach. School principals would receive initial training related to their pedagogic
                         responsibilities. The training would draw on the experience of PEPP2 and would use the manual
                         already developed, which clearly explains the respective roles. The second level of support involves
                         deployment of Pedagogic Advisers (CP) and Inspectors, who are responsible for visiting each school
                         and each teacher at least once a year, in the regions. On the basis of their reports, the insp ectorate
                         would prepare subject-based in-service training programs (including how to use existing materials
                         and textbooks). The third level of support is the teachers' study group established in networks of
                         closely located schools (Cellule animation pédagogique-CAP). The in-service training would take
                         advantage of the half-day midweek break to organize activities for teachers each week.

                         Subcomponent 4. Increased availability of textbooks and pedagogical materials

                         This sub-component will support improving the teaching and learning environment by increasing the
                         availability of textbooks and other pedagogical materials. The previous project (PPEP2) financed
                         successful local production of teaching materials to improve science teaching. This initiative will be
                         extended. The project will also finance necessary equipment for the two “Lycees Scientifiques”
                         pilots in upper secondary schools. The current project will build on and improve the overall
                         textbooks provision started under PEPP2 to ensure textbooks availability for lower and upper
                         secondary. The project will not acquire textbooks directly, but will provide support to ensure
                         adequate textbook availability for the secondary education. Quantity and details will be completed
                         during project preparation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Contributing to strengthening education institutional capacity at central and
                         decentralized entities (US$8.00 million)

                         The objectives of component 3 are to contribute to strengthening the ministry’s capacity in selective
                         areas and support the PCU operations. The areas covered include:
                         3.1. Project management and implementation activities;
                         3.2. Establishment of a Technology Platform: the Technology Platform, as an IT infrastructure for
                         secondary education institutions (secondary and higher education), with connectivity to the Ministry
                         in charge of Secondary and Higher Education (MESS) will reinforce the sector EMIS built under the
                         PPEP2 by integrating different entities. It would serve a dual purpose for academic and
                         administrative management of institutions and schools. With regard to academics, the platform
                         would serve as a tool for course development, in the form of so-called “virtual labs”, and for course
                         delivery with the view to reducing teacher shortages in higher education; and as a virtual library
                         shared by teacher training institutions within the universities.
                         3.3. strengthening students learning assessment and examination systems;
                         3.4. Studies to provide relevant information needed for policy dialogue and decision-making for
                         education policy reforms.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented mostly in five poorest regions of the country.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The borrower's institutional capacity for safeguard policies is acceptable due to its experience with
                           bank funded projects on one hand and on the other hand, its voluntary to make the environmental
                           management one of key pillars contained in its Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustained
                           Development for 2011–15 (Stratégie pour la Croissance Accélérée et le Développement Durable-
                           SCADD). Furthermore both ministries ( Ministry of National Education and literacy and Ministry of
                           Secondary and Higher Education) are familiar with safeguard policies for having opportunity in the
                           past to implement projects funded by the World bank. In addition, it exists a national agency (Bureau
                           National des Evaluations Environnementales-BUNEE) in charge of environmental studies and the
                           monitoring and the control of projects implementation at the national level. Nevertheless, the PCU
                           capacity building efforts to support project implementation will be done by implementing
                           recommendations contained in the safeguards instruments prepared for the project. The project will
                           also receive guidance from the Bank’s environmental and social specialists in the Project team.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
                           Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will finance construction of new
                           BP 4.01                                             lower and upper secondary schools in the five
                                                                               poorest regions of the country. In addition, it is
                                                                               envisaged that the project will finance the
                                                                               expansion of existing private secondary schools
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               using private-public partnerships. Likewise, IT
                                                                               infrastructure is planned to be constructed under
                                                                               component 3. These investments, which are
                                                                               mostly small- to medium-scale civil works, are
                                                                               expected to induce potential environmental
                                                                               adverse impacts. However, they do not involve
                                                                               irreversible impacts. So, impacts expected will
                                                                               be dust, noise and particularly waste
                                                                               management. The exact location of the
                                                                               construction and expansion activities are not yet
                                                                               known, an Environmental and Social
                                                                               Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                               prepared. This document will be prepared,
                                                                               consulted upon and disclosed both in-country
                                                                               and at the World Bank Infoshop prior to
                                                                               appraisal.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The project does not involve or affect natural
                                                                               habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project does not involve or affect forests.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The construction will involve excavations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         Taking into account that factor, the policy on
                                                                                                                                 physical cultural resources is triggered because
                                                                                                                                 it could lead to chance finds. However, the
                                                                                                                                 triggering of this policy does not entail the
                                                                                                                                 preparation of a specific safeguard instrument.
                                                                                                                                 A chapter will be included in the ESMF to
                                                                                                                                 provide guidance in case physical cultural
                                                                                                                                 resources will be discovered.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Usually, in urban areas, public schools are built
                                 4.12                                                                                            in administrative areas reserved for this kind of
                                                                                                                                 infrastructure. However, this is not the case in
                                                                                                                                 rural areas, where these new constructions could
                                                                                                                                 involve land acquisition leading to involuntary
                                                                                                                                 resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                                                                                                                                 resources and livelihoods. Therefore, to
                                                                                                                                 anticipate these potential social adverse impacts,
                                                                                                                                 a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared by the client. That safeguard document
                                                                                                                                 preparation will follow the same process as the
                                                                                                                                 ESMF. So, it will be reviewed, consulted upon
                                                                                                                                 and disclosed publicly within Burkina Faso and
                                                                                                                                 at the Infoshop before appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy
                                      Framework (RPF) constitute the environmental safeguard instruments to be prepared within the
                                      project. These safeguard instruments are expected to be prepared, reviewed, consulted upon and
                                      disclosed within the country by the Government of Burkina Faso, and by the World Bank’s
                                      Infoshop prior to appraisal of the Project.
                         IV. APPROVALS




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Adama Ouedraogo

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 18-Sep-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)     Date: 18-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
