                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1384
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina            Project ID:    P108000
                            Project Name:      Sava Waterway Rehabilitation Project (P108000)
                            Task Team          Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Oct-2013                       Estimated   17-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSTR                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Ports, waterways and shipping (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (67%), Regional
                                              integration (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      30.00           Total Bank Financing:                 30.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                30.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                          0.00
                              Total                                                                                      30.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to enhance regional trade by improving the navigability,
                           operational performance and intermodal connectivity of the Sava River between the Una and Drina



                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                         Rivers for freight transport users in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and the environmental sustainability of
                         freight transport in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project is part of a larger Program to improve navigability in the Sava River between Belgrade
                         (river km, “rkm? 0), Serbia and Sisak (rkm 594), Croatia. The WB-financed project covers the
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) side of the river, from the Croatian border on the West to the Serbian
                         border on the East.

                         Specifically, the Project will consist of two main components:

                         Component 1 - Sava River rehabilitation works, implementation supervision and institutional support
                         (US$21.1 million equivalent)
                         The component includes civil works, involving river dredging and training works, riverbank
                         protection in Bosnia and Herzegovina to return the Sava River to Class Va status between Br?ko and
                         the international border with Serbia in the East and to Class IV status between Br?ko and the
                         international border with Croatia in the West, a total length of 338 km.

                         Component 2 - Targeted investments to improve the operational performance and intermodal
                         connectivity of Br?ko Port; implementation supervision, and institutional support (US$8.9 million)
                         The component has four works sub-components and one consultancy for implementation supervision
                         and institutional support:

                         (i)      Cargo handling yard (estimated at Euro 1.15, US$1.5 million equivalent): This includes the
                         completion of works on the reconstruction of 70 m of the vertical quay wall; asphalt works of 6,200
                         sqm for the cargo handling yard (operational plateau), the installation of a 630 m wastewater draining
                         line including a 10,000L-capacity separator, and ground enforcement in the area where the yard will
                         be extended.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii)    Rail connection in the port (estimated at Euro 1.3 million; US$1.7 million equivalent): This
                         consists of the construction of a rail connection between the existing rail tracks on the crane plateau
                         and new tracks to be built in the port. Total length of planned rail tracks within the port is 0.225 km.

                         (iii)   Rail bypass (estimated at Euro 3.3 million, US$4.3 million equivalent): This consists of the
                         construction of a new link between the Br?ko Novo railway station and the port, a 4.5 km link that
                         would reroute the rail tracks away from the city center to the periphery.

                         (iv)     Access road to the port (estimated at Euro 800,000, US$1 million equivalent): This consists
                         of the rehabilitation of the access road from the port to Bijeljina road, a distance of 0.9 km (including
                         the construction of an underpass bridge).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Sava River is an international waterway, and is linked hydrologically to the Black Sea Basin and the
                         Danube sub-basin. The project aims to increase mobility on the entire Sava River through
                         coordinated investments in waterway rehabilitation by riparian countries,involving Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina, Croatia, and Serbia. Due to fact that the Sava River in Bosnia and Herzegovina is an
                         international boundary between Bosnia and Herzegovina and either Croatia or Serbia, investments
                         made in the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina will not be effective without coordinated investment


                                                                       Page 2 of 14
                         by the country on the opposite bank of river.

                         The location of the Project is the basin of the Sava River in Bosnia and Herzegovina extending
Public Disclosure Copy




                         between the international border with Serbia in the East and the International border with Croatia in
                         the West. The broader Program extends beyond Bosnia and Herzegovina to the port of Sisak in
                         Croatia and to the confluence of the Sava River with the Danube River in Belgrade. Specifically, the
                         component 1 investments for the Project concern river engineering rehabilitation works in Bosnia
                         and Herzegovina, a distance of about 338 river km (rkm), extending through the territories of
                         Republic Srpska (RS), the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and Brcko District. Of the
                         338 rkm, about 33 rkm share a border with Serbia and 305 rkm share a border with Croatia.
                         Component 2 investments are civil works planned within Br?ko port and in Br?ko District (BD).

                         Minefield and UXO clearance works (funded separately by an IPA grant administrated by the Bank
                         but not part of this project financing) implemented in line with specific international standards of
                         operations are required on river banks and possibly in a few locations of the riverbed before river
                         rehabilitation works (Component 1) may start. The overall project area of impact is the respective
                         section in BiH of the river itself, including the river bed, areas around the banks on both sides, as
                         well as the ecosystem downstream.

                         The Sava River has a number of areas along its banks that are protected or of special scientific or
                         environmental significance. Based on existing information, there are two sites (Majzecova Bašta and
                         Obedska Bara) designated as special nature reserves in the project area. There are no endangered/
                         threatened species within the Project’s direct footprint although several sensitive fauna species live in
                         the Sava River (salmon, beaver). Ten nationally registered archeological sites are located in the Sava
                         river bed in the Project area.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         I. U. B. Reddy (SASDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                         Esma Kreso (ECSEN)
                         Sandra Kdolsky (ECSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes                 The environmental assessment process for the
                         BP 4.01                                                 broader Program (from Belgrade to Sisak) is
                                                                                 being carried out under two separate contracts: (i)
                                                                                 the Sava River section between Belgrade and
                                                                                 Br?ko is the responsibility of the Government of
                                                                                 Bosnia and Herzegovina; and (ii) the section
                                                                                 between Racinovci (Brcko) and Sisak is the
                                                                                 responsibility of the Government of Croatia
                                                                                 (note: the actual 23 km section of the Sava River
                                                                                 between Racinovci and Br?ko is covered in both
                                                                                 EIAs). The Project is proposed as category A for
                                                                                 environmental assessment purposes given the
                                                                                 specific rehabilitation infrastructure works related
                                                                                 to Components 1 and 2.To meet appraisal



                                                                         Page 3 of 14
                                                                     conditions, in the absence of detailed design
                                                                     related to the specific infrastructure investments
                                                                     proposed on the river sector between Brcko (BiH)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     and Belgrade in Serbia, the Government of BiH
                                                                     prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) (including an
                                                                     Environmental Management Plan Framework and
                                                                     a Physical Cultural Resources (PCR)
                                                                     Management Framework) covering the
                                                                     investments in BiH as well as the investments in
                                                                     Serbia. This document that reflects the
                                                                     requirements of the national legislation as well as
                                                                     the EU and World Bank environmental and social
                                                                     provisions was discussed in Sarajevo (January 24,
                                                                     2013) and Belgrade (April 19, 2013) and
                                                                     disclosed in country and in Infoshop at least twice
                                                                     before appraisal (see specific disclosure dates
                                                                     below). Based on this ESMF, and in parallel with
                                                                     the preparation of the detailed design for
                                                                     Component 1 investments, a full ESIA will be
                                                                     prepared during project implementation which
                                                                     will start with Component 2. This ESIA will
                                                                     identify and analyze the site specific potential
                                                                     impacts within the project area of impact
                                                                     including sensitive downstream habitats and
                                                                     specific cultural resources, as well as cumulative
                                                                     impacts. It will also provide an analysis of
                                                                     mitigation options to the specific evaluated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     potential impacts and propose suitable measures
                                                                     and practical monitoring actions. The ESIA will
                                                                     also meet the Bank’s requirements for public
                                                                     consultation and disclosure in country and
                                                                     infoshop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            The policy is triggered since project
                                                                     interventions including dredging, river banks
                                                                     rehabilitation, and possibly land clearing will (i)
                                                                     be located in the proximity of two protected areas
                                                                     (Majzecova Bašta and Obedska Bara), for which
                                                                     provisions of appropriate conservation and
                                                                     mitigation measures will be necessary during
                                                                     works, and (ii) potentially impact sensitive
                                                                     ecological sites downstream that are within
                                                                     project area of impact.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No




                                                             Page 4 of 14
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             The policy is triggered since ten registered
                         BP 4.11                                         archaeological sites have been located in the Sava
                                                                         riverbeds in the project area. Based on the PCR
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Framework developed as part of ESMF, a
                                                                         Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan
                                                                         will be prepared before works may commence
                                                                         and fully implemented during rehabilitation and
                                                                         drainage activities
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             This policy is triggered as the project activities
                         4.12                                            anticipate potential land acquisition in the context
                                                                         of the river correction works, and the works in
                                                                         Brcko District. At the time of appraisal, a detailed
                                                                         overview of social impacts of the works cannot
                                                                         be made as the detailed design for the main river
                                                                         rehabilitation works proposed along the Sava
                                                                         River banks in BiH (Component 1) is not yet
                                                                         finalized. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) was prepared, approved and
                                                                         disclosed to address the potential adverse
                                                                         impacts. For Component 2 (Brcko Port
                                                                         Improvements), which is planned to be
                                                                         implemented as first year investments will
                                                                         involve minor expropriation and displacement of
                                                                         one household. A draft Abbreviated Resettlement
                                                                         Action Plan (ARAP) has been prepared for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Component 2, but due to delays in the verification
                                                                         of the details of the affected land, the ARAP
                                                                         could not be finalized prior to appraisal with
                                                                         details such as list of affected land owners, extent
                                                                         of losses, and budget estimates. For this reason,
                                                                         it was agreed with the Government of Brcko
                                                                         District that for the one subcomponent (contract
                                                                         package) where the expropriation is involved, the
                                                                         tender documents will be issued only when the
                                                                         ARAP is final, approved and disclosed. The
                                                                         ARAP confirms that there are no expropriation
                                                                         impacts for the other 3 subcomponents (contract
                                                                         packages) of Component 2.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         Yes             The policy is triggered since the Sava River is
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            an International waterway, passing through 4
                                                                         riparian countries, and is linked hydrologically to
                                                                         the Black Sea basin and the Danube sub-basin. As



                                                                 Page 5 of 14
                                                                                a follow-up to consultations with LEGEC and
                                                                                LEGEM, the team requested the Sava River
                                                                                Commission to inform these countries about the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                project goals (including the de-mining activities)
                                                                                during the 3rd Joint Statement Implementation
                                                                                Meeting that was held in Vienna in April 2011. A
                                                                                copy of the final announcement of this meeting,
                                                                                the agenda, and relevant presentation and the
                                                                                Minutes of the discussions were sent for Bank's
                                                                                records in order to meet the OP 7.50. No
                                                                                responses have been received from riparians.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment: the project is rated as environmental assessment category
                              A because of specific river related infrastructure works under Components 1 and 2, which could
                              potentially have adverse impacts on the Sava river itself or the downstream environment. The
                              project investments include activities related to the improvement of the navigability of the Sava
                              River and embankments, together with associated investments in the port and access infrastructure
                              in Brcko. Demining works associated with the Sava River improvements in the river sections in
                              Bosnia and Herzegovina are financed separately by the EU are not part of the Project, but part of
                              the broader Program. The demining works are necessary to be undertaken before the actual river
                              works may commence. The proposed activities are expected to have several positive social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              environmental impacts in the form of improved access of the waterway, prevention of floods due
                              to embankment improvements, facilitating increased fishing and tourism activity, increased safety
                              due to the removal of rail tracks from the Brcko district center, etc. Once the demining is carried
                              out, this land can be brought under cultivation. Many people will positively benefit and the area
                              under cultivation will increase. Thus, the demining activities will contribute to increase household
                              incomes and reduce the poverty levels in the project area.

                             Possible negative environmental impacts during construction works relate to potential changes in
                             river course, water speed and water quality as a result of the works planned to enhance the
                             navigability to allow larger vessels.

                             The construction related impacts during river rehabilitation and the port works are likely to be
                             localized and can be prevented or reduced to acceptable levels by applying international
                             construction practice and planning. Such potential impacts are related to: (i) air pollution/dust,
                             noise, vibration, and access restriction, (ii) improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii)
                             temporary pollution of soil and surface waters due to accidental spillage of fuel and oil from
                             construction activities; (v) safety hazards including worker safety; (vi) damage to natural habitats,
                             aquatic fauna, or existing vegetation, and (vii) impacts to physical cultural resources. However,
                             these impacts could be properly managed during the construction phase by the contractor and
                             closely supervised by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), the Project Implementation Team


                                                                        Page 6 of 14
                         and the supervision engineer.

                         Other potential direct impacts are the alteration of riverbed capacity, impacts from sediment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transportation from banks erosion or dredging activities, that could contain hazardous materials
                         such as heavy metals, or species disturbance specifically linked to component 1 works (e.g.,
                         dredging activities).

                         Possible negative environment impacts during the operation phase include changes in river stage,
                         wetland hydrology, or to aquatic habitat, incremental adverse impacts on water quality through re-
                         suspension of heavy metals in sediments and subsequent impacts to downstream water quality,
                         impacts from disposal of dredged materials, waste from ships and ports, and oil spills; from
                         channel erosion or siltation, etc) to the river water ecosystem and downstream due to river bed
                         dredging. This can potentially negatively affect long term the functioning of wetlands, which are
                         important habitats of plants, birds, fish, amphibians and other animals.

                         These impacts will be effectively prevented or reduced through the application of appropriate
                         protective actions, mitigation measures and monitoring activities. These issues and potential
                         mitigation approaches are highlighted in the ESMF and will be addressed in detail in the ESIA.
                         The ESIA will include site specific ESMPs, which will be incorporated in works contractors’
                         technical specifications and bidding documents).

                         In order to study the potential impacts of the project and to propose related mitigation measures to
                         address such impacts as well as of the future activities on the Sava river after enhanced planned
                         navigability, the Borrower prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) to meet the OP/BP 4.01 requirements and project appraisal conditions. The ESMF (with
                         Environmental Management Plan Framework, EMPF) covers all investments financed by the
                         Bank and sets out the process based on which the related ESIA will be developed during project
                         implementation once the detail design is prepared for the Component 1 works. The ESMF
                         summarizes investment options analysis; reviews legislative and organizational structures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental management; describes existing environmental and social conditions and
                         anticipated impacts during and after works; outlines environmental impact mitigation and
                         monitoring actions; and describes the public consultation process. As required by OP 4.01, the
                         ESMF was publicly disclosed twice in local language: in Sarajevo, BiH (on the website of MoT)
                         on January 24, 2013 (at the level of ToR) and in Belgrade, Serbia on April 3, 2013 (at an advanced
                         draft level). Disclosure took also place at the World Bank (Infoshop) in English language on May
                         7, 2013 (first advanced draft) and later on October 4, 2013 (revised final draft). Two public
                         consultations took place in Sarajevo on January 24, 2013 and in Belgrade on April 19, 2013
                         respectively; comments provided during the discussions were further addressed in revised
                         documents. Finally, a revised final ESMF document was re-disclosed in local language on
                         October 3, 2013 on MoT website and in Infoshop in English on October 4, 2013 to meet project
                         conditions.

                         Government of Croatia (GoC) will revise the existing EIA for the works planned from Sisak (rkm
                         594) to Brcko (rkm 234); such revisions will be done in line with the detailed design that will be
                         prepared by GoC. Recent official communication (dated October 22, 2013) from the Ministry of
                         Communication and Transport (MoTC) in BiH to the Ministry of Maritime, Transport and
                         Infrastructure of Croatia notified MMATI that the revised EIA will require also the “no? objection
                         from the Bank before construction permits for the works between Sisak and Brcko could be issued.
                         OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary resettlement.

                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                         NOP/BP 4.12 Involuntary resettlement. Notwithstanding the positive social benefits, the project
                         will also trigger limited adverse social impacts in the form of minor expropriation and related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts, for example for access to dredging works, dumping sites or strengthening of river banks
                         and rail bypass. Therefore, OP/BP 4.12 was triggered. The preliminary estimates indicate about
                         18 hectares of land is required for river improvement activities related to dredging works to
                         increase the depth of fairways at two locations (Jamena and Srenska Reca). These lands are
                         mostly uncultivated lands and do have any productive values. The exact amount of expropriation
                         will be known once the sites are identified and the screening is conducted. In case of Brcko rail
                         bypass, about 10,000 sq.meters consisting of about 10 land parcels and one residential house
                         which is locked in a triangle position between rail tracks to be built will be required to be
                         expropriated. The detail of ownership and extent of area lost by each land owners will be known
                         once the land ownership details are verified, which is now underway.

                         As the project in Bosnia and Herzegovina is closely linked to the Sava River rehabilitation
                         investments in Croatia and Serbia, associated impacts of these projects and their mitigation have
                         been considered as well. The river rehabilitation works along the Serbian parts of the river do not
                         expect any adverse social impacts in the form of minor resettlement or expropriation. The Serbian
                         Government has informed the Bank in writing that the proposed works under the project will be
                         executed only within the main river channel and will be within the water. Thus, they concluded
                         that there will be no resettlement or expropriation of land. The Task Team will monitor the project
                         portion in Serbia on a regular basis to ensure that no triggering of the policy occurs. In case of
                         Croatia part of the project, the river rehabilitation works will require expropriation of small private
                         land parcels, but no resettlement of people. The task team has also confirmed using satellite
                         imagery there are no structures along the river section in Croatia. In addition, the Task Team
                         undertook due diligence thus far (including the review of 3 previous RPFs for Croatia and review
                         of the Croatia Safeguards Diagnostic Review - Equivalence Analysis), the Croatian Legislation
                         approximates the Bank’s policy in the treatment of property owners (market price is achieved but
                         not necessarily replacement value, unless the option of land for equivalent land is chosen).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Croatian legislation is not equivalent to the WB for those using land that are not property owners
                         or in cases where livelihood restoration is required. To ensure that property owners affected
                         receive the same treatment as they would under the Bank. The Task Team visited the site to
                         ascertain the likely impacts due to expropriation and concluded that there will be expropriation of
                         40 land parcels and all of these are under water. The Task Team also ascertained based on the
                         discussions with officials and landowners, that due to morphology of the river in the past, some of
                         the private lands are now under water and some of those lands will be expropriated for the
                         proposed works. Since these lands are under water, they do not have any economic and productive
                         value and thus there is no loss of livelihood due to expropriation. The land owners interviewed
                         during the field visit confirmed that all those losing lands under water possess about 10-20
                         hectares of agricultural land ( in addition to those under water), which will be their source of
                         income. Thus, the Team concluded that the proposed expropriation will not have any adverse
                         impact on livelihoods. The land is expected to remain under water and so there is no change
                         expected in land values. The Bank Team will continue to monitor the expropriation situation
                         during the project implementation as needed. At the conclusion of the land take, a final visit will
                         be made to ensure that WB equivalence was achieved. For cases where it was not (due to non-
                         payment of replacement value or displacement of non-land owners or people requiring extra help
                         for livelihood restoration, the Team will use best effort to convince the Government of Croatia to
                         assist the project-affected people (PAPs) in a way considered equivalent to the WB policy. This
                         effort and other aspects above will all be documented in the Project files in WB documents.

                                                                    Page 8 of 14
                           OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats will apply since several locations with natural habitats of potential
                           interest have been identified along the Sava River from Br?ko downstream to Belgrade, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the protected areas Majzecova bašta and Obedska Bara sites (in RoS). Also, there are several
                           sensitive ecosystems/habitats both in the Sava River itself (e.g., aquatic ecosystems/habitats) and
                           also on the banks and adjacent areas (river-dependent ecosystems/habitats), which are not
                           however, considered of global importance. The ESMF identified these potential impacts but they
                           were not analyzed in detail at this stage. Further site specific analysis and mitigation options will
                           be carried out during the ESIA work, which will be prepared in parallel with the detailed design.
                           Some of this further site specific analysis and mitigation options relate to areas covered by the
                           Croatian EIA (from Sisak to Brcko) revised by GoC in line with the detailed design. Once
                           finalized, this EIA will also be revised by the Bank to ensure that all environmental impacts and
                           mitigation measures are correctly discussed, and will be implemented in line with OP 4.01.

                           OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources will apply since ten archaeological sites have been
                           nationally recognized as located in the project area. In addition to follow the national laws on
                           cultural heritage, a Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) Management Plan will be prepared at
                           ESIA/detail design level based on the PCRMF included in the ESMF, and enforced during works.

                           OP/BP 7.50 Projects on International Waterways policy is triggered since the Sava River is an
                           international waterway, and is linked hydrologically to the Black Sea Basin and the Danube sub-
                           basin. As advised by the Bank, the ISRBC informed these countries about the project goals
                           (including the demining activities) during the 3rd Joint Statement Implementation Meeting that
                           was held in Vienna in April 2011. A copy of the final announcement of this meeting, the agenda,
                           the relevant presentation, and the Minutes of the discussion were sent to the Bank for its records in
                           order to meet the provisions of the OP7.50. Additionally, a letter including information on
                           notification of riparian countries as per World Bank policy OP 7.50, and the project details has
                           been sent to ICPDR office (Vienna, Austria) on November 8, 2010 for further comments. No
                           comments were received from ICPDR prior to the proposed deadline of December 31, 2010.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Based on the ESMF, several foreseen cumulative impacts have been identified at the project site,
                           expected primarily in link with the increase of water pollution (heavy metal and other wastewater)
                           and effect on protected zones downstream due to works planned on construction of several
                           wastewater treatment plans as part of urban development strategy highlighted in the Sava RBMP.
                           Further possible cumulative impacts will be evaluated in the ESIA once the specific locations of
                           the rehabilitation works will be provided at the level of detailed design, which will allow correct
                           evaluation of these activities in link with other on-going investments, projects, urban development
                           impacts that cumulatively could affect the downstream area of the project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives that have been considered and are discussed in the ESMF include the
                           following options: (i) river rehabilitation works upgrading to Class Va level versus Class IV; (ii)
                           more extensive river bed alignment versus traffic control (e.g. the one way traffic at a time versus
                           two-way traffic at the same time on certain sections where a river bend is smaller than 360 m) and
                           (iii) design of engineering interventions and management of dredged sediments (technical options
                           to be evaluated at the detailed design level). Upon weighing the economic and environmental costs
                           and benefits, it was considered that for the section from Brcko to Belgrade, the Sava River should

                                                                      Page 9 of 14
                          be upgraded all the way to Class Va navigation status, as this can be achieved in this section
                          mainly through additional well-managed dredging and will not require a significant increase in the
                          number of engineering interventions groins, sills and bank protection (which can generate more
Public Disclosure Copy




                          negative environmental impacts that require additional mitigation and costs).

                          The section from Br?ko to Sisak will be upgraded to Class IV as upgrading to Class Va would
                          require a significant increase in the number of engineering interventions with groins, sills and bank
                          protection in comparison with rehabilitation to class IV, which would in turn be expected to have
                          more negative environmental impacts that require mitigation and management.

                          The ESIA at the level of detail design will evaluate and assess the possible site-specific impacts
                          generated during dredging activities required to bring the Sava river bed to Va level on the Brcko-
                          Belgrade sector. Specific alternatives related to various types of dredging methods, disposal site
                          selection, and sustainable transportation options of dredged materials will be evaluated as part of
                          the detailed design. There are known dredging methods which are typically used depending on the
                          depth of the sediments and environmental concerns such as the need to minimize sediment
                          suspension and increase dredging accuracy. The disposal of dredged material will be analyzed in
                          order to select appropriate disposal options (e.g. land reclamation, open water discharge, or
                          contained disposal). Further, beneficial reuse of uncontaminated, dredged material will be
                          considered in the ESIA (e.g. for wetland creation or enhancements, habitat restoration, or creation
                          of public access / recreational facilities).

                          The section from Br?ko to Sisak will be upgraded to Class IV as upgrading to Class Va would
                          require a significant increase in the number of engineering interventions with groins, sills and bank
                          protection in comparison with rehabilitation to class IV, which would in turn be expected to have
                          more negative environmental impacts that require mitigation and management.

                           The detailed design for the proposed river rehabilitation works still have to be completed and are
                           attempting to minimize adverse impacts. In the case that minor expropriation or resettlement is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           necessary due to the works, they will be mitigated in accordance with the provisions of the RPF,
                           and the RAP or ARAP as case may be will be prepared to describe the mitigation measures.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In general, the government and specifically the main executing ministries have developed some
                           capacity in the implementation of the anticipated ESIA, ESMP and public disclosure requirements
                           associated with Bank safeguard policies. This includes prior experience with Bank safeguard
                           procedures in the framework of the existing Bank projects, the experience to date of effectively
                           managing environmental impacts related to water and sanitation investments and solid waste
                           management activities based on international good practice, the existence of good professionals
                           preparing EIA, and the basic infrastructure for monitoring and laboratory analysis (specially linked
                           to water and air quality).

                          The Task Team will familiarize the Borrower, who has also experience in the expropriation
                          process under the local laws, with the implementation of the provisions of the project ESMF/ESIA
                          and the RPF. The main PIU will be strengthened with one Environmental and one Social
                          Safeguards Specialist having suitable skills and qualifications related to environment and social
                          impacts. These Safeguards Specialists will be responsible for overseeing the consultants work
                          related to environmental and social impacts and also facilitate all required support from the


                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                         Government in regard to social impacts, expropriation and resettlement.

                         The ESMF document covers the EA and SA processes for all investments financed by the Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and covered by the project including: (a) the ESIA process for the river works; (b) the EA analysis
                         (summary of EIA report) for the Brcko port investments (covering the four agreed specific
                         investments). In addition, the ESMF document covers the EA process for the proposed demining
                         works (funded by the EU TF) managed as per the SOP provisions in line with international
                         standards. Once the detail design is prepared, the ESIA and the ESMP will be updated to
                         incorporate any new engineering documentation or works details needed for the river rehabilitation
                         and their possible affiliated impacts. The ESMP will be prepared in such a manner that
                         environmental and social requirements (mitigation measures and monitoring, technical
                         specifications) related to the construction phase can be incorporated in the bidding/contract
                         documents. The ESIA (with ESMP) report will take into account any comments provided by the
                         relevant stakeholders including NGOs, authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Republika Srpska,
                         Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Br?ko District), Republic of Serbia and the World
                         Bank. The ESIA will be disclosed and publicly discussed twice in country at the level of ToR and
                         before the draft ESIA is finalized. The final document will also be disclosed in English in Infoshop
                         during project implementation.

                         For component 2 works in Brcko port, the Client prepared an application to environmental permit
                         for the respective works in line with national legislation; based on this application an
                         environmental permit has been issued in October 2012 and revised in August 2013. This
                         environmental permit includes information at the level of the EMP and meets the OP 4.01
                         requirements for the works under this component. Disclosure has been done on Brcko District
                         website on September 18, 2013 and in Infoshop on October 4, 2013.

                         For the demining activities funded by the RETF, the internal standards including specific measures
                         for environment protection and safety and occupational health procedures will be attached to the
                         Contractors technical specifications and implemented and monitored at the site. These
Public Disclosure Copy




                         international standard measures meet the OP 4.01 requirements; they have been also disclosed in
                         Infoshop in October 2013, although demining is not funded by this project. The actual demining
                         operations will be supervised by an International Consultant during the entire duration of works
                         and will provide assessment of activities progress as well as of implementation and application of
                         environmental protection measures at site in line with IMAS provisions.

                         Social Impacts. At the time of appraisal, a detailed overview of social impacts of the works cannot
                         be made as the detailed design for the main river rehabilitation works proposed along the Sava
                         River banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia is not yet finalized. As a result, ESMF and
                         RPF were prepared to outline the measures and process to be followed for identifying and
                         addressing the social impact and environmental impacts. Once, the sites are identified, the
                         borrower will undertake a screening to identity the potential adverse social impacts and
                         expropriation related impacts. If land acquisition/ resettlement impacts are identified in the
                         screening, then Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated RAP as the case may be will be
                         prepared prior to initiation of the procurement process for the corresponding component/activity
                         and implemented prior to commencement of respective works in accordance with the provisions of
                         RPF. The RPF covers principles, applicable laws in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia, processes
                         for carrying out census and socioeconomic surveys, expropriation processes, entitlements for
                         different types of impacts, and processes for the preparation of plans for project activities
                         involving the implementation arrangements, grievance mechanisms, disclosure, monitoring and

                                                                  Page 11 of 14
                           evaluation.

                           In the case of Component 2 (Brcko Port improvements), the borrower has prepared a draft ARAP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           outlining the process for expropriation and the potential minor expropriation related impacts.
                           However, the ARAP could not be finalized due to delays in verifying the affected land and the
                           extent of losses. The ARAP will be finalized once the details of the affected land are available and
                           the final ARAP will be disclosed prior to issuance of tender documents for the corresponding
                           works.

                           The Task Team will familiarize the borrower, who has experience in the expropriation process
                           under the local laws, with the implementation of the provisions of the ESMF/ESIA and the RPF.
                           The PIU will be strengthened with one Environmental and one Social Safeguards Specialist having
                           suitable skills and qualifications related to environment and social impacts. The Social Safeguards
                           Specialist will be responsible for overseeing the consultants work related to social impacts and
                           also facilitate all required support from the Government in regard to social impacts, expropriation
                           and resettlement.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders of the project are the State Government, the Entities (Federation of Bosnia
                           and Herzegovina, Republika Srpaska), the Brcko District Administration, local municipalities
                           where the river rehabilitation is passing through, the local people, and river users (in particular the
                           owners, operators and occupants of vessels and cargoes). As the project is closely linked to other
                           investments in waterway rehabilitation by Croatia and Serbia, the Governments of Croatia and
                           Serbia are important stakeholders, as well.

                           Consultation mechanism - The draft RPF and ESMF have been discussed in stakeholder
                           consultation workshops in January and April 2013 to seek their feedback and suggestions and
                           incorporate them in the final versions as appropriate. Additionally, during the preparation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ESIA, consultations with the local community and other stakeholders will occur twice at the ToR
                           level and before the draft ESIA will be finalized. The screening process will identify and analyze
                           all relevant stakeholders, apply qualitative (gender-sensitive focus groups and in-depth interviews)
                           and quantitative (household survey) methods to determine their fears and expectations, and assess
                           the potential impacts. The results of the ESIA will determine if anyone is adversely affected by
                           the river rehabilitation works.

                           Public Disclosure - The ESMF draft reports were disclosed on the BiH MoTC website in January
                           (at the level of screening) and April 2013 respectively and made available in the Bank Infoshop in
                           May, 2013 and the updated version on October 4th, 2013 (re-disclosure both in country and
                           Infoshop in local language took place on October 3, 2013). A final RPF has been disclosed locally
                           on October 3rd, 2013 and in the Bank’s Info shop on October 3rd, 2013.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           03-Oct-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        04-Oct-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           17-Aug-2013
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


                                                                      Page 12 of 14
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           03-Sep-2013
                           Comments: Note: In addition to the ESMF that concerns the investments funded by Component
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         1, an EMP for Component 2 has been disclosed in country in October 2012; revised
                                         and re-disclosed in August 2013 on Brcko District website (in September on MCT
                                         website), and in Infoshop on October 4, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           03-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader: Name: Moustafa Baher El-Hefnawy
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                             Date: 28-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                               Date: 28-Oct-2013




                                                                      Page 14 of 14
