                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5986
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Benin                             Project ID:    P143652
                            Project Name:      Benin Multisectoral Food Health Nutrition Project (P143652)
                            Task Team          Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Oct-2013                       Estimated   19-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTHW                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (60%), Other social services (30%), Agricultural extension and research
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Nutrition and food security (75%), Child health (10%), Population and
                                              reproductive health (10%), Other rural development (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      28.00           Total Bank Financing:                  28.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                28.00
                              Total                                                                                      28.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the new project is to increase the coverage and utilization of
                           community-based child growth and nutrition interventions in project areas. The project will establish
                           a decentralized multisectoral platform for the implementation of community-based food, health and
                           nutrition interventions aimed at improving child growth and nutrition outcomes. The new project

                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         will build on the renewed interest in and ownership of food and nutrition outcomes, the enhanced
                         capacity for policy coordination, and the experience from implementing the JSDF supported
                         Community Nutrition Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The direct beneficiaries of this project are children under five years of age, particularly children
                         under two, their mothers and caretakers, pregnant women and adolescents. Other community
                         members and communities at large, the public service delivery agents, local governments, NGOs and
                         line ministries are indirect beneficiaries of the project for support activities in reaching the direct
                         beneficiaries
                         3. Project Description
                         With the decentralization policy, a new cadre of local government now exists. The mobilization of
                         this new cadre is a challenge as well as an opportunity for multi-sectoral food and nutrition
                         programming. These new actors need to be mobilized to strengthen the local management capacity
                         for improving nutrition outcomes. The project will support priority investments as laid out in the
                         Strategic Plan for Food and Nutrition Development (PSDAN) through community action and
                         improved service delivery at the local level, while strengthening the capacity for multi-sectoral
                         coordination by Communal Consultative Groups (CCG) and the Food and Nutrition Council (CAN)
                         for improved food, health and nutrition outcomes.

                         The project will have two components: Component 1 will address broader objectives of
                         strengthening and supporting multi-sectoral action and collaboration at the national and decentralized
                         policy levels needed to properly manage the nutrition agenda and achieve lasting results in nutrition.
                         Component 2 will focus on Commune-level action for the protection and promotion of food and
                         nutrition security of mothers and young children by implementing and scaling up a package of
                         community-based food and nutrition security actions while strengthening the delivery and utilization
                         of essential public food, health and nutrition services. Activities under this component will build on
                         the experience of the Bank-supported Community Nutrition Project (CNP) implemented by Plan
                         Benin in 10 Communes on behalf of the Government of Benin since 2011 (P124191).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Policy and program development, management and coordination (US$ 4.2 million):
                         Effective community-based development is dependent on an enabling institutional environment for
                         support, supervision, monitoring and coordination. Also, impact on nutrition is based not only on
                         direct nutrition interventions, but requires a multisectoral approach that integrates activities from a
                         variety of sectors that impact the various determinants of maternal and child nutrition and survival.
                         Hence, the need to strengthen the coordinating and supervisory role for multisectoral nutrition
                         program planning, management, monitoring, evaluation and coordination of the CAN, line ministries
                         and development partners at central level and the Communal Councils and their stakeholders at the
                         decentralized level.

                         At the decentralized level, Communal Councils are the entry point for community mobilization and
                         development. They will oversee implementation and monitor results. The project will build on the
                         experience of the CNP by organizing the agriculture, health and social affairs sectors as well as
                         NGOs that operate at the local level in CCG which: (i) develop a common results framework for
                         nutrition-sensitive service delivery; and (ii) inform Local Government decision making and make
                         proposals to the Commune authorities for the integration of nutrition in the Commune Development
                         Plans (CDP) and Budget.

                         This project is designed to enable learning through operational research, documentation, and


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         knowledge management to capture the effect and efficiency of the program on food, health and
                         nutrition outcomes, ownership, cost-effectiveness, and other aspects of community mobilization and
                         multisectoral planning and programming for nutrition outcomes. Thus, operational research and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         process evaluations will be a key feature of the project to strengthen the learning from this
                         experience.

                         This component will support: (i) long-term technical assistance for capacity building of the
                         Permanent Secretariat of the CAN (SP CAN); (ii) joint planning with sectors and stakeholders (e.g.,
                         the National Association of Communes of Benin - ANCB) to develop and support integrated
                         nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive sector policies; (iii) orientation and in-service training
                         workshops with stakeholders to improve coordination, implementation, and management of nutrition
                         and food security at all levels; (iv) monitoring, reporting, surveillance and operational research; and
                         (v) advocacy and strategic communication to elevate the topic of food security, nutrition and health
                         at all levels. In addition to consultant services, workshop and training, and communication, this
                         component will finance material and equipment, and operating costs.

                         Component 2: Community mobilization and services delivery strengthening (US$ 23.8 million): This
                         component represents the operational core of the project, focusing on social and behavior change
                         communication and service delivery at community level for the improvement of food security,
                         nutrition, and health conditions. This component will support the implementation of community-
                         based interventions centered around: (i) growth monitoring and promotion, including individualized
                         counseling on IYCF, integrated management of childhood illnesses (IMCI), and adequate water,
                         sanitation and hygiene practices; (ii) community management of acute malnutrition (CMAM); (iii)
                         health and nutrition needs of pregnant women and adolescents; and (iv) food security through
                         production, transformation, and diversification to improve availability, access and utilization of
                         nutritious foods; household food diversification will be achieved through small-scale fruit, vegetable
                         and crop production, transformative approaches to managing food, and consumption. These
                         interventions have been identified as essential for the improvement of nutritional outcomes, most
                         recently in the Lancet Maternal and Child Nutrition Series (2013), and represent the “short-route?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interventions under the PSDAN. Many of these activities involve social and behavior change
                         communication including community-based promotion of key family practices (i.e., the 12 family
                         and community practices that promote child survival, growth and development), health care seeking
                         behaviors for improved maternal and child health and nutrition outcomes, hygiene and sanitation,
                         and household food diversification through small-scale production, transformation and consumption.

                         The community interventions will be implemented through Commune-level subprojects by NGOs in
                         partnership with the Communes; i.e., one NGO taking the lead for community mobilization in one
                         Commune on behalf of the Commune authorities. The scope of services in the terms of reference
                         (TOR) will lay down specific requirements such as minimum coverage of children under five,
                         adolescents, pregnant and lactating women with community (selected) interventions as described
                         above; use of community registers; monitoring and evaluation; reporting; and community
                         restitutions. A detailed list of key interventions (e.g., basic package) is attached in Annex 2.

                         NGOs have the advantage of representing community interests in a different manner than sectors or
                         Communes. Therefore, they contribute to the checks and balance in agreed roles and responsibilities
                         for community development. In addition, NGOs play an important role in facilitating community
                         mobilization and organization; and can be instrumental in strengthening capacity of local actors and
                         stakeholders. NGOs and Communes are horizontal structures that are better suited for community
                         dialogue and development than vertically organized sectors. The subprojects will be developed by

                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                         the NGOs in partnership with the Commune authorities and implementation will be coordinated by
                         the CCG of which the NGO is member to ensure complementarity of roles and responsibilities at
                         Commune level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on the common results framework and adhering annual work programs by the CCG, this
                         component will provide financial support to Communes to strengthen the delivery of harmonized and
                         coordinated food, health and nutrition services (e.g., screening and management of severe acute
                         malnutrition, micronutrient supplementation, treatment of common infectious diseases, extension
                         services on food production and transformation of nutritionally rich and diversified foods, and
                         household and community sanitation) to complement the community interventions by the NGOs. In
                         addition, the service delivery personnel are important actors to help train, guide and provide technical
                         oversight of the work by the community actors. In addition to the subprojects, this component will
                         finance goods (including pharmaceutical products, material and equipment), training and workshops,
                         communication, and operating costs.

                         The activities under this component will be progressively scaled up to cover at least 40 Communes
                         out of the country’s 77 in all the 12 “Départements?. Local Government will be consulted in the
                         identification of priority Communes for the roll out of this program using objective criteria and
                         receiving guidance from the Permanent Secretariat of the CAN (SP CAN). The majority of the
                         priority Communes will be rural but some may also be found in peri-urban areas. The Communal
                         subprojects will start in 10 Communes in the first year, move into another 15 Communes in the
                         second year and add another 15 Communes in year three. The first 10 Communes will come from
                         five “Départements?.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         N/A

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                          BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                          4.12




                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              N/A. Project activities will have negligible to minimal adverse environmental and social impacts.
                              Production of nutritious foods will be done at the household level and will not require large-scale
                              environmental mitigation measures and pest management. The project does not involve acquisition
                              of land leading to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                             Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                             be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                             issue, been prepared
                             Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the OP?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                        Page 5 of 6
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)                       Date: 28-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
