                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC6323

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Croatia                           Project ID:       P147499
                            Project Name:       Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe (P147499)
                            Task Team           Jean-Francois Marteau
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           22-Sep-2014                       Estimated         15-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      ECSTR                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Railways (80%), Public administration- Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Debt management and fiscal sustainability (20%), Other public sector
                                                governance (25%), Regional integration (35%), Other social deve lopment
                                                (10%), Trade facilitation and market access (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                        Total Bank Financing:          75.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                Amount
                              Borrower                                                                          25.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                             75.00
                              Total                                                                            100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The higher level objective of the project is to support to the overall sustainability of Croatia’s railway
                           sector and the efficiency of its key corridors. A longer term reform program for the Croatian railway
                           sector will be reflected in the sector strategy under preparation.

                           Against this backdrop, the proposed project will support fundamental yet shorter term needs of the
                         sector. The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Sustainable Croatian Railways in Europe
                         Project is to improve operational efficiency and accountability of the public rail sector, and improve
                         connection of the Rijeka port to the rail portion of the Trans-European Network.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The project would comprise three components, as follows:

                         Component 1: Support to sector governance

                         MMATI’s (Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure) role is currently assumed
                         with limited resources and requires further support in several key areas. The Bank assistance may be
                         provided to define public service obligations with HZI and HZP and the set-up of a reliable data
                         collection system that would allow the MMATI to adequately manage funding of passenger services
                         and infrastructure maintenance. In addition, support will be required to: (i) help define the optimal
                         network needed to carry out rail operations (as the network was designed over the 20th century based
                         on another political and economic reality) and (ii) to evaluate logistics performance and
                         competitiveness of the main corridors. Lastly, as the MMATI also holds an important shareholder
                         role in various companies, the proposed project could support the State as policy maker, purchaser of
                         service and shareholder. Such a support could include setting up of a unit and defining its modus
                         operandi for better management of transport State Owned Enterprises (SOEs).

                         Component 2: Support to companies’ restructuring

                         Support to retrenchment in HZI and HZP. Support to retrenchment in HZI and HZP. With needs as
                         yet not covered by the government and other International Financial Institutions (IFI) financing, the
                         project will contribute financing for labor restructuring. This could include financing of end-of-
                         employment, severance and compensation payments for part of the employees whose positions are
                         planned to be made redundant during the period 2014-16. The proposed financing would finance the
                         associated end of employment payments, including (i) statutory severance and additional severance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and payments specified in the labor contracts. For staff not of retirement age, the project may provide
                         support services for finding alternative employment, including job outplacement and retraining
                         services, counseling and advisory support and employment intermediation. Involving the Bank in the
                         staff downsizing gives all parties comfort that it will be carried out using optimal social development
                         practice, including accountability measures and sound systems of governance, effective and
                         transparent stakeholder engagement and communication approaches and independently verified
                         reporting arrangements and monitoring and evaluation processes.


                         Support to the restructuring plans of HZI and HZP. The project will finance technical assistance and
                         software to both companies in order to modernize operations and facilitate the implementation of the
                         restructuring plan. This will include financial and asset management systems, reorganization, and
                         improvement of operations. The Bank will support preparation of a business plan for HZP that will
                         integrate activities that the company is currently undertaking (such as preparation of a new ticketing
                         system) and changes that are planned for the medium term (fleet modernization, revised Passenger
                         Service Contracts, etc.). HZI management capacity for large scale projects may need to be
                         strengthened in light of the ambitious investment plans ahead. Moreover, additional private sector
                         participation in the sector can still be sought, for example by implementing leasing arrangements for
                         new trains/rolling stock, asset management, performance based contracting for infrastructure
                         maintenance and Public Private Partnership arrangement for station management, but these and the
                         support that the Bank may give will be discussed further during preparation which is ongoing.

                         Component 3: Enabling investment to increase the system efficiency
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Infrastructure development. HZI network operations still suffer from lack of investment in
                         development, and are one of the key deterrents to the use of train for passenger services, including in
                         densely populated areas. Competitiveness of cargo transport also needs to rely on improved corridor
                         connectivity and integration into the European network, to allow larger and continuous trade flows.
                         Many of the related investments cannot be funded by EU funds, while potential gains in efficiency
                         and competitiveness could be significant in the short-term. In this respect, the rehabilitation of the
                         rail line segments from Rijeka to Skrljevo and the passenger side of Rijeka railway station (corridor
                         Vb) will be assessed during preparation. Financing under the project may be possible depending on
                         resources, and only if the level of readiness is sufficient. .

                         Periodic maintenance and rehabilitation. The project could help finance some backlog of
                         rehabilitation in segments that have exceeded their design life. These should be based on clear
                         efficiency objectives, for example, to decrease both infrastructure maintenance and passenger train
                         operating costs. Track rehabilitation in areas which serve a large population and linkages to major
                         socio-economic centers would be considered in priority. The project could either contribute to the
                         overall rehabilitation program through supply of inputs (ballast, sleepers, rails), or fund specific
                         rehabilitation contracts. This would depend on the assessment of the procurement implications of the
                         various options and of their cost effectiveness. The principle behind this proposal would be to secure
                         rehabilitation funding which has been lacking for many years.

                         Access to the Rijeka Port. The Port of Rijeka Authority is funding the design and environmental
                         studies for: a) the intermodal terminal linking of the Zagreb Container Terminal (ZCT) and the main
                         freight station in Rijeka, and b) the reorganization of the Rijeka freight station itself as part of the
                         Rijeka Gateway II Project. Initial estimates show that the total investment cost in ZCT rail access is
                         around EUR 40 million, of which around EUR 30 million is to be covered by the HZI (marshaling
Public Disclosure Copy




                         yard) and the rest funded by PRA or the concessionaire (intermodal yard). The proposed project
                         would finance the HZI component.

                         Safety and Environmental Liability: In principle, HZI plans to fund with other sources its main rail-
                         road crossing automation, but the system still has environmental liabilities that pose risk to safety and
                         the environment, especially in the Botovo facility (tank and freight wagon washing station) near one
                         of the Drava River tributaries. Clean-up of this facility may be envisaged under the project and costs
                         close to EUR 10 million.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Infrastructure developments and access to Rijeka Port subprojects are located in the City of Rijeka
                         area as are closely linked with the Rijeka Gateway II project. Rehabilitation of the rail line segment
                         from Rijeka to Skrljevo would include railway lines upgrade and double tracking on selected
                         sections, electrification and signaling. The current line is partly located within the city of Rijeka and
                         would require, on some urban segments, widening. At this stage of the project preparation, this
                         investment is just considered for financing and not confirmed by the Word Bank or the Borrower.
                         Rehabilitation of the passengers’ railway station in Rijeka is also envisaged, and would include
                         changes in the main building and tracks/yard but all within the existing corridor/area and would not
                         require any additional space.
                           Under the Access to the Rijeka Port sub component, the project would finance: a) the intermodal
                           terminal linking of the Zagreb Container Terminal (ZCT) and the main freight station in Rijeka, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           b) the reorganization of the Rijeka freight station itself. The current lanes in the marshaling yard
                           would be reconstructed and part of those connected to adjacent ZCT, while the remaining would be
                           rehabilitated for the HZI purposes. The project would finance only the marshaling yard within HZI
                           land (the lines inside the terminal being responsibility of the Port Authority; however, the design and
                           EIA (Environment Impact Assessment) study would be prepared as one. All the works would be
                           done within the existing railway corridor /area.

                           The periodic maintenance and rehabilitation subprojects are not yet identified and might be located
                           all around the country. These might include change of sleepers, electrification, signaling,
                           rehabilitation of drainage, etc.

                           The tank and freight wagon washing station, located in the village of Botovo, represents one of the
                           11 environmental liability hot spots in Croatia. For more than 30 years, an old quarry near river
                           Drava (bordering with Hungary) was used as a depot for waste waters originating from cleaning
                           wagons carrying oil, pesticides, and other type of cargo. Technical solutions and other environmental
                           due diligence documents have been prepared within the last 4-7 years. The financing of this
                           subproject has not been confirmed by the borrower.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           As a large infrastructure company complying with the national and EU environmental legislation,
                           HZI has capacity for environmental compliance; however it has not recently participated in any WB
                           projects and therefore lacks specific WB safeguards policy knowledge.

                           There are two departments in HZI dealing with environmental issues. The Department for
                           Development deals with coordination of preparation of essential studies like EIA required for the
                           project preparation, while the Department for Environmental and Fire Protection deals with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental issues related to maintenance and rehabilitation (waste minimization, water and
                           wastewater treatment, environmental legacy liabilities like Botovo, education of staff on the ground,
                           etc). The Department for Development has one staff in charge for environmental protection and the
                           majority of services related to environmental issues are outsourced. The Department for
                           Environmental and Fire Protection has five staff with environmental background, regularly attending
                           environmental trainings. Both departments coordinate on a daily basis.
                           Given the above, it can be concluded that the capacity for preparation and implementation of the
                           project is sufficient. Additional training of the staff regarding the WB safeguards policies and
                           assistance in preparation of Terms of References (ToRs) for environmental due diligence and review
                           of the same would be provided during project preparation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Daniel P. Owen (ECSSO)
                           Natasa Vetma (ECSEN)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes   The proposed investments will have a range of
                         BP 4.01                                 impacts to the environment ranging from minor
                                                                 to significant.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 If financed, Infrastructure development sub
                                                                 component will most probably require widening
                                                                 in the urban areas and as a consequence of
                                                                 adding an additional line will increase traffic
                                                                 and for that reason might presents significant
                                                                 impact to the environment.
                                                                 The periodic maintenance and rehabilitation
                                                                 works present temporary and site specific
                                                                 environmental impacts which could be
                                                                 mitigated by the preparation of site specific
                                                                 Environment Management Plans (EMPs).
                                                                 Access to port of Rijeka impacts will also be
                                                                 site specific and would not require widening of
                                                                 the marshaling yard or increasing number of
                                                                 lanes. Although site specific, the team agreed on
                                                                 the preparation of an EIA for these investments.
                                                                 The EIA will also undergo national EIA
                                                                 procedure.
                                                                 As Botovo presents one of the major
                                                                 environmental liability hotspots in Croatia if
                                                                 financed, safety and environmental liability
                                                                 component would require full review and if
                                                                 needed update of all technical documents
                                                                 including remediation plan and EIA.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The railway station in Rijeka is listed as a
                         BP 4.11                                 historical monument and is likely to be part of
                                                                 the rehabilitation of the Rijeka rail interface.
                                                                 Most of the other project rehabilitation works
                                                                 will not impact physical or cultural resources.
                                                                 Due to possible earth works, EIA and EMP will
                                                                 have chance finds clauses.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    TBD   Widening for the construction of parallel lines
                         4.12                                    in urban areas might require expropriation. This
                                                                 will depend on the final scope of works. This
                                                                 rating will be confirmed during preparation if
                                                                 the upgrading of the Rijeka Skreljevo facility is
                                                                 confirmed for financing
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The following is suggested:
                                      (i) for the Infrastructure Development subcomponents ToR for EIA with EMPs as well as the
                                      documents would be prepared and approved by the WB during project preparation;
                                      (ii) for the Periodic Maintenance and Rehabilitation subcomponent, prior to appraisal sample
                                      EMPs would be prepared for several known investments and sample EMPs for different types of
                                      maintenance and rehabilitations. These would be publicly disclosed and discussed;
                                      (iii) for the Access to Rijeka Port subcomponent EIA and EMP for planned investment financed
                                      by the project would be prepared prior to appraisal and publicly disclosed at least two times and
                                      discussed following national and the WB procedures;
                                      (iv) for Safety and Environmental Liability subcomponent all documents would be reviewed and
                                      updated during project preparation; and
                                      (v) A Social Impact Assessment will be launched prior to project appraisal to discern key social
                                      impacts of labor retrenchment and line closures generated by the government program
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Jean-Francois Marteau
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 16-Jan-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Juan Gaviria (SM)                                                                                                    Date: 17-Jan-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
