INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12468
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Feb-2015, 03-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Myanmar                    Project ID:  P147629
Project Name: Agricultural Development Support Project (P147629)
Task Team       Paavo Eliste
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Feb-2015                Estimated    23-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Irrigation and drainage (40%), Agricultural extension and research (30%), Crops
(30%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Other rural development (20%), Climate
change (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               100.00
Total                                                                     100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase crop yields and cropping intensity in the selected
existing irrigation sites in Bago East, Nay Pyi Taw, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 20


﻿Project Beneficiaries are farm households who have access to irrigated land in selected irrigation
schemes in Bago East, Sagaing, Mandalay, and Nay Pyi Taw regions. In addition the project would
benefit households in targeted communities who may not have access to irrigated land through
participation in extension activities which would cover the whole grow irrigation areas, including
non-irrigated lands.
Approach. The project will use phased approach which allows for flexible identification of the
number and size of target gravity irrigation perimeters. It is suggested that the project
implementation will start with smaller and technically simple irrigation sites while carrying out
studies for more complex sites. Local communities will be consulted to seek their inputs and
agreement to participate in project activities. The specific boundaries and features of the irrigation
schemes within these sites will be determined as an output of the technical feasibility studies which
include relevant environmental and social assessment to be prepared during the first year of the
project implementation.
Components. The proposed project has four components: (i) Irrigation and Drainage Management
(US$78.4 million); (ii) Farm Advisory and Technical Services 17.2 million); (iii) Project
Coordination and Management (US$4.4 million); and (iv) Contingent Emergency Response (US$0
million):
Component 1. Irrigation and Drainage Management
This component aims to enhance the more responsive and reliable provision of irrigation and
drainage services in the project irrigation sites. The component will involve (i) capacity development
of the irrigation management institutions, and (ii) rehabilitation of existing gravity irrigation and
drainage infrastructure, which includes improvement of management of selected existing reservoirs
and irrigation systems. The project would support the following sub-components:
1.1 Strengthening Irrigation and Drainage Management Institutions. This sub-component will
O
support: (i) expert meetings, training and capacity building of the Irrigation Department and
Agricultural Coordination Committees (ACC); (ii) awareness campaigns; (iii) formation and training
of water user groups (WUGs); and (iv) development of information and decision support systems on
the availability and use of water resources, and irrigation and drainage infrastructure in the country.
1.2 Rehabilitation and Improvement of Irrigation and Drainage Infrastructure. This sub-component
will support: (i) technical feasibility studies and designs for the rehabilitation and improvement of
selected existing irrigation sites, including preparation of the site specific environmental and social
safeguards documents; (ii) rehabilitation and improvement of existing main conveyance, flow control
and sediment management systems, access roads, and de-siltation of the project irrigation and
drainage sites; (iii) dam safety enhancement measures for dams serving the project irrigation sites as
monitoring instrumentation and remedial works; (iv) rehabilitation and improvement of existing on-
farm water management infrastructure in project irrigation sites; and (v) carrying out of 2-3 land
improvement pilots in the project irrigation sites.
1.3 Improvement of Land Records and Practices. This sub-component will support: (i) renewal of
cadastral maps, land records, and land use right certificates in the project irrigation sites; (ii) piloting
of new inclusive approaches to land improvement and property valuation according to international
best practices; (iii) community awareness campaigns in the project irrigation sites on land rights and
Page 2 of 20


﻿transactions in the land market; and (iv) a study tour for MOAI officials to a countries with advanced
land administration systems to inform the carrying out of activities under this sub-component.
Component 2: Farm Advisory and Technical Services
U
This component seeks to enhance MOAI farm advisory services at target districts which host selected
irrigation schemes to improve farmer crop choices and increase farm productivity. The project would
support the following sub-components and activities:
2.1 Crop Variety Development and Seed Multiplication. This sub-component will support: (i)
carrying out of adaptive trials in the project irrigation sites to evaluate the performance of various
crop varieties; (ii) production of breeder and foundation seeds for farmers in the project irrigation
sites; (iii) multiplication of registered seeds for farmers in the project irrigation sites; (iv)
multiplication of certified seeds for farmers in the project irrigation sites; and (v) provision of
technical assistance to strengthen public seed inspection services to ensure the quality of seeds
produced under the project.
2.2 Soil Management. This sub-component will support: (i) mapping of soil characteristics in the
project irrigation sites and development of fertilizer use recommendations for each of the soil types;
(ii) evaluation of the fertilizer recommendations for soils prevailing in the project irrigation sites; (iii)
provision of training and technical assistance to MOAI extension staff on soil nutrition and
appropriate fertilizer application rates at the farm level; (iv) development of extension materials and
provision of training and technical assistance to farmers in the project irrigation sites on improved
plant nutrition and soil conservation practices; and (v) strengthening of public fertilizer inspection
services to ensure the quality of fertilizers used by farmers under the project.
2.3 Plant protection. The sub-component will support: (i) carrying out of pest surveys in the project
irrigation sites; (ii) establishment of mobile units for identifying pests and diseases in the project
irrigation sites; (iii) upgrading of MOAI laboratory facilities for the identification of pests and
diseases; (iv) provision of training and technical assistance to farmers in the project irrigation sites on
crop protection; (v) provision of training and technical assistance to MOAI staff and farmers in the
project irrigation sites on IPM techniques; and (vi) review of measures required to comply with
sanitary and phytosanitary requirements for Myanmar agricultural exports.
2.4 Extension of Modem Farming Practices. This sub-component will support: (i) carrying out of on-
field demonstrations for testing of new crop varieties and extension of farm technologies in the
project irrigation sites; (ii) monitoring of the multiplication of certified seeds under sub-component
2.1; (iii) rehabilitation and construction of small village extension education centers for holding
farmer training courses under the project; (iv) carrying out of studies on post-harvest practices of
crops and analysis of agriculture supply chains; (v) carrying out of pilot activities to demonstrate
post-harvest value adding food processing in the project irrigation sites; and (vi) training of farmers
in the project irrigation sites on modem farming practices through on-farm demonstrations or farmer
field schools and development of related educational materials.
2.5 Farm Mechanization. This sub-component will support: (i) provision of technical assistance and
modern farm machinery, equipment and education materials to the MOAI mechanization training
center in Meikhtila, Mandalay region to develop modem training methodologies, materials,
workshops and vocational training; and (ii) provision of farm machinery, equipment, and other
assistance for the operations of MOoAI mechanization service stations in the project regions to
Page 3 of 20


﻿provide services to farmers in the project irrigation sites.
Component 3: Project Coordination and Management
O
)         The Project Management Unit will be established, which will be responsible for the overall
coordination of the project implementation and fiduciary arrangements.
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response
The objective of this zero component is to allow a rapid reallocation of funds from other components
to provide rapid response support to disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic events as needed.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project irrigation sites are located in well-established agricultural production areas in the Nay
Pyi Taw, Bago-East, Mandalay, and Sagaing regions. These regions account for about 80 percent of
the country's areas equipped with irrigation and drainage infrastructure. The project would target
about 8 irrigation sites which cover about 35,000 ha of net irrigable area and which may span over 16
townships. The specific boundaries and features of the irrigation schemes within these sites will be
determined as an output of the technical feasibility studies which include relevant environmental and
social assessments to be prepared during the project implementation.
The project target regions are also the areas with high rural population densities. While ethnic
minorities are known to be present, the vast majority of population in project areas belongs to ethnic
Bamar. The project would utilize only surface water resources through, which is being delivered
through gravity fed irrigation systems. Water resource used by irrigation schemes of proposed project
sites are tributaries of Sittoung river (Sin The and Swa Chaung schemes), Chindwin river (North
Yamar scheme) and Ayerwaddy river (Male Nattaung scheme). The project will not construct new
dams/reservoirs or alter their height or capacity and will not use groundwater resources, and there are
no plans to utilize groundwater resources. There are 230 small to medium dams and associated
irrigation schemes on its tributaries and small streams, but the mainstream remains undeveloped.
Many of these schemes have been established during colonial times and during 1980s and 1990s.
The vast majority of these schemes are in the size of 5,000 to 10,000 ha.
The project sites will be selected through feasibility studies to be completed after the project
effectiveness. These feasibility studies will provide information about site-specific social and
environmental impacts. The pre-selected four irrigation sites to be confirmed by the feasibility
studies have physical characteristics such as bank erosions, sedimentation along main canals, and
poor drainage systems. It is assumed that most of the eight irrigation sites to be supported by the
project have similar characteristics. In addition, dam seepage and water quality due to mining
operation in the catchment area are considered major problem for improving the efficiency in the
Male Nattaung irrigation scheme.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (GSURR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoru Ueda (GWADR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
Page 4 of 20


﻿6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes           The project is assigned as an environmental category "B"
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  primarily due to its potential environment and social
impacts that are assessed to be less adverse and largely
confined within the project area of influence. This is
because of the rehabilitation nature of the proposed
irrigation and dam safety works and limited scale, which
will take place mainly within the footprint of existing
irrigated systems on established agriculture lands (e.g.,
typical works on dam body will include repair of slopes
and dam crest covers; repair of existing spillways;
installation of monitoring equipment; repair of gate
devices and provision of infiltration blankets to reduce
seepage; and surfacing of access road where necessary).
Specifically, the project will finance physical works
related to rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance of
main conveyance, flow control and sediment management
systems and de-siltation of existing irrigation and
drainage infrastructure; rehabilitation of on-farm water
management infrastructure and land leveling in selected
systems and possible expansion of on-farm irrigation and
drainage services to new areas within existing irrigation
command systems; and, irrigation site planning and
preparation, including pre-feasibility studies for building a
pipeline of potential investment projects and full technical
feasibility studies for selected sites. The physical
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure will not involve
Q)                                               significant structural modifications or alter operation (e.g.,
increase in height of dams or in reservoirs capacity).
The envisaged investments are typical to similar small
scale agriculture development projects and are not
expected to have significant adverse environmental and
social impacts. Temporary negative impacts are related to
small scale construction activities, which are limited to
the rehabilitation and improvement of existing irrigated
agriculture infrastructure. The lack of technical
information of the specific location of rehabilitation
works planned within the selected schemes during
preparation requires the preparation of an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF).
The ESMF was prepared by MOAI as the main project
safeguard document. The ESMF provides the overall
Page 5 of 20


﻿process for screening subprojects and activities for
environment and social impacts, conducting the
assessment of environment and social impacts of specific
subprojects and activities during the project
implementation once the technical details are known; it
also provides guidance on the range of measures to
effectively address impacts while adhering to relevant
existing environmental protection laws, regulations and
standards in Myanmar, as well as with the WB's
Safeguards Policies and international good practice. The
ESMF also provides information on the type, level and
depth of environmental and social impact assessments
(ESIAs/EMPs/ECoPs) required for each of the
investments and conduct cumulative impact assessments,
where relevant, based upon the outcomes of the screening.
The Terms of References (TORs) for various technical
studies, including the feasibility studies of investments,
will incorporate environmental and social impact
assessments and considerations to ensure that safeguard
issues and measures are mainstreamed into studies and
advisory services. The TORs will be submitted to the
Regional Safeguard Secretariat for review and approval.
The draft ESMF has been disclosed in country in English
on January 16, 2015 and in local language on February 2,
2015 as well as in English in Infoshop on January 20,
2015, and it was subject to public consultations at 4
potential project sites as well as in Yangon during
February 3-10, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          There are no known protected areas in the schemes
4.04                                  foreseen to be covered by the project. The physical
interventions (including those proposed for improving the
safety and operation of the existing dams associated with
the funded irrigation schemes) are highly unlikely to lead
to conversion or degradation of critical or other natural
habitats. The ESMF assessment notes that there are no
known endangered or critical fauna or flora in the area of
the four irrigation schemes. However, given that the
proposed project irrigation schemes for Sin The and Swa
are situated within Sittoun basin area, while Male
Nattuaung and North Yamar are lying under Ayerwaddy
basin area and Chindwin basin area, respectively, there
could be potential impacts to natural habitats such as
rivers, wetlands or riverine vegetation downstream.
ESIAs to be conducted during implementation assess
project impacts on natural habitats and corresponding
Page 6 of 20


﻿measures will be included in the ESMP.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The project will not finance activities that will affect
forest, forest health and forest-dependent communities.
The draft ESMF findings concluded that there is no forest
or any protected vegetation in irrigated areas although
different forest types have been variably observed in the
upstream catchment area of each irrigation scheme. The
rapid assessment made as part of ESMF preparation
observed the forest cover changes in the 4 catchment
areas and deforestation rates are already high (e.g., 50%
in Sin The 1990 vs 2013; 45% in North Yamar 2000 vs
2013; 19% in Swa 2000 vs 2013, and 12% in Male
Nattaung (2002 vs 2013).
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           A potential long-term environmental impact of the project
implementation would be the possible increase in traces
of agro-chemicals in groundwater, drainage networks, and
nearby streams. The project will include promotion of
integrated pest management and production systems. The
procurement of chemical pesticides is not allowed under
the project. The project will demonstrate the use of
organic fertilizers (e.g. green manuring) as part of
extension demonstrations of technical packages, which
are legally allowed for use in country. However, the
improved irrigation facilities and intensification of crop
systems may induce some pesticides use leading to
increased usage. Integrated Pest Management practices
will be implemented in all irrigation areas based on the
Integrated Pest Management Plan Framework developed
during preparation. Site-specific IPMPs will be developed
and promoted during implementation.
Physical Cultural        Yes          Archaeological and cultural heritage sites have not been
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  found in the project area, although there are religious
buildings such as monasteries and pagodas in project
villages. Relevant officials confirmed that there are no
sacred sites, graveyards and/or burial places along the
canals in the project areas. Since detailed design and exact
locations of rehabilitation have yet to be done, PCR
policy is triggered. Detailed assessments of the project
impacts on PCRs will be undertaken during site specific
ESIAs for each of the irrigated schemes to be financed by
the project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes          The project would rehabilitate existing irrigation schemes
BP 4.10                               and finance land improvement pilots in four target
regions. The project irrigation schemes and land
improvement pilot sites will be identified based the
feasibility study to be conducted during implementation.
Page 7 of 20


﻿The social assessment was conducted during preparation
for four pre-identified irrigation schemes because they
demonstrate socioeconomic and demographic
characteristics, including the presence of ethnic
minorities, typical of irrigated areas in project provinces.
Some ethnic minority farmers are found to be present
where irrigation schemes that may be included in the
project exist in target regions.
Ethnic farmers who receive water from project irrigation
schemes will benefit from improved access to irrigation
water. Some ethnic farmers may lose limited farmland if
canal realignment and other project supported civil works
result in loss of land or assets. However, such negative
impacts are anticipated to be limited in scale. Also, it is
anticipated that few local people including ethnic
minorities who do not directly benefit from improved
access to irrigation water will lose assets.
Such impacts on farmland and private assets will be
addressed per Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
Framework (LRPF). Land improvement pilots are not
anticipated to cause significant negative impacts on ethnic
minorities other than limited losses of land and assets.
Loss of farmland and assets due to land improvement
pilot will be addressed per LRPF.
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was
developed and attached to the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). Ethnic Minority
screening will be carried out during implementation per
IPPF and, if ethnic minority communities who meet the
eligibility criteria of OP 4.10 are found to be present in
project area of influence, a site specific Social Assessment
for the Ethnic Minority community including free, prior
and informed consultations leading to their broad
community support will be conducted in line with OP
4.10, and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
developed.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project will not result in large scale physical
OP/BP 4.12                           relocation of households or loss of land. Although not
anticipated at this stage, if there is any physical relocation
it will be of limited scope. Furthermore, the rehabilitation
and capacity improvement of primary and secondary
canals will require realignments which may result in
losses of parts of land and/ or assets of farmers on the
canal embankment. Civil works will be undertaken in
Page 8 of 20


﻿crop idle seasons to avoid temporary land occupation to
the extent possible.
A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework
(LPRF) was prepared which provides policies and
procedures that apply to loss of land and other private
assets that may occur as a result of the project. The Land
Acquisition Action Plans (LAAP) will be developed
during implementation based on the provisions under
LRPF.
Land improvements pilots will also be conducted in 2-3
sites which may result in a limited loss of farm plots for
participating farmers. The impacts are generally not
significant as it is foreseen that the majority of farmers
will lose less than 10 percent of the productive assets such
as farmland. Here again no physical relocation of
households is anticipated. It is expected that the majority
of impacts will be addressed through the voluntary
exchange of land between farmers, and the increased
productivity and income that will result from land
improvement pilots.
A third party service provider will help rights holders and
land users within the boundary of the pilot land
improvement sites mediate between themselves for land
swaps and provide in-kind assistance to help farmers
when needed to help restore their livelihood. The protocol
and conditions of all voluntary donations are provided in
detail the LRPF will apply to land improvement. Farmers
will be informed that, in the event that income is not fully
restored after two cropping seasons, they are entitled to
income support and compensation for losses of income.
Farmers who decide not to participate in the land
improvement pilot have the option to leave the farmland
with compensation and livelihood support if needed.
Civil works will be carried out to improve the safety and
operation of dams from which the project irrigation
schemes will receive water, based on the
recommendations of the dam safety study conducted
during the preparation. Feasibility studies that will be
carried out during implementation will identify the types
and scale of civil works that the project will finance.
Private land will unlikely be affected, and access to
natural resources will also not be affected.
Page 9 of 20


﻿The rehabilitation of access roads may require loss of
private assets or land, since the exact irrigation schemes
to be included in the project scope are not determined yet.
In such an event, compensation will be provided at
replacement value for loss of land or assets and
livelihoods restored if applicable.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes         Although the project will not finance construction of new
a         4.37                                dams or structural and significant operation changes in the
existing ones, the irrigation systems financed by the
project would draw water directly from specialized
irrigation reservoirs formed by a number of existing dams.
A due diligence of the four dams identified during
preparation has been conducted during the project
preparation to assess their safety and integrity and a Dam
Safety and Integrity Report was prepared in line with OP/
BP 4.37 for these four dams. The Report provides
recommendations for works related to dam safety and
repairs which may include undertaking bathymetric
survey to assess actual sediment yield; preparing
Instrumentation Plan and Installing Monitoring
Instruments (benchmarks, piezometers and "V" notches);
embankment and spillway repairs; clearing of the trees
and bushes at the downstream slope and toe area of the
dams. The final choice of dam safety repair works
depends on the outcome of the technical feasibility
studies. During the project preparation, the framework of
the Emergency Preparation Plan (EPP) was prepared,
based on which the full-fledged EPP will be prepared
during project implementation.
A Dam Safety assessment will be carried out for the
remaining dams to be identified during implementation.
Four plans will be prepared for large dams, namely:
Construction Supervision and Quality Assurance Plan;
Instrumentation Plan; EPP; and 0 & M Plan. In addition,
an Independent Dam Safety Expert will be hired by the
project to make sure requirements of OP 4.37 are
reviewed independently and are met.
Projects on International  Yes      The Ayeyarwady rises in the Himalayas, bisects Myanmar
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                from north to south and empties through a nine-armed
delta into the Bay of Bengal. A small portion of the
catchment areas that feed two of the tributaries of the
river (the Maykha and the Malikha) are located in China.
The Malikha tributary in turn is fed by a sub-tributary
originating within India. This meets the definition of an
International Waterway as stipulated in paragraph 1 of the
WB OP 7.50 on International Waterways, although the
Page 10 of 20


﻿combined flow outside of Myanmar is estimated to be less
than 1 percent. OP 7.50 applies since the project will
finance the rehabilitation and improvement of
management of irrigation and drainage infrastructure and
associated reservoirs in the Sagaing and Mandalay
Regions, including related feasibility studies and
engineering designs. The project will rehabilitate and
improve existing gravity irrigation and drainage schemes
in the Sagaing and Mandalay regions which are
exclusively located in tributaries of the Ayeyarwady River
with their catchments fully located in Myanmar territory.
However, the exact irrigation schemes that will be
rehabilitated under the project will be determined
following detailed feasibility studies. Nonetheless, the
project will not finance any investments which would lead
to water abstraction rates significantly above the original
abstraction rates. In opposite, the rehabilitation and
operational improvement will enhance the reliability and
flexibility of water delivery services to the farmers in
existing irrigation systems to improve their productivity,
to enable crop diversification and to reduce production
risks. Hence, the project is not expected to adversely
affect the quality or quantity of water flows to other
riparians and will not be adversely affected by other
riparians' possible water use. On this basis, the Bank has
determined that the proposed project does not require
riparian notification in accordance paragraph 7(a) of OP
7.50.
Projects in Disputed     No            The project is not located in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated category "B" in line with the WB OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
primarily due to the rehabilitation nature of the proposed irrigation works and limited scale of
works, which will take place mainly within the footprint of existing irrigated systems on
established agriculture lands, as well of the dam safety improvement linked to existing irrigation
dams (e.g., typical works will include repair of slopes and dam crest covers; repair of existing
spillways; installation of monitoring equipment; repair of gate devices and provision of infiltration
blankets to reduce seepage; and surfacing of access road where necessary). In addition, the project
will also finance farm advisory and technical services and institutional strengthening, among other
activities. The irrigation sites will be selected against economic, technical, social and
environmental criteria agreed with MOAI. It is expected that the project would target up to 8
existing irrigation sites in four project regions. Implementation of irrigation and drainage
infrastructure and land improvements investments on farmer fields under Component 1 are mainly
Page 11 of 20


﻿rehabilitation by their nature and are not expected to have significant negative environment and
social impacts. In 2-3 selected systems among those where the project will rehabilitate irrigation
and drainage infrastructure, the project will also pilot land improvement. The project will also
promote farmers' participation in irrigation management through Water User Groups (WUG), and
O
improve their access to new skills and knowledge about farming skills which will serve to expand
their cropping choices and optimize their resource use.
Potential negative environmental impacts could include (i) construction related damage caused by
contractors during construction activities which are limited to the rehabilitation and improvement
of existing irrigated agriculture infrastructure (e.g., construction waste disposal, dumping of
excavated sediments and other materials from irrigation canals and drainage collectors); (ii) water
quality impacts such as potential increased surface water contamination resulting from possible
long term use of fertilizers and drainage pollution; and (iii) soil salinization or erosion associated
with maintenance of existing irrigation practices Further, as the proposed project is in the upper
watershed of the Andaman Sea basin into which is flowing through the Ayeyarwady River Delta,
there is need to guard against any possible ecosystem and hydrological issue.
The rehabilitation and capacity improvement of primary and secondary canals will likely require
realignments which may result in losses of land and/ or assets on the canal embankment. Since the
original alignments will be followed for most parts of the canals, the impacts are unlikely to be
significant for the most part, and no physical relocation is anticipated to be necessary for the most
part. Civil works will be undertaken in crop idle seasons to avoid temporary land occupation to the
extent possible. A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LRPF) was prepared in
line with OP 4.12 which provides policies and procedures that apply to loss of land and other
private assets that may occur as a result of the project. The Land Acquisition Action Plans
(LAAPs) will be developed during implementation based on the provisions under LRPF. The
LRPF also includes a detailed protocol, process and conditions for voluntary land donation that it
is anticipated will occur.
The project would also help farmers improve the parts of the irrigation and drainage systems
owned and managed by farmers themselves (e.g. watercourses) through rehabilitation of culverts,
canals and ditches, or construction of new pathways, canals and ditches owned and managed by
farmers themselves. Affected farmers themselves will plan and design such civil works with the
a           technical assistance of the Irrigation Department (ID). No significant land acquisition or physical
relocation of households is anticipated to be necessary, however, assets such as trees and
structures may need to be removed, and readjustments, on-field extensions and changes of land
use will also likely also occur. Such impacts it is anticipated will mostly result in the
reconfiguration of the parts of farmland within the original boundary without affecting land
ownership or causing permanent loss in income streams. Small parts of farmland that beneficiary
farmers currently use for farming may be transformed into canals, ditches and pathways, if so
wished by affected farmers themselves, however, affected farmers will continue to own and
manage such canals, ditches, and farm access pathways as part of their own farm plots. The size of
plots that farmers can use for farming may be slightly reduced depending on how plots are
reconfigured, and income may be affected temporarily, however, such a temporary income loss
should be covered by the improved access to irrigation water. Civil works will likely be completed
and production will be recovered after one cropping season or two. In the event that the loss in
production and the resultant loss in income are not recovered within two cropping season, the
project will provide income support u ntil recovered.
Page 12 of 20


﻿The project will also support land improvement pilots in 2-3 sites which may result in a limited
loss of parts of farm plots for participating farmers. It is expected that impacts will not be
significant: that the majority of farmers will loseless than 10 percent of productive assets such as
farmland. Since the land improvement pilot will only support readjustment of farmland, no
O
Q)          physical relocation of households is anticipated. It is expected that the majority of impacts will be
addressed through the voluntary exchange of land between farmers, and the increased productivity
and income that will result from land improvement pilots will cover the temporary income loss
due to the implementation of the pilots. The protocol and conditions of voluntary donations
provided in the LRPF will apply to land improvement, namely: (i) affected people are the direct
beneficiaries; (ii) know that they have the right to refuse to donate land or assets, or accept in-kind
assistance offered by fellow farmers; (iii) agree to donate land or assets without coercion or under
duress; (iv) will not lose more than 10 percent of their total irrigated land or sources of income;
and that (v) technical features of the project activities are such that negative impacts will be fully
recovered from the increased income as a result of the project in 2 cropping seasons. In the event
that income is not fully restored for any participating farmer after two cropping seasons, the
project will provide income support to such farmers. The affected farmers will be clearly informed
that, in the event that income is not fully restored after two cropping seasons, they are entitled to
income support until restored. Those farmers who opt out of the pilot are entitled for alternative
farmland of the same size and productivity, or cash compensation at replacement value, and
compensation at replacement values for all affected assets including trees, structures and standing
crops and restoration of livelihood if applicable.
The construction of village extension education centers will cause land acquisition since the
project will either rehabilitate existing centers at their current locations or newly establish them by
transforming existing government buildings on the state land. Small facilities for seed storage and
value added processing activities will be built on community or farmers land, if and only if direct
beneficiary groups (WUGs or women's groups, as relevant) elect such facilities to be built in their
villages. Such beneficiary groups will be allowed to donate land to house such facilities,
following the principles, procedures and processes provided in the LRPF.
Some civil works will also be carried out to improve the safety and operation of dams from which
the project irrigation schemes will receive water. Feasibility studies that will be carried out during
implementation will identify the types and scale of civil works that the project will finance. They
a           will typically include works on the dam body such as the repair of slopes, dam crest covers and
existing spillways, the installation of monitoring equipment, the repair of gates/hoisting devices
and the provision of infiltration blankets to reduce seepage. Limited acquisition of land or loss of
access to livelihood opportunities is expected to occur. The rehabilitation of access roads may
require loss of private assets or land, since the exact irrigation schemes to be included in the
project scope are not determined yet. In such an event, compensation will be provided at
replacement value for loss of land or assets.
It is anticipated that some ethnic minority communities who meet the eligibility criteria of OP 4.10
are present in potential project areas, although the majority of people who would be affected by
the project would be ethnic Bamar. OP 4.10 is thus triggered. A social assessment was carried out
during preparation and collected and analyzed socio-economic, demographic/ ethnographic
characteristics of project regions. Since the project would rehabilitate existing irrigation schemes,
the social assessment focused on those parts of the project regions with existing irrigation
schemes. Potential negative impact on ethnic minorities will be similar to Bamar farmers, and will
be likely limited mostly to minor losses of farmland as a result of the rehabilitation of primary and
Page 13 of 20


﻿secondary canals and land improvement pilots. Such impacts will be addressed through LRPF.
The Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was developed and attached to the
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). IPPF provides steps to ensure that
ethnic screening will be conducted during project implementation, that Social Assessment (SA)
including free, prior and informed consultations will be carried out with affected ethnic minorities
leading to their broad community support, and that Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be
developed in line with the provisions of IPPF
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
A potential long term environmental impact is the possible raising of groundwater levels, a known
effect of increased irrigation after rehabilitation and increased system utilization. Further, a
potential indirect impact of the rehabilitated scheme could be on drinking water quality for
villages that might use wells around the irrigation sites. Also, possible conflicts with other water
source users may occur (dam/reservoir operation for other activities such as a hydro power station)
as well as the risk of utilizing the allowed volume of water abstracted from water sources such as
rivers and streams. Many of these environmental impacts will be mitigated through the design and
implementation of engineering solutions, for example, canal lining, and improved operational
management. Also, excessive use of fertilizer and pesticide by farmers may impact the quality of
water that drains from agriculture field to adjacent natural watercourses or the groundwater
impacting long term drinking water sources located in the project sites.
Education of the farmers through extension services is an important mitigation mechanism,
regarding in-field preparation and operation, cropping patterns, soil and water conservation
measures, and application of fertilizers. Beneficiary farmers will receive positive long-term
benefits from the improved access to irrigation water and extension services. The project will
assist them to form inclusive WUGs to enable them to equitably allocate water among member
farmers including vulnerable farmers such as women headed households and ethnic minority
farmers.
O
Cumulative environmental impacts that might be generated at the project sites include possible
water contamination downstream from reservoirs linked to rehabilitated irrigation schemes due to
uncontrolled and unregulated activities such as mining and gold panning in the upper watershed.
High arsenic levels were found in Male Nattaung dam and nitrate level exceeded maximum limit
in water sample taken from the irrigated canal of Sinthe; such pollution if not addressed at source
could affect quality of surface and ground water downstream despite rehabilitation of related
irrigation schemes. These potential impacts will be addressed in the site specific environmental
and social assessments.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During implementation, Feasibility Studies will be carried out to assess the technical, economic,
social and environmental feasibility of rehabilitating irrigation schemes in the project target
regions. The irrigation schemes that will be included in the project will be determined based on the
result of the Feasibility Studies. They will include scheme specific Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIA)/Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP), which will
include IPP if needed in line with OP 4.10 and LAAP will also be developed as part of the
Feasibility Studies.
The four schemes for which social assessment was carried out during preparation may be
Page 14 of 20


﻿rehabilitated by the project if the feasibility is ascertained under the feasibility studies. Land
improvement pilot sites will be selected during implementation based on the assessment of
technical feasibility as well as potential environmental and social impacts. Site specific Social
Assessments will be carried out as part of the Feasibility Studies, and a LAAP will also be
O
developed as part of Feasibility Studies. Where ethnic minorities are found to be present as a
result of the ethnic screening which will be carried out at the beginning of the Feasibility Study,
Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) will be developed in line with OP 4.10.
Many of the irrigation schemes in the project target townships, which are candidate schemes to be
included potentially in the project, were built some 10 - 20 years ago. The SA carried out during
project preparation found that, in some cases, people were displaced without adequate
compensation when dams - and to some extent primary canals - were originally built. The SA
conducted during preparation was not a comprehensive assessment, since it included only the four
irrigation schemes that were pre-identified for potential funding under the project. It will be
followed-up by a more comprehensive site specific Social Assessment, including all candidate
schemes, during implementation.
The project irrigation schemes as well as the dams that the project irrigation schemes take water
from were originally built some 10 - 20 years ago. The social assessment conducted during
preparation found that local people were displaced when they were built, and that some of them
did not receive proper compensation at replacement cost.
The land issues related to existing dams and reservoirs are considered to be beyond the scope of
and will not be directly addressed by the project. These complex legacy issues are being addressed
at the country level through the auspices of the National Land Resource Management Central
Committee and the Parliamentary Land Loss Inquiry Commission. The Bank, under the Country
Partnership Framework, may provide separate support on land, including country wide land
related studies or assessments. However, under the project, the existence of land legacy issues
directly related to candidate irrigation schemes to be considered to be included in the project will
be assessed as part of the more comprehensive SA to be carried out during implementation.
To such effect, the SA will, among other issues: identify who were affected when the candidate
irrigation schemes were originally built including their ethnic identities; assess what compensation
a           and assistance they received to restore livelihood and what are their current levels of livelihood;
and determine if there are significant unresolved land issues or disputes which need to be
addressed within the scope of the project objectives or that if not addressed would hinder the
implementation of project activities. The initial findings of the SA will also be used as an input for
site selection where only candidate schemes which have no or relatively minor land legacy issues
which can be effectively addressed under the scope of the project would be eligible to participate
in the project. For the participating schemes, any land legacy will be addressed through the LAAP,
and the IPP, if relevant, which will be developed during implementation and include measures to
restore the livelihood of affected people in line with the objectives of applicable Bank policies
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MOAI prepared an ESMF to meet the project appraisal conditions. In line with this ESMF,
during implementation, site-specific environmental impact assessments and associated EMPs with
detailed monitoring and mitigation measures will be prepared as part of a team also undertaking
feasibility and social studies. The draft ESMF disclosed in country in a local language and in
Page 15 of 20


﻿Infoshop in English has been discussed in the public consultations at the 4 potential project sites as
well as in Yangon during February 3-10, 2015. Implementation of the Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) will also be discussed and agreed with the Government and adequate
funds provided in the project for the development of each site-specific ESMP.
The ESMF requires that a monitoring program be developed for each scheme. The environmental
monitoring program will concentrates on key indicators of the possible adverse impacts identified
by the environmental impact assessments, in particular groundwater quality and levels warning of
approaching water-logging problems and drainage effluent quality affecting downstream areas.
The monitoring program will be prepared in adequate detail, setting out the location and frequency
of measurements, and the parameters to be measured and tested. Specific training and capacity
building program for ESMP implementation and monitoring will be provided by Bank experts as
well as international consultants during the project implementation.
On the social side, the project implementation agency, MOAI, carried out with the help of
consultants a social assessment during preparation to assess the potential positive benefits and
negative impacts of the project. Four irrigation schemes were pre-identified for the purpose of
social assessment because they demonstrate socioeconomic and demographic characteristics,
including the presence of ethnic minorities, typical of irrigated areas in project target provinces.
Any of the four irrigation schemes may be rehabilitated under the project if their technical,
economic, social and environmental feasibility is verified under Feasibility Studies which will be
conducted during implementation.
MOAI also developed the LRPF in line with OP 4.12 which provides project policies and
procedures to address its impact on land or private assets. The MOAI also developed the ESMF,
which includes the IPPF as its annex. Indigenous Peoples screening will be conducted during
implementation to assess if an ethnic minority community who meets the eligibility criteria of OP
4.10 is present in or have collective attachment to the project area of influence, and SA including
free, prior and informed consultations with affected ethnic minorities will be carried out per IPPF
leading to their broad community support. IPP will be developed based on the result of SA and
free, prior and informed consultations based on the provisions of the IPPF.
O
The PMU will be responsible for implementation of the ESMF and its provisions, whereas the
a           day-to-day supervision of the site specific mitigation activities and implementation of monitoring
actions will be overseen by the PIUs at the township level. The PMU will create a Safeguard Unit
composed by an environmental and a social specialist. This Unit will be in charge of: screening
and scoping, preparing terms of reference for environment and social issues to be included in
feasibility studies, detailed screening of sub-projects identified in FS, preparing terms of reference
for safeguard instruments as well as for the third party service provider, reviewing and quality
control of safeguard instruments produced for each sub-project, monitoring and follow up of
safeguard implementation. The Bank will provide adequate training and support to the PMU and
its Safeguards Unit to ensure that they have the technical and institutional capacity to undertake
project screening. scoping and provide the ToRs.
The weak safeguard management capacity of institutions involved in the project including the
PMU will be addressed through sustained trainings, designated supervision consulting services,
and learning by doing type of activities. Technical training on environmental management and
social mobilization for participatory development would be required to build the capacity of staff
at operational and management level. Al so, there might be need for training to improve technical
Page 16 of 20


﻿skills in certain aspects for effective and irrigation management such as dam safety, hydrology and
meteorology measurement and assessment, etc. A series of training workshops on implementation
of the ESMF will take place as part of the project launch workshop and in particular during the
initial year of implementation. This training will ensure that the main specialists are able to
O
manage and monitor the environmental and social aspects of the ADSP activities. The workshops
will be conducted by an external consultant with knowledge on the environmental management
requirements for Myanmar, including substantial knowledge on World Bank and IFC safeguard
policies and requirements (e.g., OHS standards). Adequate budget for safeguards capacity building
training is included in the ESMF.
During implementation, MOAI will also hire a third party service provider who is knowledgeable
about the Bank safeguard policies who will assist MOAI in engaging with participating farmers
and affected people, assist the capacity development of Water User Groups (WUG), and lead in
participatory M&E. The third party service provider will work under the guidance and supervision
of the Safeguard Coordinator to be hired by and help the PMU, to help ensure the project
compliance with the OP 4.01, OP 4.10 and the OP 4.12.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project include farmers, who have access to irrigated land in selected
irrigation schemes in Bago East, Sagaing, Mandalay, and Nay Pyi Taw regions. In addition the
project would benefit households in targeted communities who may not have access to irrigated
land through participation in extension activities which would cover the whole grow irrigation
areas, including non-irrigated lands. Consultations have been undertaken with key ministries, the
Members of the Parliament, and relevant NGOs and CSOs.
The ESMF includes specific measures for consultation and public disclosure during project
implementation, including particular measures for consulting with ethnic minorities as described
in the IPPF for site-specific activities in areas with ethnic minorities. The draft SA, ESMF and
LRPF were submitted to the Bank's Infoshop on January 20, 2015 and were publicly disclosed in
country in Myanmar language on February 2, 2015 and in English on January 16, 2015.
O
Consultations were held in the Swar Chaung irrigation system in Bago East region (February 3,
2015), the Sin The irrigation system in Nay Pyi Taw (February 4, 2015), the Male Nat Taung
*           irrigation system in Mandalay Region (February 5, 2015), the North Yamar irrigation system in
Sagaing Region (February 6, 2015), and in Yangon (February 10, 2015).
There were no summaries of the project documents for the villages. However, the government
team prepared a comprehensive presentation in Burmese which provided a summary of the project
which included a more detailed summary of the findings of the ESMF and LARF provided with
the support of the World Bank team. The Bank safeguards team attended these consultations and
provided clarifications as needed.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 17 of 20


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Myanmar                                                16-Jan-2015
Comments: The English version of ESMF, including LRPF, IPPF and Pest Management
Framework, has been disclosed on the project website in country on January 16,
2015. The draft ESMF translated in local language was disclosed in country on
February 2, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                            07-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                         20-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Myanmar                                                16-Jan-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                            07-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                         28-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Myanmar                                                16-Jan-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?         Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                            07-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                         20-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Myanmar                                                16-Jan-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  ] No[X]  NA [ ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Page 18 of 20


﻿If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[   ] No[X]      NA[     ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
0
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
Page 19 of 20


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paavo Eliste
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 02-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)              Date: 03-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 20 of 20


