                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC9728

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Central Asia                   Project ID:      P151363
                            Project Name:     Climate Adaptation & Mitigation Program for Central Asia (CAMP4CA)
                                              (P151363)
                            Task Team         Angela G. Armstrong
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       12-Jan-2015                      Estimated        26-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GENDR                             Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (40%), Public administration- Information
                                              and communications (30%), General agriculture, fishing a nd forestry sector
                                              (15%), Forestry (15%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (25%), Environmental policies and institutions
                                              (25%), Other social protection and risk management (25%), Climate change
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     60.00                   Total Bank Financing:       60.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                              60.00
                              Total                                                                    60.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for Central Asia (CAMP4CA) is to
                           support the integrated development of climate-smart information, institutions, and investment
                         capacities throughout the countries of Central Asia. This is expected to be achieved through
                         strengthened coordination mechanisms; improved information gathering, sharing, and analysis for
                         decision support; and incubation of innovative climate-smart action for potential scale up.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The project will finance a set of national and regional activities, structured around the following three
                         pillars: (i) Information – for datasets, information systems, tools, and knowledge for climate-smart
                         decision making; (ii) Institutions – for capacity and coordination at national and regional levels
                         around climate action; and (iii) Innovation – for pilot investments in key vulnerable sectors, that can
                         be easily replicated to scale-up resilience. An initial menu of options is presented below, that draws
                         on an early scoping exercise by the Central Asia Technical Working Group on Climate Change,
                         finalized in May 2014. The list of activities (and their sequencing) supported by the project will be
                         further refined during project preparation, depending on each country’s priorities and needs as well
                         as related World Bank (and other development partners) projects and programs, with a view to
                         maximizing synergies at national and regional scale.

                         Component 1: Information for climate-smart decision making. Activities under this component seek
                         to provide data, knowledge, and tools for a better understanding of climate change vulnerabilities,
                         climate-smart options and the promotion of risk-management as a core tenet of resilience. Together
                         these activities will contribute to developing a unified regional analytical framework for better
                         managing climate change. Given economies of scale in knowledge production, there are strong
                         incentives for regional collaboration and the activities under consideration could be implemented by
                         a network of existing regional and national research and academic institutes that would form a virtual
                         Regional Center for Integrated Climate Change Assessment.

                         Monitoring systems and data portal for climate and earth systems in Central Asia
                         -        Upgrading, modernization, and expansion of glacier/cryosphere monitoring, through ground
                         monitoring and remote sensing systems, to help anticipate glacier lake outburst and improve
                         projections of water resources in the region under a changing climate.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Development of a centralized forest and land monitoring system, based on the interpretation
                         of satellite imagery and limited ground truthing, to monitor state and health of forests and pastures,
                         for informed management interventions, better emissions inventories and other reporting under
                         international commitments (e.g., under FAO), and identification of areas at risk of extreme events.
                         -        Establishment of an Integrated Central Asia Climate Data Portal to facilitate collection,
                         sharing, and maintenance of data relevant for climate-smart assessment. On Forest/Land
                         Management for instance, the Portal could include different levels of access to provide transparency
                         on overall forest and pasture data to the general public/civil society, facilitate community-based
                         pasture and forest management plans, and better inform national/sub-regional forest and pasture
                         management planning in participating countries.
                         Models and tools for climate-smart decisions.
                         - Capacity and infrastructure for integrated climate modeling and assessment, to develop/adapt,
                         maintain, and link climate, sectoral, and economic models (e.g., water and climate change,
                         agriculture and economy) for analyses/projections to support decisions at appropriate regional/
                         national scales.
                         -        Setting up a regional repository of knowledge and lessons from the region, which would
                         house a library of reports/studies on climate change assessment and climate-smart lessons and
                         solutions and cater to the needs of different stakeholders (e.g., decision-makers, entrepreneurs,
                         students, citizens). This repository could also build and maintain a roster of experts (internal and
                         regional), which would be on call for specific advice or more thorough analysis, and launch as
                         required new analyses and assessments.

                         Component 2: Institutional capacity building for climate action. Activities under this component aim
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to support institutional capacity development and broader stakeholder engagement, at both regional
                         and national levels, for increased adaptive capacity and mainstreaming of climate change
                         considerations into policy, investment, and lifestyle decisions.

                         Regional Climate Change Coordination Center
                         -        Such a Center would establish a permanent entity to enhance dialogue and collaboration in
                         Central Asia. The Center would coordinate climate change knowledge and learning activities,
                         catering to the needs of stakeholders from all countries in the region (e.g., a repository of knowledge
                         and climate-smart lessons, maintaining a roster of experts, leading awareness raising and outreach,
                         offering training, facilitating knowledge and experience sharing through events like the Climate
                         Change Forum, working with academia and universities on curricula, and commissioning new
                         studies).
                         Institutional capacity development to strengthen national responses to climate change
                         These activities would deploy a combination of capacity building and technical assistance services
                         aiming to:
                         -        Mainstream resilience (both to disasters and climate change) in national/sectoral/sub-
                         regional plans and programs based on methodologies/approaches and tools developed under
                         Component 1. This would include capacity building efforts (nationally or for several countries
                         simultaneously to allow discussion among practitioners from different countries) to review/develop
                         plans (e.g., identify risks, cost options, mobilize resources);
                         -        Provide advice on enabling institutional frameworks to improve cross-sectoral coordination
                         for design and implementation of climate-smart policies and programs;
                         -        Undertake climate change public expenditure reviews (PERs) to assess resources supporting
                         climate action, their alignment with strategic climate objectives, and tools to prioritize mainstreaming
                         climate change in national budgets, and monitor results;
                         -        Facilitate access to climate finance and national implementing entity (NIE) accreditation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Targeted capacity building towards non-governmental entities (e.g., in the agricultural value chain)
                         -        Building the capacity of the research and extension services to provide needed technologies
                         and advice to agricultural sector on how to improve the climate resilience at farm and agribusiness
                         (as applicable) level;
                         -        Provision of training and advice to extension agents, farmers and other stakeholders on
                         climate-smart agricultural practices as required.

                         Component 3: Innovation in resilience investments. Activities under this component would comprise
                         pilots to test new and innovative approaches and generate new lessons to accelerate climate action in
                         Central Asia. These could include pilots funded through competitive innovation grants, with such
                         criteria as implementation in several countries or private sector co-financing. Possible investments
                         could include:
                         -        Introduction of a regional risk-sharing facility for the agricultural sector (such as an
                         agricultural insurance scheme);
                         -        Pilot payments for environmental services to support re-vegetation and restoration of forests
                         and their services (including reduced exposure to hazards like landslides and mudflows, reduced
                         siltation in reservoirs, reduced land degradation). Supporting countries in preparing for future carbon
                         markets could also be explored;
                         -        Community forestry and pasture management for participatory, equitable, and improved use
                         of natural shared resources. In particular, there is an opportunity through the program to support the
                           development of different models of community-based resource management which can serve as best
                           practice for different conditions and for further rollout and replication in the participating countries
                           and information to broader land and forest management policy;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - CSO and local institutions marketplace for climate resilience innovation: a small grant competitive
                           program will be established to encourage innovation in climate resilience.

                           Component 4: Project Management This component will support the operating costs of implementing
                           CAMP4CA at both regional and national levels, including support for procurement, financial
                           management, coordination, reporting, and monitoring and evaluation.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be implemented in four Central Asia countries: Kazakhstan; Kyrgyz Republic,
                           Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           At this stage of project development the implementing arrangements are not yet identified and thus,
                           there is no knowledge on clients’ safeguards institutional capacities. These will be assessed during
                           project preparation and appropriate capacity building, if needed, will be supported under the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This OP is triggered as the project will support
                           BP 4.01                                               pilot investments in key vulnerable sectors,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 possibly in the area of re-vegetation and
                                                                                 restoration of forests and their services,
                                                                                 community forestry and pasture management
                                                                                 for participatory, equitable, and improved use of
                                                                                 natural shared resources, etc. The project also
                                                                                 might support small scale civil works related to
                                                                                 renovation of existing premises. The exact
                                                                                 domain for project financing will be decided
                                                                                 during the initial stages of project preparation.
                                                                                 Although the pilot investments will be limited in
                                                                                 scope, they may generate various environmental
                                                                                 and social impacts related to: soil degradation;
                                                                                 water and air pollution; biodiversity
                                                                                 conservation; labor safety issues and health
                                                                                 impacts, etc. It is also expected these potential
                                                                                 impacts will be mostly temporary by nature and
                                                                                 site specific. To address these impacts, an
                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) will be designed which
                                                                                 would specify the rules and procedures for
                                                             subproject Environmental Assessments. The
                                                             ESMF will also provide advise for setting up
                                                             under Component 2 a regional repository of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             knowledge and lessons from the region in
                                                             climate-smart agriculture, which might include
                                                             information materials for training and advice on
                                                             climate-smart agricultural technologies (e.g.,
                                                             soil, water and crop management for both
                                                             rainfed and irrigated production systems,
                                                             livestock and pasture management, global good
                                                             practices), covering all aspects including
                                                             production, post-harvest handling and
                                                             processing, marketing, and financing. The
                                                             ESMF will be disclosed and consulted in all
                                                             participating countries.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This OP is triggered as the project might
                                                             support different afforestation and pasture
                                                             improvement activities which might impact
                                                             natural habitats (NHs). The ESMF will provide
                                                             relevant advise on necessary EA activities in
                                                             those cases where the proposed activities might
                                                             have impacts on NHs. Also, the ESMF will
                                                             stipulate that any projects which could impact
                                                             Critical Natural Habitat, and any with the
                                                             potential for a significant and lasting negative
                                                             impact on a natural habitat, will be excluded
                                                             from project financing.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This OP is triggered as the project might
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             support re-vegetation and restoration of forests
                                                             and their services. The ESMF will provide
                                                             relevant advise regarding what is necessary to
                                                             be taken into consideration during the EA for
                                                             those sub-projects that include afforestation
                                                             activities and in particular, with regard to the
                                                             selection of land plots given for afforestation as
                                                             well as with regard to ensuring biodiversity of
                                                             newly planted forests and their sustainability.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project is not going to support purchasing
                                                             pesticides but it might generate a need for their
                                                             increased usage, in particular in the case of
                                                             forestry nurseries development. No separate
                                                             Pest Management Plan is needed, but the ESMF
                                                             will include a section describing both measures
                                                             which will be used to ensure compliance with
                                                             national laws and WB requirements relating to
                                                             pesticide purchase and use, and also measures to
                                                             promote Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
                                                                                                                                 approaches and safe pesticide handling and
                                                                                                                                 disposal practices to reduce human and
                                                                                                                                 environmental exposure. Additionally the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 ESMF will include a list of eligible pesticides in
                                                                                                                                 the participating countries and guidance on their
                                                                                                                                 use.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            N/A
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            N/A

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           Involuntary resettlement as per OP 4.12 is not
                                 4.12                                                                                            anticipated. Investments under Component 3
                                                                                                                                 (such as landscape planning) will be
                                                                                                                                 participatory in nature with consent required for
                                                                                                                                 any planning decisions that impact land and/or
                                                                                                                                 crops. This will be confirmed during
                                                                                                                                 preparation. Activities requiring land use such
                                                                                                                                 as wood lots or community nurseries will be
                                                                                                                                 undertaken on community land and/or through
                                                                                                                                 voluntary arrangements (which will be
                                                                                                                                 documented and verified) based on inclusive
                                                                                                                                 and participatory community processes.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not support any subproject
                                                                                                                                 related to irrigation and water abstraction from
                                                                                                                                 reservoirs.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No. The new project will not finance any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            irrigation sub-projects. Furthermore it will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 support any projects which might discharge
                                                                                                                                 waste waters directly into international
                                                                                                                                 waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF will be disclosed and consulted with all key stakeholders before Appraisal in all
                                      participating countries. If selected premises for renovation are selected before Appraisal, the
                                      Checklist EMP will also be prepared, disclosed and consulted in the participating countries.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Angela G. Armstrong

                                 Approved By:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)      Date: 30-Jul-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager:   Name: Kseniya Lvovsky (PMGR)   Date: 31-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
