                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC6773

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tunisia                          Project ID:       P146502
                            Project Name:      TN-Road Transport Corridors (P146502)
                            Task Team          Vickram Cuttaree
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Oct-2014                      Estimated         17-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSTI                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Export
                                               development and competitiveness (30%), Regional integration (20 %)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    260.00                      Total Bank Financing:        100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:         100.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      60.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        100.00
                              Total                                                                        160.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           9. The proposed Development Objectives is to enhance access to lagging regions to more developed
                           areas through improved and safer road transport corridors.
                           C. Project Description
                           2. The proposed project would support a portion of a program of modernization of national and
                           regional road corridors, road safety improvement on these sections and institutional strengthening of
                         the MET.

                         3. The proposed loan amount is $100 million out of a total program of $260 million. The proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program would include the following:
                         a. Road Improvement Component. The proposed program will upgrade about 136 km of existing
                         single-lane national and regional road sections on three road corridors. The improvement of road
                         corridors is expected to support private investment in the concerned lagging regions. This component
                         would include: (ii) 49 km of National Road 12 between Sousse and Kairouan, (ii) about 65 km of
                         National Road 4 between El Fahs and Siliana (of which the Bank will only finance 6-10 km), and
                         (iii) 22 km of Regional Road 133 between Zaghouan and Tunis. Civil works will include widening
                         and upgrading of the road sections when necessary, upgrading of bridges and improvement of road
                         intersections, traffic signs and implementation of other safety measures. The cost of the selected
                         section on RN4 to be financed by the Bank loan will be confirmed during preparation.

                         b. Institutional Development Component. The project will enhance the institutional capacity of MET
                         to better manage the national and regional road network through supporting specific intervention
                         related to its strategy for the sector. Potential areas, to be confirmed during preparation, include: (i)
                         strategy for the management, maintenance and financing of the road network, (ii) methodology for
                         determining the type of road intervention, taking into consideration local conditions, in order to
                         improve the efficiency of road investment (“catalogue de structures”), and (iii) strategy for public
                         sector. The project will also finance the purchase of equipment for quality control and testing of civil
                         works and vehicles for road supervision.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         4. The project has identified three roads to finance (i) 49 km of National Road 12 between Sousse
                         and Kairouan, (ii) about 6-10 km of National Road 4 between El Fahs and Siliana, and (ii) 22 km of
                         Regional Road 133 between Zaghouan and Tunis. Civil works will include widening and upgrading
                         of the road sections, upgrading of bridges and improvement of road intersections, traffic signs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of other safety measures. Right of way exists for National Road 12 and Regional
                         Road 133 and is sufficient along the roads in rural areas, though some land acquisition will be
                         necessary, particularly around the improvement of road intersections. Little encroachment was
                         identified during screening; no more than ten to fifteen structures were pre-identified as possibly
                         having encroached on the right of way in semi-urban areas and this will be confirmed with a census
                         during preparation. In urban and semi-urban areas, lanes are either already doubled, or will not be
                         doubled thereby avoiding the need for physical resettlement beyond the encroached structures. A
                         land acquisition plan / resettlement action plan will be prepared prior to appraisal for these roads.
                         The review of RN4 by the Bank team concluded that the entire RN4 may not need to be doubled and
                         the project would finance works only on limited section of RN4 where no land acquisition is
                         necessary. A Resettlement Policy Framework will be disclosed prior to appraisal that would regulate
                         the development of land acquisition plans in the event that parallel financing or additional financing
                         will be identified for the National Road 4 sections currently not included during the implementation
                         of the project. In accordance to Bank policies, ESMPs and RAPs would be reviewed, cleared and
                         disclosed, and compensation made before construction can start for those affected segments.

                         5. The project will follow a programmatic approach. There are no known natural habitats nor forests
                         along National Road 12 and Regional Road 133, but the reduction of man-planted economic and
                         non-economic trees line along stretches of the roads will need to be managed to mitigate the
                         environmental impact. The ESMF and RPF will be prepared for the broader program, taking into
                           consideration that additional road sections could be added to the program but will not be financed by
                           the proposed loan. The ESMF will state how environmental and social due diligence and
                           documentation will be coordinated in case other International Financial Institutions co-finance the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           remaining portion of the program not financed by the proposed project.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           6. The Ministry of Equipment and Environment has had experience working with other IFIs,
                           including the African Development Bank and the European Investment Bank. However, the Ministry
                           of Equipment has not worked with the Bank on projects in the last decades and is not familiar with
                           the Bank’s safeguards policies. Technical support and training will be necessary during project
                           preparation and in the first phases of the operation to ensure timely preparation and consultation of
                           safeguards instruments and to minimize risk of poor implementation. The Ministry will assign
                           designated Environmental and social staff and source in technical expertise through consultants. The
                           Government team will also benefit from the expertise provided by the Bank Safeguards team
                           members
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruma Tavorath (SASDI)
                           Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The policy is triggered since adverse
                           BP 4.01                                              environment impacts are likely to occur if
                                                                                upgrading and/or rehabilitation of selected roads
                                                                                are not properly planned, designed or
                                                                                constructed. Environmental impacts can be
                                                                                related to improper management of issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                related to construction site waste and debris;
                                                                                slope stability, soil erosion and sediment
                                                                                control; fugitive dust, noise, spills and other
                                                                                emissions; stormwater and wastewater runoffs
                                                                                etc. The environmental impact of the reduction
                                                                                of economic and non-economic trees that line
                                                                                stretches of the roads will need mitigation
                                                                                measures. Occupational health and safety issues
                                                                                associated with road construction workers,
                                                                                pedestrians and traffic safety will also need
                                                                                management, particularly in urban areas. An
                                                                                Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                                                                (ESMP) will be prepared for each of the 3
                                                                                identified roads. An Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Framework (ESMF) will also be
                                                                                prepared for the program as it is likely that
                                                                                additional roads could be identified in the
                                                                                subsequent and/or implementation phases.
                                                                                These ESMPs and ESMF will be reviewed,
                                                                 approved and disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                 Infoshop prior to appraisal. Strategic
                                                                 consultations with primary and key stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 will be held and documented.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    There are no registered or known natural
                                                                 habitats in the project area and no adverse
                                                                 impacts are anticipated. Any potential impacts
                                                                 of the proposed operation on natural habitats, if
                                                                 found will be defined in the ESIA and ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There are no registered or known forests in the
                                                                 project area and no adverse impacts are
                                                                 anticipated.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    It is not envisaged to procure or use any
                                                                 pesticides under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project is not expected to impact on
                         BP 4.11                                 physical cultural resources. However, chance
                                                                 finds procedures will be described in the
                                                                 respective ESMPs and the ESMF to safeguard
                                                                 any cultural resources that may be discovered
                                                                 during works or services performed under the
                                                                 project under any of its components.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   It is not envisaged that the Bank’s Policy 4.10
                                                                 will apply under this project
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The policy is triggered because the
                         4.12                                    improvement of the three road corridors will
                                                                 necessitate land acquisition and temporary and
                                                                 permanent involuntary resettlement. Land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 acquisition will involve primarily agricultural
                                                                 terrains, and only few permanent or semi-
                                                                 permanent structures would be affected.
                                                                 Identification of affected terrains is ongoing and
                                                                 will be confirmed during finalization of the
                                                                 design/alignment, i.e. prior to appraisal.

                                                                 Two Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be
                                                                 prepared by appraisal in accordance with OP
                                                                 4.12 to ensure the application of the appropriate
                                                                 safeguard policies of National Road 12 and
                                                                 Regional Road 133.

                                                                 A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will
                                                                 be prepared in accordance with OP 4.12 to
                                                                 ensure application of the appropriate safeguard
                                                                 policies on the same principles in the event that
                                                                 a programmatic approach will allow for
                                                                                                                                 additional civil works to be identified during
                                                                                                                                 project implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not finance construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             None of the project roads are expected to be
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            across international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             None of the project roads are expected to be in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The safeguard related studies have started in December 2013 and are expected to be completed by
                                      July 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Vickram Cuttaree

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                                                                                            Date: 10-Feb-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Patricia Veevers-Carter (SM)                                                                                         Date: 25-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
