                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA4228
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                          Project ID:    P128307
                            Project Name:     PK: Sindh Agricultural Growth Project (P128307)
                            Task Team         Tahira Syed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDA                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Animal production (30%), Crops (30%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
                                              (20%), Agricultural extension and research (15%), Rural an d Inter-Urban Roads
                                              and Highways (5%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (55%), Other rural development (20%), Rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              policies and institutions (15%), Rural markets (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      98.00           Total Bank Financing:               86.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      12.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             86.00
                              Total                                                                                   98.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                            A. Project Development Objective(s)
                            To improve the productivity and market access of small and medium producers in selected
                            commodity value chains.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            B. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                          3. Project Description
                         The SAGP would contribute to more inclusive growth by prioritizing support to small producers with
                         commercial potential. The project would be implemented over a period of five years and would have
                         the following components:

                         Component A: Capacity Building and Institutional Development: The project will implement
                         through the Directorates of Research and Extension and the Department of Livestock and Fisheries.
                         Consultations with both clients identified several capacity building and institutional development
                         needs, which this component will finance in addition to capacity building of producers. This
                         component will finance activities around technology development, technology dissemination,
                         capacity building, and strategic planning for Sindh’s agricultural sector.

                         Component B: Investment for Agricultural Growth: This component finances actual investments in
                         selected value chains of horticulture, rice and dairy. The component would also finance a demand
                         driven investment fund to support farmers and producers with infrastructure and technology
                         innovations support in the selected value chain. Selection criteria for farmers and producers groups to
                         receive project interventions as well as the detailed procedures for funds transfer and managing
                         contributions will be included in the Operational Manual being developed by the implementing
                         agencies.

                         Component C: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation: This component wouldfinance
                         the costs for Project Management Units (PMUs) and the Project Coordinator’s office. Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would be provided for impact evaluation, communications strategy, grievance redressal mechanism
                         (GRM), independent third party monitoring, establishment of a management information system
                         (MIS) and overall monitoring of the implementation of Environment and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF).The Impact Evaluation, MIS and third party monitoring will be implemented by
                         the Project Coordinator whereas overall monitoring andevaluation, GRM and communication
                         strategy will be implemented by the respective PMUs and the PIUs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would focus on horticulture and milk production because they have a small farmer focus,
                         have significant involvement of women in production and processing, and, from a national
                         perspective, Sindh enjoys the greatest competitive advantage in these pro-poor production value
                         chains. The province has fertile irrigated agricultural lands and support wheat-rice on the right bank
                         of the Indus river while wheat-cotton, and wheat-rice are cultivated on the left bank of the river.
                         Sindh being located in the deltaic region has flat lands, slope on average is less than 1 ft per 1 mile
                         and therefore drainage of irrigation return flows remains a challenge in the area. Over the recent past
                         Sindh has also experienced heavy floods and rural population of Sindh suffered significantly due to
                         standing floodwater. Sindh also produces fine quality fruits including mangoes, bananas and dates.
                         Livestock rearing is also major activity in the area. Rural Sindh therefore presents agro-based
                         environmental settings and project interventions could bring positive changes in them.


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Simeon Kacou Ehui (SASDA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Miki Terasawa (SASDS)
                           Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
                           Fouad Muhammad Khan (SASDI)

                            6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            The activities under Component B if established
                                                                            in or near sensitive habitats can potentially cause
                                                                            ecological disturbances.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             There is no forest cover in the project area and
                                                                            activities will not be conducted in or affect any
                                                                            natural or man-made forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes            PPest management is triggered because the
                                                                            project activities can potentially alter the scope
                                                                            and intensity of current pesticide usage regime,
                                                                            though the activities would be aimed at reducing
                                                                            pesticide usage. An Integrated Pest Management
                                                                            Plan (IPMP) has been developed for the project to
                                                                            systematically monitor pesticide usage and
                                                                            facilitate reduction in intensity through project
                                                                            activities.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             There is no evidence of the presence of physical
                            BP 4.11                                         cultural resources in the project area and no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            project activity shall be conducted within or in
                                                                            the vicinity of any identified physical cultural
                                                                            resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no known indigenous groups in the
                                                                            entire Sindh province as identified under this
                                                                            policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             No land acquisition is foreseen. All planned
                            4.12                                            project interventions will take place on private or
                                                                            donated land.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             No dams shall be constructed or rehabilitated
                                                                            under this project.
                            Projects on International        No              Now activity shall be conducted on international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              There are no disputed areas in the provide of
                            7.60                                            Sindh, Pakistan.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 3 of 8
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           While most of the sub-projects are expected to be capacity building interventions with no
Public Disclosure Copy




                           significant social or environmental impacts, some value chain interventions, agricultural
                           machinery usage and pesticide usage associated with the project can have adverse impacts that
                           need to be mitigated at the planning stage. The potential impacts could be impacts related to
                           construction of storage facilities to enhance value chain, construction of artificial insemination
                           center, health and safety incidents resulting from usage of thrashers, tractors and other machinery
                           deployed in agriculture sub-projects.
                           Following are some of the key negative environmental impacts that could arise from project
                           activity. None of these are expected to be large scale, significant and/or irreversible;
                           •         The subprojects under Component B if established in or near sensitive habitats such as
                           protected areas can potentially cause ecological disturbances. This could be caused by changes in
                           land form and habitat, habitat fragmentation, blockage of migration paths, water consumption and
                           contamination. Similarly, the subprojects can potentially cause loss of precious ecological assets,
                           if they are inappropriately located and encroach into forests/swamplands or historical/cultural
                           buildings/areas, disrupt hydrology of natural waterways (including natural drainage particularly in
                           southern Sindh where blockage of natural drainage is a serious issue), regional flooding, and
                           drainage hazards.
                           •         The facilities to be established under the value chain and post-harvest loss management
                           subprojects may generate a wide range of waste effluents. These could include waste water from
                           washing and cleaning operations, oils and oily water generated by machinery maintenance, leaked/
                           spilled fuels and oils, waste effluent discharges from the processing operation, animal wastes, and
                           others. Uncontrolled discharges of these wastes and other effluents can potentially contaminate
                           the soil, pollute the nearby water bodies and degrade their value for communities and ecology.
                           Depending upon their constituents and extent, these discharges can potentially affect the soil
                           fertility, pollute the drinking water sources, contaminate irrigation water thus affecting the crops,
                           and degrade wetlands thus negatively affecting the ecology of the area including natural flora and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fauna.
                           •         The facilities to be established under the value chain and post-harvest loss management
                           subprojects may potentially generate a wide range of solid wastes, including sludge produced by
                           washing and cleaning operations, waste/rotten agriculture produce, animal secreta, wastage from
                           packing operations, workshop wastes, and others. Inappropriate disposal of these wastes can
                           potentially aggravate the solid waste management problems in the area, while also contaminating
                           soil and water.
                           •         The construction of subproject facilities can potentially cause short-term environmental
                           and social issues such as loss of fauna soil erosion, soil and water contamination, noise and air
                           pollution, and safety hazards for the nearby population. These issues in turn can potentially affect
                           the cultivation fields, soil fertility, human health, ecological degradation, and public nuisance.
                           •         Transportation, storage, and use and/or disposal of materials such as explosives, fuel and
                           other chemicals during construction and operation pose health and safety risks for the nearby
                           community. Similarly, accidental release of potentially hazardous substances such as fuels,
                           solvents, acidic and alkaline materials from the subproject facilities may potentially pose health
                           and safety hazards for the nearby population.
                           •         Occupational Health and Safety Hazards: Operation and maintenance of the subproject
                           facilities may potentially cause occupational health and safety (OHS) risks for the workers. These
                           risks may be associated with fugitive dust and gaseous emissions, fire and explosion, exposure to
                           noise, electric shock, working on heights, body injuries caused by process equipment, working in


                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                           confined spaces, and other similar aspects.
                           •        Vehicular traffic during facility construction and operation may potentially cause
                           congestion on the local routes, generate noise, and pose safety hazards for the local population
Public Disclosure Copy




                           particularly for children and elderly people.
                           •        The project may alter the scope and intensity of current pesticide usage regime, potentially
                           reducing the usage intensity, though expansion of farming footprint may cause increase in
                           pesticide usage in some locations.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Development of value chains under Component B of the Project may potentially cause
                           intensification of cultivation, thus increasing the usage of crop inputs including irrigation water,
                           fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides. This in turn can potentially cause water shortage in an
                           already water stressed area as well as soil and water contamination, having negative impacts on
                           people, as well as on natural flora and fauna.
                           All planned project interventions will take place on individual’s own land where the project targets
                           individual producers. In case any minor areas of land will be needed for a project targeting a group
                           of beneficiaries, such as construction of value addition facilities (such as cold storage, collection
                           and processing centers), the land should either be: (a) private land obtained through compensation
                           paid by the community (i.e., transaction between willing buyer and willing seller) or (b) land
                           obtained through private voluntary donations, provided the donation will have minimal livelihood
                           impact on the concerned person (less than 10 percent). Community purchases and private
                           voluntary donations will be fully documented as required by the ESMF.

                           While the project support will target small and medium farmers, the participation by
                           sharecroppers, tenants, landless, and women may be limited. In enhancing their participation, the
                           project will develop a consultation framework as a part of the value chain development activities,
                           which will help identify current roles and opportunities in the project implementation for these
                           groups. The project’s management information system (MIS) will track their level of participation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Under agriculture, the emphasis of the project is on horticulture crops and post-harvest
                           management in rice. However, horticulture, though showing impressive growth in the agricultural
                           sector is a minor contributor to provincial GDP when compared to the four major agricultural
                           crops of wheat, rice, sugarcane and cotton. Alternative design scenarios were considered; these
                           included:
                           Alternative 1: No investment project. The ‘no-project’ alternative is not acceptable since in that
                           scenario, no direct investment would strategically promote sectoral growth for agriculture and its
                           subsectors. Additionally, investments in agricultural sector with a focus on reaching to the small
                           and medium farmers have been ad hoc at best. As a result, promotion of horticulture while
                           remains a priority for the GoSindh, few resources are available to address the subsectors many
                           challenges that limit its growth.
                           Alternative 2: Focus on different horticulture crops. Mangos and bananas are both economically
                           valuable crops in Sindh, and offer a moderate export potential if varietal selection were improved.
                           However, these crops are primarily grown by larger farmers, who are able to access the required
                           investment capital for production units that are economically viable. In addition, both crops have
                           received significant prior support from donors and government and appear to be thriving.
                           Nevertheless, their contribution to the economy of Sindh is lower than that of dates, onions and

                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                           chilies.
                           Alternative 3: Focus on the major crops. Wheat, rice, sugarcane and cotton are the backbone of
                           the Sindh agricultural economy. However, to make an impact in these crops would need
Public Disclosure Copy




                           considerable amounts of investment, and would be beyond the scope of the first phase of this
                           program, which was tasked with showing measurable impact in the first six years. A second
                           consideration is that fact that the major four crops all receive considerable government subsidies in
                           one form or another and operate in distorted market following political rather than economic
                           imperatives.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to address the
                           potential environmental and social issues that may emerge from project activity. The ESMF
                           provides initial screening criteria to firstly assess which subprojects will not be able to quality for
                           project funding based on safeguards issues. These include projects within the boundaries of any
                           critical natural habitat or potentially affecting such a habitat, large scale linear infrastructure
                           projects and other projects involving extensive environmental and social impacts which are
                           irreversible. For all other relevant project typologies, impacts are identified, mitigation measures
                           are developed and checklists are proposed. For projects involving infrastructure development, a
                           template and sample Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is included.
                           The ESMF also includes institutional measures that will be adopted to ensure compliance with the
                           ESMF. This includes nomination of a focal person for safeguards at each of the two PMUs as well
                           as recruitment of an environmental specialist and a social specialist to assist in monitoring and
                           documentation of compliance with the ESMF. A training and capacity building program has also
                           been proposed which will be led by the environment and social specialists.
                           Further, an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) has been developed to facilitated use of IPM
                           techniques towards reduction of pesticide usage intensity specially in project related activities,
                           without compromising on agricultural productivity.
                           Institutional capacity building and human resource measures have been proposed in the ESMF to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fill any capacity gaps at the agriculture and livestock departments. The agriculture department
                           extensions have been engaged in other World Bank projects in the agriculture sector within the
                           province and capacity and human resource developed there shall be brought to fore here to assist
                           in ensuring compliance with safeguards policies. There is strong consultant support available in
                           the province in the agriculture and environmental sectors, and they shall be engaged to further
                           enhance departmental capacity especially in monitoring and reporting of environmental
                           compliance.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As part of the development of the ESMF consultations have been completed with key
                           stakeholders. Additionally, as part of the investments design for agricultural crops, detailed
                           consultations with the communities, small and medium farmers and producers groups,
                           sharecroppers, tenants, landless laborers, women, middlemen, traders, private sector, NGOs, and
                           donor agencies were held. Feedback from these consultations is used in preparing ESMF. The
                           process of stakeholders’ consultations will continue during project implementation in preparing
                           and implementing the actual investment level mitigation plans, where ever required. Purpose of
                           such consultations would be to ensure increased participation of the stakeholders in the planning
                           and implementation of the project activities at the sub-project level.
                           The ESMF as well as the Urdu and Sindhi translations has been disclosed on the official websites
                           of GoSindh, Agriculture Department, and Livestock Department. Hard copies of these documents

                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           will also be maintained in the PMUs and PIUs as well all regional offices of the client. Copies
                           shall also be sent to relevant stakeholders including the provincial Environmental Protection
                           Agency. In addition, the ESMF has been disclosed on WB InfoShop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jul-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         18-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Sep-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         18-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                       Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [     ]


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tahira Syed
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                        Date: 11-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (SM)                          Date: 14-Dec-2013




                                                                       Page 8 of 8
