INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 1105
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Benin                      Project ID:   P147014
Project Name:    Public Investment Management and Governance Support Project (P147014)
Task Team        Robert A. Yungu
Leader(s):
Estimated        25-Jan-2016                Estimated     29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO13                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Central government administration (100%)
Theme(s):        Administrative and civil service reform (60%), Managing for development
results (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00             Total Bank Financing:    30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      30.00
0          Total                                                            30.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to strengthen public investment management effectiveness and
enhance public sector accountability in Benin.
C. Project Description
The project builds on the action plan and recommendations formulated through a national consensus
approach by Beninese stakeholders during the earlier stage of the framework diagnostic of the


﻿Benin's PIM carried out by a World Bank team. It would be implemented over a four-year period
and would finance high level workshops, training programs, coaching, technical assistance, and
information management systems upgrade.
O
The project includes two main components which seek, on one hand, to tackle the shortcomings and
weaknesses of the PIM system and, on the other hand, to address underlying governance and public
administration issues which impact the PIM. The two components are: (i) Enhancing the Public
Investment System; and (ii) Strengthening Governance and the quality of Public Administration. A
third component deals more generally with the aspects of coordination and management of the
project.
Component 1: Enhancing the Public Investment Management (US$17.0 million)
This component incorporates key consensus-driven recommendations during the diagnostic stage of
the PIM framework.
Sub-component 1.1 : Strategic guidance and Appraisal (US$4.0 million)
Support will be provided to ensure that proposed investment projects are aligned with strategic
priorities and meet eligibility criteria. The main envisaged activities include:
*      Elaboration of a PIM manual to serve as a mandatory reference framework for the
preparation and implementation of projects. The manual will include key guidelines on the
preparation and elements of the concept note, appraisal, supervision, and contract management. A
systematic assessment will be carried out at the appraisal stage to decide whether a project should be
taken forward as a PPP or not.
*      Strengthening of the gatekeeping role in the Ministry of Planning to ensure centralized and
independent appraisal of projects.
*      Strengthening of the financial and risk management role of the Ministry of Finance,
especially regarding contingency liabilities for the Government in the case of PPPs.
*      Compliance with the calendar for PIP, MTEF, budget preparation, and submission to the
Parliament
 *    Development of mechanisms to facilitate a shift to multi-year contracts
o      *      Development of an integrated planning and programming information system (SINAPSE)
connected with SIGFIP (budget execution system) SIGMAP (procurement management system), and
the Enterprise Architecture framework
*      High level workshop and training programs in investment decision-making, contingency
valuation, earned value analysis, etc.,
*      Technical Assistance to government investment entities in the application of project
appraisal techniques learned.
Sub-component 1.2: Annual Budgeting and Project Selection (US$2.0 million)
Support will be provided to prevent un-vetted projects from 'jumping the fence" (for political or
opportunistic reasons), and to ensure implementation readiness. The following activities are
envisaged:
*      Elaboration of guidelines on vetted projects, PIP, recurrent expenditures, inclusion of
procurement plans into the budget preparation


﻿*      Seminar and training programs in multi-year and annual budgeting, procurement,
procurement plans (PPMs), annual work plan (PTAs), and credits consumption plan (PCCs)
*      Budgeting and procurement information management system upgrade
 *    Technical Assistance to MEF and Directorate of Financial and Assets Management (DRFM)
in line ministries in the application of annual budgeting and project selection learned.
Sub-component 1.3: Project Implementation (US$4.0 million)
The capacity needed to ensure more rapid execution of projects or divestment will be provided. Some
of the proposed key activities include:
*      Seminar and training programs in budget execution, project management, contract
management
*      organization of monthly ministerial working meetings with credit administrators, chief
accountants of MoD, Planning and Programming Directorate (DPP), Directorate of Financial and
Assets Management ( DRFM), and Directorate of Financial Control (DCF) to document, justify, and
prioritize requests for validation of financial transactions made to the MoF
*      Modernization of the processing circuit for investment expenditures under capital transfer
(Title VI) to ensure alignment with investments managed by the State (Title V)
*      Development of the electronic management of tender processes (e-procurement) as provided
by the Procurement Law and introduction of a bidder pre-qualification process and a categorization
of enterprises
*      Development of standardized technical specifications for the acquisition of common items to
assist the Directorate of Public Procurement (DNCMP) in evaluating technical aspects of tender
packages.
*      Development of ministerial commitment plans and a consolidated forecasting plan issued by
the General Directorate of Budget (DGB) with respect to the overall national budget
Sub-component 1.4: Project Evaluation and Audit (US$2.0 million)
o
In order to evaluate project results against expected objectives, learn from them for better design of
future projects, and ensure compliance with fiduciary procedures, the following activities are
proposed:
*      Seminar and training programs in project evaluation and audit
*      Production of a unified quarterly consolidating information on financial, economic and
physical execution
*      Systemize the organization of joint biannual site visits of a sample of projects (risk-based
selection) and ensure follow-up of recommendations including positive or negative rewards
*      Introduce risk-based auditing, reduce a priori controls, and strengthen subsequent
verification processes.
*      Strengthen the technical capacity of the Chamber of Accounts pending the establishment of
an Independent Court of Accounts
*      Strengthen the technical oversight of the National Assembly.
Sub-component 1.5: Public Private Partnerships (US$5.0 million)
Given the complexity of PPP and the central role that they play in leveraging external financing for
transformational projects, particular attention will be given to this type of investments for which the


﻿recommendations highlighted above for traditional public investments will still apply.
PPP portfolio includes a mixed bag of highly complex economic infrastructure projects and small-
scale social infrastructure projects, which both require different treatments. The main economic
O
)       infrastructure projects, for which the Government generally seeks funding for external partners like
during the Paris Roundtable meeting in June 2014, include: (i) the railway Niamey-Cotonou, (ii) the
new airport; (iii) the deep water port; (iv) energy production, restructuring, and distribution projects;
etc. Generally, these high-caliber projects are centrally managed from Cotonou. By contrast, small-
scale social projects in water or education sectors are decentralized and managed by communes.
The PPP law is currently under preparation, and there are many key areas which have not yet been
adequately addressed in the current version. These include: (i) the institutional framework; (ii) the
anchorage of the PPP unit; (iii) the disclosure of contractual conditions and actual contract
performance; and (iv) contract management and fiscal management of PPPs. The treatment of
unsolicited proposals for which exemption of competitive bidding applies, and which is great
concern, especially given that the threshold for PPP sole-sourcing is 100 million US dollars.
The following support activities are envisaged:
*      Technical assistance and advisory services to the Government for tightening and improving
the PPP law by addressing existing gaps in the current draft mentioned above.
*      Streamline and strengthen the institutional framework governing PPPs (current ly, there are
overlaps from many institutions dealing with PPPs)
* Rapid assessment of proposed PPPs for which there are no feasibility studies
* Revise the decree governing procurement, particularly the sole sourcing selection method
that is granted to unsolicited proposals
*      Elaborate the PPP operational manual. The manual will help, among other things, clarify the
processes and steps to follow for identifying projects, hiring transaction advisors, preparing an
outline business case/pre-feasibility and feasibility studies, appraising projects, choosing
procurement method, and managing risks.
* Roll out a series of seminar and training programs on PPP which will be tailored to specific
audiences and interests (financial risks, procurement, appraisal, contract management, performance
management, negotiations, etc.)
o       *      Technical assistance in appraisal, implementation, contract management, and evaluation for
four high profile PPPs.
Component 2: Strengthening Governance and Public Administration (US$15.0 million)
To ensure effective implementation and long-term success of the proposed PIM activities described
above, it is critical that broader support on governance and change management be also provided. In
the absence of dedicated activities and systems to bring in more accountability, transparency, and
participation achieving long-term success in PIM and generally in any institutional reform program
would be elusive.
Thus, this second component will support activities to improve public sector information system (e-
governance) and strengthen judiciary and parliamentary capacity. Furthermore it will provide change
management tools and training in leadership, coaching and results-based management to cultivate a
culture of collaboration for results and to develop real ownership of reforms within the


﻿administration.
Sub-Component 2.1: Institutional Strengthening (US$8.0 million)
O
Q)      In addition to technical capacity that the actors involved in the PIM chain will acquire through
training, guidance, and systems upgrade, another equally important and perhaps more fundamental
dimension is governance and institutional capacity. As indicated earlier, the issues of overlaps, lack
of accountability, corruption, justice, and ineffective institutions are major constraints broadly for
development programs, and PIM in particular. Some key activities envisaged under this sub-
component include:
*      Organizational audit of the DGB, DGIFD, DGSPP, and AGT to take into account their new
functions under the WAEMU directives, the new Finance Law, and the PPP law
*      Strengthen the capacity of the Parliamentary Finance Commission in PIM
*      Consolidate results-based management by developing mission letters, performance contracts,
task assignments and performance monitoring. Pilot the performance evaluation system on high-
profile/high-risk projects
*      Strengthen the newly created Office for the follow-up and implementation of donor pledges
(BOSS)
*      Strengthen the e-governance platform including the HR system and the Enterprise
Architecture framework
*      Support to the Anti-Corruption Committee
*      Support to the justice sector training through training of judges
Sub-Component 2.2 Adaptive Change Management (US$3.0 million)
Institutional changes, such as those outlined in the PIM-strengthening activities of Component 1 and
in the activities outlined in Component 2.1, are often more adaptive changes than they are technical.
In order to ensure that adequate adaptive skills are present among the staff who are to be affected by
th e project, this sub-component will support change management capacity building and a series of
rapid-results initiatives that wil 1 pilot changes within affected ministries and engage stakeholders in
an analytical process to understand and then be better able totackle the barriers to reform. Radical
transformation will not occur overnight; the important areas of change addressed in the restof the
a project will require incremental improvements and the sustained support of stakeholders.
The following activities are envisaged:
*      Rapid Result Initiatives and coaching to engage those in leadership positions within the civil
service to ensure continued commitment to the reform agenda
*      Leadership training for leaders from the public sector and civil society, to be better able to
identify priority issues, develop adaptive and problem-driven intervention plans, and establish and
use feedback loops for better project design and management
*      Coalition building support activities involving civil society and the media in monitoring and
overseeing public sector reform priorities.
Component 3: Support to the Project Coordination Unit (US$2.0 million).
Main activities that will be carried out by the PCU include: (i) development of annual work programs
and corresponding procurement plans, procedure manuals, and procurement plans; (ii) conduct of


﻿fiduciary and monitoring activities; (iii) coordination of the technical work related to the project
components; (iv) and monitoring in project preparation and implementation. The project will
provide funding for necessary office equipment, acquisition of the accounting software, and payment
of the various activities related to project coordination and monitoring.
O
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU0 1)
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
It is unlikely that safeguard and social studies will be required for this capacity building operation
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Robert A. Yungu
Approved By:
O
Regional Safeguards   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)             Date: 09-Feb-2016
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)              Date: 09-Feb-2016
Manager:


