                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC7868

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central America                  Project ID:      P149895
                            Project Name:      Honduras and Nicaragua Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project (P149895)
                            Task Team          Ana Campos Garcia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        01-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (50%), Flood protection (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Financial Sector Development (50%), Natural disaster management (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        24.00               Total Bank Financing:         24.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  24.00
                              Total                                                                        24.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase the fiscal resilience of Honduras and Nicaragua to
                           catastrophic events resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and excess rainfall. This will be
                           achieved by providing financing to allow participating countries to access regional risk insurance
                           against tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and excess rainfall through CCRIF membership. Affordable
                           entrance and membership will be achieved by joining CCRIF with other COSEFIN countries. The
                           IDA credit will be instrumental in positioning Honduras and Nicaragua to obtain catastrophic risk
                           protection more efficiently and cheaply through CCRIF.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Project will finance the entrance fee and the annual insurance premiums necessary for Honduras
                           and Nicaragua to participate in the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Facility (CCRIF).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 1: Payment of the entrance fee to the CCRIF for Honduras andNicaragua

                           The objective of this component is to assist Honduras and Nicaragua to join the CCRIF by financing
                           their entrance fees. This fee is equivalent to the first year’s insurance premium for each of the two
                           participating countries.

                           Component 2: Payment of annual insurance premium to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua

                           The objective of this component is to assist Honduras and Nicaragua to purchase the catastrophe
                           insurance coverage offered by the CCRIF during the first three years of membership. Annual
                           insurance premiums will initially cover risk associated with tropical cyclone (wind and storm surge)
                           and earthquake during Year 1. Upon availability of an additional excess rainfall product in Year 2,
                           Component 2 may also be used towards financing annual insurance premiums meant to cover against
                           excess rainfall. Every year, members will have the choice of selecting the exact mix of insurance
                           coverage (i.e. how much coverage for which event) depending on country prioritization.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed Project does not contemplate any direct physical investments, but rather will finance
                           entrance fees and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
                           insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and the Project therefore does
                           not have any safeguards implications.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed Project does not contemplate any direct physical investments, but rather will finance
                           entrance fees and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. The
                           insurance funds will not be tied or tracked to any specific investments, and as a result there is no
                           need to assess the Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                           BP 4.01                                              and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF
                                                                                for Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                                payments are linked to carrying out any specific
                                                                                investments or physical works, the Project is not
                                                                                expected to cause any adverse environmental
                                                                                impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                                                                                and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF
                                                                for Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                payments are linked to carrying out any specific
                                                                investments or physical works, the Project is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                expected to have any impacts on natural
                                                                habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                Project will only finance entrance fees and
                                                                annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
                                                                Honduras and Nicaragua. As none of the
                                                                payments are linked to any specific investments
                                                                or physical works, the proposed Project will not
                                                                finance any activities that could affect the
                                                                welfare of forest dependent communities or the
                                                                management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                Project will not finance any activities that
                                                                involve the procurement or significant use of
                                                                pesticides, but rather will only finance entrance
                                                                fees and annual insurance payments to the
                                                                CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
                         BP 4.11                                and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF
                                                                for Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                payments are linked to any specific investments
                                                                or physical works, the Project is not expected to
                                                                have any impacts on physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The proposed Project will finance entrance fees
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                and annual insurance payments to the CCRIF
                                                                for Honduras and Nicaragua. Since none of the
                                                                payments under the proposed Project are linked
                                                                to any specific investments or physical works,
                                                                the project activities will not have any impacts
                                                                on indigenous peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   Given that the proposed Project will only
                         4.12                                   finance entrance fees and annual insurance
                                                                payments to the CCRIF for Honduras and
                                                                Nicaragua which are not linked to any specific
                                                                investments or physical works, the proposed
                                                                Project will not cause any involuntary
                                                                resettlement as defined by the policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No   This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                Project will neither support the construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                investments which rely on services of existing
                                                                dams.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            Project will only finance entrance fees and
                                                                                                                                 annual insurance payments to the CCRIF for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 Honduras and Nicaragua and will not affect any
                                                                                                                                 international waterways as defined under the
                                                                                                                                 policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The proposed Project will exclusively finance
                                 7.60                                                                                            entrance fees and annual insurance payments to
                                                                                                                                 the CCRIF for Honduras and Nicaragua. As the
                                                                                                                                 proposed Project is not linked to any specific
                                                                                                                                 investments or physical works, the policy on
                                                                                                                                 disputed areas is not triggered.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 14-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      No Social or Environmental Assessment is required beyond the initial screening.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Ana Campos Garcia

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                                                                                                Date: 13-Mar-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Anna Wellenstein (SM)                                                                                                Date: 13-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
