                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA7871
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Latin America                       Project ID:    P149670
                            Project Name:      Central America & Caribbean Catastrophe Risk Insurance Project (P149670)
                            Task Team          Ana Campos Garcia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                              Estimated   01-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSDU                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Non-compulsory pensions and insurance (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other Financial Sector Development (50%), Other Private Sector Development
                                              (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      53.01           Total Bank Financing:                      0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0.00
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                       53.01
                              Total                                                                                         53.01
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve affordability of high quality sovereign
                           catastrophe risk transfer associated with tropical cyclones, earthquakes, and/or excess rainfall for
                           COSEFIN and CARICOM member countries.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                         Page 1 of 6
                         The Project has three components that have been identified in collaboration with COSEFIN and
                         CARICOM countries and partners. As experience has shown with the Caribbean Catastrophe Risk
                         Insurance Facility (CCRIF)’s tropical cyclone and earthquake insurance products, the structure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provides standardization (which is increasingly requested by the market), limits operating costs, and
                         takes advantage of the risk pooling benefits, which will contribute to lower premium rates for all
                         participating countries. Importantly, all products offered are expected to be self-sustaining by the
                         time of project close, as fully-capitalized risk retention ability within CCRIF will have been
                         developed.

                         Component 1: Finance Parametric Earthquake Risk Insurance for COSEFIN countries within CCRIF

                         Component 1 will finance the following activities (until donor contributions to the Multi-Donor Trust
                         Fund (MDTF) Component 1 have been exhausted): (a) coverage of all costs associated with
                         reinsurance earthquake risk contracts and/or accessing capital markets, as well as (b) financing of all
                         insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermath of an earthquake. By funding the
                         main costs associated with providing COSEFIN countries with earthquake risk coverage, this
                         component will enable the CCRIF to retain more of the capital it generates from premium payments.
                         This, in turn, will help building its reserves to underwrite such coverage more quickly. As the CCRIF
                         builds its risk-bearing capacity for the COSEFIN portfolio during project implementation, higher
                         coverage price ratios for the earthquake product will be offered at Project closing.

                         Component 2: Finance Parametric Climate Risk Insurance for COSEFIN countries within CCRIF

                         Component 2 will enable the CCRIF to provide tropical cyclone (hazards related to wind speed and
                         storm surge) and / or excess rainfall coverage to COSEFIN members as a measure to adapt to climate
                         change. While the corresponding tropical cyclone models for COSEFIN countries are already
                         available and the insurance coverage is ready to be offered for the 2014 hurricane season, technical
                         design work needs to be completed for the excess rainfall product, including: (i) preparation of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         country-risk assessment model; (ii) calibration of this model; (iii) actuarial analyses; and (iv) design
                         of country-specific insurance based on these parameters. The CCRIF would lead and finance the
                         technical and insurance design work to underwrite the potential excess rainfall losses in close
                         collaboration with the interested countries.

                         This component will cover the main costs of the CCRIF’s risk retention and transfer with regards to
                         the tropical cyclone and excess rainfall perils of participating COSEFIN countries. Specific activities
                         financed under this component (until donor contributions to the MDTF Component 2 have been
                         exhausted) are: (a) coverage of all costs associated with reinsurance contracts and/or accessing
                         capital markets, (b) financing of all insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermath
                         of a tropical cyclone and excess rainfall event, as well as (c) consultancy services required for the
                         technical work to develop the climate risk products. By funding the main costs associated with
                         providing COSEFIN countries with tropical cyclone and excess rainfall coverage, this component
                         will enable the CCRIF to retain more of the capital generated from premium payments, thereby
                         building its reserves to underwrite such coverage more quickly.

                         Component 3: Finance Parametric Climate Risk Insurance for CARICOM countries within CCRIF

                         Component 3 will enable the CCRIF to provide excess rainfall coverage to CARICOM member
                         countries as a measure to better adapt to climate change. The current tropical cyclone policy for


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         CARICOM countries is linked to wind and storm surge damage caused by an eligible hurricane. In
                         response to strong interest expressed by CARICOM stakeholders, the CCRIF started working on the
                         design of a new insurance product to cover disasters caused by excess rainfall, both due to hurricanes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and non-hurricane systems, about three years ago. This product will function as a hedge rather than
                         aim to replicate actual losses from the various hazards related to heavy rainfall. The CCRIF
                         continues to develop a more sophisticated rainfall model to provide quality climate risk coverage,
                         with the following technical preconditions still required for a country including: (i) refinement of
                         country-risk assessment model; (ii) calibration of each model; (iii) actuarial analyses; and (iv) design
                         of country-specific insurance based on these parameters. As of February 2014, the CCRIF has
                         generated preliminary country-risk assessment models for excess rainfall and is advancing work on
                         model calibration in collaboration with interested governments. It is expected that an excess rainfall
                         product for some of the CARICOM states will become available during the 2014 hurricane season.

                         This component will cover the main costs of the CCRIF’s risk retention and transfer with regards to
                         excess rainfall perils of participating CARICOM countries. Specific activities financed under this
                         component (until donor contributions to Component 3 of the MDTF have been exhausted) are: (a)
                         coverage of all costs associated with reinsurance contracts and/or accessing capital markets, (b)
                         financing of all insurance payouts not covered by the reinsurance in the aftermath of an excess
                         rainfall event, as well as (c) consultancy services required for the technical work needed to develop
                         the excess rainfall product. By funding the main costs associated with providing CARICOM
                         countries with excess rainfall coverage, this component will enable the CCRIF to retain more of the
                         capital generated from premium payments, thereby generating a strong reserve base, which
                         contributes to the goal of providing participating countries with efficient access to catastrophe
                         insurance.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed Project does not contemplate any physical investments, but rather will finance
                         parametric insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for catastrophic events resulting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall. The Project therefore does not have any
                         safeguards implications.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The proposed Project will finance parametric
                          BP 4.01                                              insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                               costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                               tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                               rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked to
                                                                               carrying out any specific investments or physical
                                                                               works, the Project is not expected to cause any
                                                                               adverse environmental impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The proposed Project will finance parametric
                                                                               insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                               costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                               tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess



                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                                                                        rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked to
                                                                        carrying out any specific investments or physical
                                                                        works, the Project is not expected to have any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                        Project will only finance parametric insurance
                                                                        payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for
                                                                        catastrophic events resulting from tropical
                                                                        cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall that
                                                                        are not linked to any specific investments or
                                                                        physical works. It will not finance any activities
                                                                        that could affect the welfare of forest dependent
                                                                        communities or the management of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No           This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                        Project will not finance any activities that involve
                                                                        the procurement or significant use of pesticides,
                                                                        but rather will only finance parametric insurance
                                                                        payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for
                                                                        catastrophic events resulting from tropical
                                                                        cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall that
                                                                        are not tied to any specific physical investment
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No           The proposed Project will finance parametric
                         BP 4.11                                        insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                        costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                        tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                        rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked to
                                                                        any specific investments or physical works, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        Project is not expected to have any impacts on
                                                                        physical cultural resources in client countries.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No           The proposed Project will finance parametric
                                                                        insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance
                                                                        costs for catastrophic events resulting from
                                                                        tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                        rainfall. Since none of the payments under the
                                                                        proposed Project are linked to any specific
                                                                        investments or physical works, the project
                                                                        activities will not have any impacts on indigenous
                                                                        people.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No           Since the proposed Project will only finance
                         4.12                                           parametric insurance payouts and coverage of
                                                                        reinsurance costs for catastrophic events resulting
                                                                        from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                        rainfall that are not linked to any specific
                                                                        investments or physical works, it will not cause
                                                                        any involuntary resettlement as defined by the
                                                                        policy.



                                                                Page 4 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                 Project will neither support the construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 investments which rely on services of existing
                                                                                 dams.
                            Projects on International           No               This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 Project will only finance parametric insurance
                                                                                 payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for
                                                                                 catastrophic events resulting from tropical
                                                                                 cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall and
                                                                                 will not affect any international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The proposed Project will exclusively finance
                            7.60                                                 parametric insurance payouts and coverage of
                                                                                 reinsurance costs for catastrophic events resulting
                                                                                 from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess
                                                                                 rainfall. Since none of the payments are linked to
                                                                                 carrying out any specific investments or physical
                                                                                 works, the policy on disputed areas is not
                                                                                 triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed Project does not contemplate any physical investments or works, but rather will
                              finance parametric insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for catastrophic events
Public Disclosure Copy




                              resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall. The Project therefore does not
                              have any safeguards implications.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The proposed Project does not contemplate any physical investments or works, but rather will
                              finance parametric insurance payouts and coverage of reinsurance costs for catastrophic events
                              resulting from tropical cyclones, earthquakes and/or excess rainfall. The Project therefore does not
                              have any safeguards implications.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable as the proposed Project does not trigger any safeguards policies.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Not applicable as the proposed Project does not trigger any safeguards policies.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Not applicable as the proposed Project does not trigger any safeguards policies.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                         Page 5 of 6
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Ana Campos Garcia
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Niels B. Holm-Nielsen (SM)                  Date: 04-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
