INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR1 199
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mongolia                   Project ID:  P125232
Project Name: Third Sustainable Livelihoods Project (P125232)
Task Team       Helene Monika Carlsson Rex
Leader(s):
Estimated       19-Feb-2013                Estimated    06-Jun-2014
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector:         Sub-national government administration (50%), General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (30%), Other social services (20%)
Theme:          Other environment and natural resources management (20%), Decentralization
(20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other soc ial protection and risk
management (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      36.20            Total Bank Financing:   24.80
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     24.80
SWITZERLAND Swiss Agency for Dev. & Coop. (SDC)                 11.40
Total                                                           36.20
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
Component 1: Capacity Building for Local Governance and Livelihoods (US$10.2 million)
The objective of this component would be to build the capacity at local and national levels for the
implementation and further development of the Government's programs and mechanisms for
supporting rural development.
At the local level, Soum governments will be challenged to effectively manage the significant
increases in governance responsibilities and investment planning and execution delegated through
the IBL and Soum Initiative. The project would include a four-year program of capacity building
coaching and establishment of effective monitoring and evaluation systems to support all of
Mongolia's soums. The objective of capacity building at soum level is twofold, touching political
and administrative decentralization. Politically, the objective is to make participative processes in
soums strong and functional in order to elicit citizen's preferences and make sure that soums respond
to these preferences. Administratively, the objective is that soums have an effective, efficient,
transparent and robust governance that is strategy-oriented, lawful and accountable at the same time.
To support this, training would be delivered in relevant topics, including:
(a)    Community participation in local development;
(b)    Local development planning, including for pastureland management;
(c)    Budget preparation and adoption;
(d)    Budget execution, including procurement; and,
(e)    Reporting, monitoring and evaluation and management information systems.
This training and technical assistance would primarily be delivered through Soum Support Teams,
based in each aimag. These teams would be provided with technical backstopping from national
Technical Assistance providers, which would support the development of training curricula and
materials and training of trainers. This system should enable close and frequent contact between the
aimag level teams and the soum authorities and citizens.
At the national level, the project would provide technical support to Government to develop and
a        strengthen the Soum Initiative and LDF, including the possible integration of the two. For the Soum
Initiative, which is still a piloting stage, technical assistance would be provided to MoED to elaborate
and scale-up the program. This could include the review and assessment of the piloting phase of the
Soum Initiative, the development of guidelines, manuals, rules and regulations governing the
program as it scales up, and the strengthening of national level systems for the administration and
monitoring of the program.
Component 2: Good Governance Performance-Based Grants (PBGs) (US$21.7 million)
Component 2.1: Performance-based Grants (US$20.6 million)
To provide incentives for soums to achieve good governance objectives, a performance-based grant
(PBG) mechanism would be implemented under SLP3, explicitly tied to the LDF. The objective of
the PBGs would be to enhance good governance in the entire budgeting process starting with
financial and policy planning, including budget preparation and adoption, budget execution,
accounting, reporting, internal and external control and public scrutiny. Financing and execution of
public capital investments at soum level and below is an important part of the budgeting process.
Page 2 of 9


﻿Particular importance would be given to citizen participation, alignment of soum budgets with bagh
citizen priorities and citizen satisfaction with the LDF process and outcomes. Based on a soum
performance monitoring system, all soums will be rated annually by independent experts against a
set of agreed performance indicators. Those soums meeting or exceeding agreed targets would
O
U        receive a percentage of the prior year's LDF allocation as budget support in the following financial
year. Currently it is proposed that this top-up would represent approximately twenty five percent of
the previous year's allocation, though this would be reviewed during the project and revised if
necessary. PBGs will be disbursed to qualifying soums through MOF Treasury systems along with
LDF allocations.
Component 2.2: Annual Performance Assessments (US$0.9 million)
The monitoring and assessment system for PBGs would be implemented by the PIU. The assessment
and ranking of soum performance would be outsourced to a politically neutral third party (Good
Governance Performance Assessment Teams). SLP3 would finance the training of these teams. The
PIU would oversee the capacity building to ensure comparability between the yardsticks used to
measure performance from one to another part of the country and to ensure political neutrality.
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$3.6 million)
A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) would be established for SLP3 within MoF. The third
component would support this implementation s tructure, financing the costs of staff, related
expenditures and the M&E, procurement and FM functions. M&E support would be supported by
SDC and include developing a Management Information System for the LDF, and conducting a
baseline, mid-term and end of project impact assessment.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will operate across the country in every soum and therefore across all ecological regions
(desert-steppe, steppe, mountain-steppe). The investment support would be at soum level and below.
The majority of soums are rural and the predominant resource base is grassland supporting semi-
nomadic herding. Small urban centers (provincial capitals) would also be eligible for investment
support under the PBGs. The participation of Ulaanbaatar in the project would be limited to
technical assistance for capacity building but no investment under the project (ie Ulaanbaatar
districts would be excluded from the PBGs).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Feng Ji (GENDR)
Songling Yao (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes
OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09  No
Physical Cultural Resources No
OP/BP 4.11
Page 3 of 9


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/BP Yes
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement  No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No
O
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas No
OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
General:
At the time of project approval by the World Bank's Board (May 2014) the Ministry of Economic
Development (MoED) was authorized as the implementing entity. Since then, there has been a
Government restructuring and MoED has been abolished. Ministry of Finance has been authorized
as the new implementing entity of the project. Ministry of Finance was the implementing entity
for both SLP-I and SLP-II. The restructuring ISDS reflects the change in implementing entity.
The restructuring did not result in any changes to the safeguards triggered. The PDO also remains
the same.
The project would finance similar types of investments as were financed under SLP2 (the previous
phase of the Program), typically small scale works and goods. In this regard, the same safeguards
issues apply with similar associated impacts. No large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are
anticipated.
Social: One of the objectives of the project is to increase and institutionalize community
engagement in local development processes, therefore, SLP3 would further reduce the
vulnerability of rural communities and enhance the security and sustainability of herder
households' livelihoods throughout the country. The project will be nationwide in geographical
coverage. There are more than 30 ethnic groups in Mongolia, of whom the Khalkh make up the
majority and comprise over 90% of the population. The majority of Mongolia's ethnic minority
groups share similar customs, traditions and systems of production as the Khalkh, with the
exception of the predominantly Muslim and linguistically differentiated Kazakhs in western
Mongolia, and traditionally nomadic reindeer-herding Tsaatan peoples in the north. These two
exceptional ethnic minority groups have been identified as Indigenous Peoples as defined by
OP4. 10 Indigenous Peoples. As identified from the Tsaatans consultation, the principal issue is
that those who maintain traditional lifestyles in remote areas would be excluded from participating
in project decision-making processes, and hence would not be afforded equitable opportunities to
benefit. Furthermore, for the remote Tsaatans, traditional tribal decision-making processes differ
from other citizens' khurals.
The project does not envisage any land acquisition or population resettlement.
Page 4 of 9


﻿Environment: Overall, the project is expected to generate significant environmental benefits. It
would not have any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts.
However, the project carries risks/impacts on environmentally sensitive areas, land degradation,
and water resources due to the broader geographical scope of the project and its relation to policies
O
and institutional development. Similar to the SLP2, the project could have a positive
environmental impact on reduced land degradation. But the project, if not managed well, has the
potential to degrade land, biodiversity as well as surface water and groundwater resources through
the effects of livestock, over-extraction from rehabilitated or newly-created wells, surface water
capture facilities and localized pollution from sheep/goat dips. Although the impact of increased
extraction of groundwater from the relatively shallow wells is probably negligible, there may be a
cumulative effect of wells on groundwater recharge. Despite the focus of the project on a
sustainable distribution of livestock, there is a risk that herders will seek to increase their numbers
of stock. More livestock in combination with an adverse distribution of livestock would have
implications for land degradation, biodiversity and water resources.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no potential and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project will support small scale works at the local level. There were two main options
considered for this: i) to co-mingle funds with the Government Treasury system through its Local
Development Fund (LDF) and therefore subject to country systems; or ii) to operate a separate
IDA financed "window" for the LDF top up, as was done with SLP2. From a safeguards
perspective, operating a project top-up funds to the LDF would provide greater oversight.
However, the first option was preferred as this is working directly with the government systems
and therefore contributes more to the project's objective of institutionalizing approaches. It should
be noted that for the types of investment under the LDF, government environmental policies, if
applied correctly and rigorously, meet the Bank safeguard requirements. The ESMP would serve
as the guideline to local authorities to implement environmental controls. For social safeguard
issues, which are focussed on IPs, the approach taken under SLP2 would be used.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will implement those mitigation measures which have been proved effective under
previous projects. The ESMP has been updated to reflect the experience and lessons learned, and
include carefully designed mitigation measures. A series of mitigation measures include, among
others:
a)      Each soum has prepared its Pastoral Management Plan in accordance with the Guidelines
approved by the Agency for Land Administration, Geodesy and Cartography, including maps of
the location of environmentally-sensitive areas (such as degraded areas, areas of importance for
threatened wildlife, and watersheds of critical importance for downstream drinking water
supplies). The project will support capacity for preparation of PRM plans and maps to avoid
impacts on sensitive areas.
b) The current Environment Guidelines and screening system will be incorporated into the LDF
project screening process, updated to reflect the experiences learned from the previous projects.
c)     Simple Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for small scale of construction would be
applied to the LDF, consistent with current environmental regulation, e.g. the revitalization of
existing wells, renovation works on different facilities (schools, health care center), improvement
Page 5 of 9


﻿of cultural centers, recreational facilities and storage facilities for animal feed and fodder.
d) The project will continue to conduct an annual Environmental Audit to review the performance
of the ESMP implementation as part of Annual Performance Assessments. Performance with
respect to environmental regulation application will be included in the criteria to qualify for PBGs.
O
e)     The project will develop local level capacity to implement the ESMP, through the Soum
Support Teams.
The updated ESMP specifies the monitoring plans, such as monitoring on land degradation and
water resource, institutional arrangement, capacity building activities, and the budget for the
ESMP implementation for the project.
Regarding IPs: As its scope is the same with the second phase of the project, the SLP3 will be
carried out nationwide including the areas populated with the Kazakh groups and Tssatan groups
who have been identified as Indigenous Peoples as per the definition of OP4. 10. Therefore,
OP4. 10 thus applies to the SLP3 as it did in the second phase from which the Project Indigenous
Peoples Plan (IPP) was developed. The SLP3 will continue to follow the existing IPP, which has
been updated on behalf of the Kazakh and Tssatan communities based on their demand-led
consultation and participation in the project context of the third phase. As a result, special planning
measures have been incorporated for project activities in Bayan Olgii and Khovd aimags where
the Kazakh live, to ensure equitable Kazakh representation in decision-making as well as their
access to documentation in Kazakh language. Meanwhile, for the Tsaatan communities in
Khuvsgul aimag, some more specific measures have been updated and incorporated into project
design to ensure that traditional Tsaatan communities have an equitable opportunity to participate
in project processes and to benefit from project activities.
Borrower capacity: This is the third phase of the Sustainable Livelihoods Program. In the
previous phases the implementing agency demonstrated its adequate capacity to deal with
safeguard policies and issues during implementation. Under the third phase the implementation
agency will remain the Ministry of Finance, however, a new Project Implementation Unit will be
established, as the old PIU has been dismantled. The major difference in design under the
proposed third phase is that the World Bank funds would be co-mingled with Government public
budget in the Local Development Funds and therefore the safeguards policies should apply to
whole LDF, which is the responsibility of the local government to implement. It is therefore of
a          importance that there is capacity at the local level to address safeguard issues. The project would
provide support for this and capacity at the PIU level, and would only release Bank funds via the
Local Development FUnd to those soums which have been assessed and found to be compliance
with environmental policy, as per the annual environmental audit conducted as part of Annual
Performance Assessments.
Capacity demonstrated under SLP2: The main challenge for SLP2 has been to adapt the
environmental screening process to new legal requirements. The environmental law of 2009 gave
responsibility for environmental screening and impact assessment to licensed officers of the
Ministry of Nature, Environment and Tourism, posted at aimag level and limited the roles of soum
environmental inspectors to environmental audit of completed investments. Because the licensed
EIA officer is only 1 per aimag and far from the soums, it created a bottleneck, especially for
screening of large numbers of small PRM subprojects involving fencing of hay fields and
improvement of livestock water sources. The bottleneck was addressed by preparing a checklist
for screening of CIF and PRM subprojects for use by soum environmental inspectors, who would
compile environmental screening forms and send them to the aimag EIA officer for signature or
Page 6 of 9


﻿further investigation. Another process introduced by a recent amendment to the environmental law
makes it legal to conduct a " strategic environmental assessment" for a category of similar
investments under a program approach, instead of requiring each single subproject to go through
the screening and sign-off process. This could greatly facilitate the approval of large numbers of
O
small PRM subprojects in support of implementing pastureland management plans. It would be
important for the PIU to seek official government consent that the abovementioned streamlined
environmental screening process developed for SLP2 would be carried over into IBL
implementation under SLP3 and included in the Government LDF Guidelines.
Under SLP2, nearly all social investments under the Community Initiative Fund involved small
improvements of existing facilities and only the public baths and other subprojects those involving
the construction of new facilities or adding new buildings to existing facilities were required to go
through environmental screening as well to comply with social safeguards on land acquisition.
Under SLP3, the ten-fold increase in funds available for soum budgets is likely to increase the
number of new facilities built. In addition, under SLP2, the PIU was required to implement social
safeguards for Tsaatan reindeer herders in the far north of Khovsgul aimag and to track
beneficiaries of investments in Bayan Olgii aimag to ensure that the Kazakh minority received an
equitable share of benefits. The main difference from SLP2 is that SLP3 supports the
government's program and adopts government standards and procedures. Government has the
necessary environmental standards and procedures but it does not have social safeguards.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project would be nationwide, and potentially impact on all citizens, though the focus is on
rural dwellers. The key stakeholders are therefore rural citizens, including the IPs identified
(Tsaatan and Kazakh) and the local authorities serving them. Consultations and disclosure of key
documents was done at provincial (aimag) and district (Soum) levels, and online. The social
assessment in the IPP confirmed that the project received a broad support from the Tsaatan and
Kazakh minority groups and continuous consultation and participation will be done in the project
implementation stage. The IPP was locally disclosed on March 28, 2013 and sent to InfoShop on
April 9, 2013.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Apr-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Apr-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mongolia                                                 28-Mar-2013
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Apr-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Apr-2013
Page 7 of 9


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Mongolia                                                  28-Mar-2013
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Helene Monika Carlsson Rex
Page 8 of 9


﻿Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)            Date: 28-Jan-2015
Manager:
0
Page 9 of 9


