                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC7597

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                        Project ID:       P148620
                            Project Name:       Large Enterprises Energy Efficiency Proj (P148620)
                            Task Team           Dhruva Sahai
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Oct-2014                      Estimated         16-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASIS                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal Area:     Climate change

                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         7.98               Total Bank Financing:                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        2.50
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                               5.48
                              Total                                                                           7.98
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of this activity is to strengthen the enabling environment for the
                           development of energy efficiency investments in large industrial enterprises in Indonesia.

                           The strengthening of the enabling environment, supported by the GEF grant, is expected to
                           incentivize local banks to undertake EE financing in the large enterprises sector resulting in
                           significant energy savings.
                         C. Project Description
                         Component 1: Project development. Total cost: US$ 5.25 million of which GEF US$ 4 million, MoI
                         US$ 1.25 million as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A.        Project development, project appraisal and monitoring. [GEF US$ 2 million] Under this
                         sub-component, a pipeline of EE investment projects will be prepared to be financed from existing
                         credit lines and, potentially through co-financing by IFC. A specific target under this project will be
                         to develop the energy efficiency lending activities of two or three participating banks. The
                         participating banks will be selected according to the following eligibility criteria: (i) portfolio of
                         industrial clients; (ii) ability to work with existing or planned IFI credit lines; and (iii) meeting Bank
                         criteria for FIs. Focus will be on 10-15 very creditworthy large industries, both state owned and
                         private. Focusing on very creditworthy industries would increase the prospects of coming to financial
                         close. This would then yield valuable case studies for the dissemination part.

                         Activities to be undertaken are expected to include:
                         (i)     pipeline development support for project developers/industries and financiers – including the
                         selection of and building institutional capacity in a strong technical/financial advisory services entity
                         responsible for generating a pipeline of bankable EE projects;
                         (ii)    the development of special EE financing products or schemes;
                         (iii)   developing enhanced systems for monitoring energy savings after the projects have been
                         financed and implemented; and
                         (iv)    training.

                         B.       Transaction advisory services. [Total cost: US$3.25 million, of which GEF US$2 million;
                         MoI US$1.25 million] Under this sub-component, the project will support:
                         (i)    preparation of a Project Operations Manual for participating banks that would include sub-
                         project selection criteria, a list of eligible sectors, project types and sizes, energy savings
                         requirements, safeguards risk assessment and management guidelines and requirements, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         monitoring and reporting requirements; and
                         (ii)   provide transaction advisory services from subproject identification through financial close -
                         experiences gained under this sub-component will allow the participating banks to continue financing
                         EE projects after the IFI loan funds are fully disbursed.

                         Component 2: Awareness and Capacity Building. Total cost: US$2.47 million; of which GEF US
                         $1.22 million, MoI US$1.25 million as follows:

                         A.    Awareness Building and Knowledge Exchange. [Total cost: US$1.75 million, of which GEF
                         US$0.75 million, MoI US$1.0 million] This sub-component will support:

                         (i)     awareness building, training, and information dissemination to key market players on the
                         opportunities for EE and successful implementation schemes through existing IFI credit lines which
                         would be shared and disseminated widely to demonstrate the viability of EE lending;
                         (ii)    market studies, assessments and options papers for future investment programs beyond the
                         state-owned enterprise market; and
                         (iii)   participation in stakeholder dialogue during roundtables and other fora to discuss various
                         policy and market issues to develop recommendations to scale-up investments in the sector.

                         B.      Capacity Building within MoI and MEMR. [Total cost: US$0.72 million, GEF US$0.47
                         million, MoI US$0.25 million] This sub-component will support:

                         (i)      dialogue with donor partners conducting review of ongoing EE primary and supplemental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         policies to identify deficiencies and discuss options for their resolution with a focus on the large
                         enterprises sector;
                         (ii)     review of incentive programs recommended by donor partners, and offered by the
                         Government to improve utilization and impacts for EE market development;
                         (iii)    design and launch of an energy/EE indicator function and database within MoI and MEMR
                         covering all sectors;
                         (iv)     identification and assessment of other potential policies with high impact potential, such as
                         government green/EE procurement, minimum energy performance standards, green award, tax
                         exemptions, etc. and develop program plans; and
                         (v)      staff training.

                         Component 3: Project Management: Total cost: GEF US$ 0.26 million

                         This component will finance consultants to support project implementation including procurement,
                         project monitoring, evaluation, and reporting activities.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Nationwide.

                         The project will be a stand-alone GEF project that will prepare a pipeline of EE investment projects
                         to be financed from existing credit lines at commercial banks to support the establishment of viable
                         financing and implementation models for large industrial enterprises in various sectors.

                         There are no physical works and no physical characteristics directly relevant to the safeguards issues
                         arising from this project. There are, however, potential physical safeguard implications relating to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         future investments in EE projects that will arise from activities supported by this project.
                         Furthermore, the advisory services and capacity building activities will also need to integrate
                         safeguards in accordance with the Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Polices to
                         Technical Assistance issued by the Bank.

                         Potential EE investments would include manufacturing process modifications in industries. These
                         modifications for EE improvement are made within the existing physical boundaries of industrial
                         plants (inside the plant fence), and do not require plant expansion. Therefore, it is not expected that
                         the foreseen future EE investments that arise due to project intervention will lead to any adverse
                         impacts to IPs or involve IPs in any manner nor will they involve any involuntary resettlement or
                         need for compensation for loss of assets or loss of access to assets or resources.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Industry will be the project implementing agency working in close collaboration
                         with the Ministry of Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR). The main stakeholders of this project
                         are MoI, MEMR, participating banks and industrial owners. Additional stakeholders are equipment
                         suppliers, construction and engineering companies, technical/financial advisors and relevant
                         government ministries (e.g., Finance, Environment, and Research and Technology).

                         The project will prepare a pipeline of EE investment projects of very creditworthy large industries,
                           both state owned and private, and establish intermediary financing facilities in two or three banks to
                           be selected under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the subprojects will be prepared
                           to ensure that the project has identified all potential environmental and social impacts that may be
                           arise due to the nature, scope, and scale of each of the sub projects and to provide adequate risk
                           screening, impact assessment, and appropriate mitigation measures to address the identified risks and
                           impacts.

                           Under Component 1, when selecting the participating banks and industries, the bank’s capacity to
                           manage environmental and social safeguards according to the guidelines in the ESMF will be
                           evaluated as part of the selection process (OP 8.30). The screening criteria will be included in the
                           Project Operations Manual.

                           As MoI and MEMR do not have sufficient experience with the implementation of Bank projects and
                           Bank safeguards measures, Component 2 will include a safeguards awareness and capacity building
                           set of activities for MOI and MEMR. Specific training on how to implement the ESMF and the
                           Project Operations Manual (POM) will be conducted by a consultant hired by MoI. The ESMF will
                           be included in the POM. Instructions on how to articulate safeguards requirements into legal
                           covenants between the financing partners and the sub-borrowers would be provided to MoI, MEMR
                           and the partners. The Bank’s safeguards specialists will provide support in developing the ToR for
                           the consultants who will implement the training program.

                           Through implementation of this project, MoI, MEMR, and the financing partners will build their
                           capacity to design and finance more sub-projects beyond this project. They will need to ensure that
                           implementation of safeguards measures by sub-borrowers (industrial owners) is also well managed.
                           Therefore, the ESMF needs to be well understood, implemented, and strengthened and can be readily
                           used for the proposed financing partners. The financing partners will then prepare their own
                           Environment and Social Safeguards Management System during full operations in line with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           requirements and guidance in the Bank-approved ESMF.

                           The ESMF and Project Operations Manual of this GEF grant project will be required to be fully
                           disclosed and consulted on with all relevant stakeholders prior to Appraisal. MoI or MEMR and the
                           partners will work with the project design consultant to conduct public consultations on the project
                           and project ESMF.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ninin K. Dewi (EASIS)
                           Qing Wang (EASER)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project is to develop a pipeline of Energy
                           BP 4.01                                               Efficiency subprojects and to establish financing
                                                                                 intermediary facilities in two or three selected
                                                                                 local banks. The project will also provide
                                                                                 awareness and capacity building activities for
                         project stakeholders including MOI, MEMR,
                         participating banks and selected industrial
                         enterprises.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Team shall also determine whether OP 4.03
                         World Bank Performance Standards will be
                         triggered. OP 4.03 may apply instead of OP
                         4.01 to Component 1 of the Project if the Bank
                         determines that the private banks have good and
                         recognized capacity to identify, assess and
                         manage the environmental and social risks
                         associated with the EE investments to be
                         financed.

                         EE physical investments resulting from sub-
                         project development and capacity building
                         activities will not be financed by the project.
                         Rather, they will use other sources of funds
                         from existing IFI credit line facilities.

                         Some of the known potential sub-project
                         impacts are related to construction aspects
                         associated with the movement of older and
                         inefficient machinery and materials (dust, noise,
                         disposal of packaging wastes). There is also the
                         possibility of hazardous materials management
                         in certain EE sub-projects such as replacement
                         of asbestos insulation, removal and disposal of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fluorescent light bulbs, etc. If old industrial
                         refrigeration equipment will need to be replaced
                         by new and efficient ones, this may result in
                         possible leakage of ozone depleting substances
                         which are also GHG with high GWP used as the
                         refrigerant in the equipment.

                         The nature of the project and the potential
                         physical impacts of all foreseen EE investments
                         are not known at this time, but most are
                         expected to be site specific at existing industrial
                         plants (within the physical boundaries of each
                         plant) and, of the ones known now, these are
                         expected to generate minor to moderate local
                         environmental impacts with no adverse, large,
                         sensitive or irreversible environmental impacts
                         generated as a result of the project or any future
                         subprojects.
                         An Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework will be prepared to ensure that the
                         project has identified all potential environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and social impacts that may arise due to the
                         nature, scope and scale of each of the sub
                         projects and other project financed activities to
                         provide adequate risk screening, impact
                         assessment and appropriate mitigation measures
                         to address the identified risks and impacts.

                         The screening process detailed in the ESMF, in
                         particular, will screen the investments for the
                         full range of environment and social impacts,
                         safeguard policies triggered and provide advice
                         on the types of safeguard instruments to be
                         prepared for each of the identified investments
                         financed during implementation of the GEF
                         project.

                         There will be three outputs from the screening
                         exercise: (1) the EE initiatives that would only
                         require an ECoP: environmental code of
                         practice, for example an SOP to handle the
                         disposal of used equipment; (2) initiatives that
                         would require UKL UPL or ESMP to manage
                         minor impact of the projects (e.g. install new
                         unit or minor change in onsite production
                         process and process control). (3) Initiative that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would require the revision of AMDAL because
                         it will change the production process and output
                         that is significantly different with the current
                         AMDAL the project has in place.

                         The ESMF will specifically include screening,
                         assessment and management guidelines to
                         address hazardous materials as an issue of
                         special concern. In addition, the ESMF will
                         specify that the advisory services and capacity
                         building activities of the project will need to
                         integrate safeguards in accordance with the
                         Interim Guidelines on the Application of
                         Safeguard Polices to Technical Assistance
                         issued by the Bank.

                         Finally, the ESMF will also provide guidance
                         on the instruments to be prepared in the event
                         that other impacts are identified as outlined
                                                                above. Further, since most, if not all of the EE
                                                                investments will be within existing projects and
                                                                project sites, the ESMF will have provisions for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                conducting due diligence of existing projects to
                                                                thoroughly assess all environmental and social
                                                                compliance, legacy issues and performance of
                                                                existing operations. The due diligence
                                                                procedures and guidelines will be integral to the
                                                                ESMF.

                                                                The ESMF will be an integral part of the Project
                                                                Operations Manual.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                not undertake any physical EE interventions or
                                                                construction in natural habitats areas, or in
                                                                protected or sensitive areas. All future
                                                                investments are expected to be located at
                                                                existing industrial plant sites in already
                                                                converted areas.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   The project will not lead to investments that are
                                                                located in or near forests or that affect forests as
                                                                all EE investments are expected to be at existing
                                                                industrial plant sites.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                not purchase or use pesticides and none of the
                                                                activities are expected to increase the use of or
                                                                involve pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   The project will not lead to investments that will
                         BP 4.11                                have impacts on PCRs, during construction and
                                                                operation as all interventions are expected to be
                                                                at existing industrial plant sites.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The policy is not triggered as all works are
                                                                expected to occur within the physical
                                                                boundaries of existing industrial sites (within
                                                                the plant fence) where there is no presence of
                                                                IPs.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   The policy is not triggered as there is no activity
                         4.12                                   that leads to involuntary resettlement and land
                                                                acquisition. The foreseen investments will not
                                                                lead to plant expansion rather it will involve
                                                                simple equipment retrofits and modernization,
                                                                which are expected to be in the existing physical
                                                                boundaries of industrial plants.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No   The project does not involve a plan to build a
                                                                dam nor does it depend on an existing dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The Project does not involve investments in
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            international waterways.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The Project does not involve investments in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Oct-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF will be prepared, cleared and disclosed prior to project appraisal expected October 1,
                                      2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Dhruva Sahai

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 12-Jun-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Nathan M. Belete (SM)                                                                                                Date: 20-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
