                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA6931

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Mar-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Benin                              Project ID:    P148628
                                                        Parent         P113145
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:     Benin Emergency Urban Env. Additional Financing (P148628)
   Parent Project    Benin Emergency Urban Env. Project (P113145)
   Name:
   Task Team         Africa Eshogba Olojoba
   Leader:
   Estimated         20-Feb-2014                        Estimated   08-May-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    AFTN1                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Solid waste
                     management (25%), Sub-national government administration (1 0%), Public
                     administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (15%), Wastewater
                     Treatment and Disposal (10%)
   Theme(s):         Other urban development (45%), Municipal governance and institution building
                     (35%), Climate change (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       6.40           Total Bank Financing:                 6.40
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                            6.40
     Total                                                                                  6.40
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                              Page 1 of 6
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve infrastructure and mitigate the negative environmental impact of floods in Cotonou
   Agglomeration and to increase Benin level of preparedness for future flooding.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The following is a summary of the EUEP components and Additional Financing (AF) activities:

Component 1: Drainage Improvement and Rehabilitation (Total IDA: US$25.96 million, of which
US$2.40 million AF)
Calibration, grading, cleaning, scouring and expansionof drains and channels. The interventions will
occur in three collectors (AA, P and W); and the Fifadji bridge will be elevated and rehabilitated to
complement civil works to be undertaken on the P collector. It will also include capacity building,
training, and strengthening the system for repair and maintenance of drains and channels. The AF
will upscale component activities by expanding drainage network rehabilitation efforts by 2.1
kilometers total, covering the neighborhoods of Houeyiho and Vedoko. The AF activities are
expected to benefit at least 10,000 additional residents.

Component 2: Municipal Solid Waste Management (Total IDA: US$15.02 million, of which US
$1.20 million AF)
Substantially improving the collection, transport and disposal of solid wastes in the project’s targeted
areas, and strengthening the institutional and legal frameworks for Solid Waste Management, as per
the National Solid Waste Management Strategy. The following activities will be financed: (i)
strengthening the institutional and regulatory framework for Solid Waste Management; (ii)
construction of municipal solid waste collection points and transfer stations in the five municipalities
of Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, Porto Novo, Ouidah and Seme-Podji; (iii) construction of a controlled
dumpsite at Abomey-Calavi; and (iv) construction of an additional cell at the Ouesse landfill site. AF
activities include (i) preparation of a technical and economic feasibility study for putting in place a
system for solid waste sorting at source in strategic areas of Cotonou, Porto Novo and Abomey-
Calavi; and (ii) two year support to the operation of Takon controlled landfill.

Component 3: Improved Wastewater Management and Sanitation (Total IDA: US$5.40 million, of
which US$0.70 million AF)
The following activities will be financed: (i) capacity building and provision of technical assistance
for establishing appropriate norms, standards, guidelines and regulations for more effective
management of wastewater; (ii) development of urban wastewater master plans for the Cotonou
Agglomeration and Porto Novo; and (iii) implementation of a small-scale decentralized sanitary
drainage and wastewater treatment pilot project. AF activities will support mitigation of the negative


                                              Page 2 of 6
environmental impacts and health hazards resulting from the mix of rain runoffs from rains with
latrine and septic tank contents during the floods. The AF will fund wastewater pilots for sanitation
and sewage management.

Component 4: Flooding and Disaster Risk Preparedness and Management (Total IDA: US$7.13
million, of which US$2.10 million AF)
Activities financed under this component include: (i) development of an early warning system; (ii)
implementation of an information dissemination and awareness raising program on floods; and (iii)
institutional strengthening of key institutions and other principal actors on management of crisis and
risks associated with flooding. AF activities will complement preparedness activities by further
improving the operational capabilities and management of flood risks in Cotonou and neighboring
municipalities.

Component 5: Project Management (Total IDA: US$2.89 million - No AF)
Effective and efficient management support for the implementation of the project, including
development and operationalization of an effective and efficient Monitoring and Evaluation System,
and all fiduciary requirements. AF activities will continue to be managed by the EUEP executing
agencies, the Public Works Executing Agency (Agence d'Exécution des Travaux Urbains
(AGETUR)) and the Society for Regional Study of Urban Habitats and Planning (Société d'Etudes
Régionales d'Habitat et d'Aménagement Urbain (SERHAU)).
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Greater Cotonou Metropolitan Area: Cotonou, Abomey-Calavi, Ouidah, Seme-Kpodji and Porto
Novo.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

 6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes
 BP 4.01
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

 Pest Management OP 4.09             No

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
 BP 4.11
 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
 4.12
 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No



                                             Page 3 of 6
   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The AF, like the original project, is classified as Category B, indicating that environmental and
     social impacts are likely to be of small scale, site-specific and, thus, manageable at an acceptable
     level. No new safeguards policies are triggered beyond OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
     and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The types of physical investments (drainage
     rehabilitation, rehabilitation and construction of Municipal Solid Waste infrastructures, wastewater
     pilots, etc.) are covered by the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and
     Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the parent project, prepared and disclosed in-country
     and at the Info Shop on May 29, 2012 and June 1, 2012, respectively. For the purpose of this AF,
     the ESMF and RPF were re-disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop on January 22, 2014 and
     January 27, 2014, respectively. The Recipient will continue to prepare Environmental and Social
     Impact Assessments/Environmental Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans as and
     when necessary during implementation. These instruments will be disclosed prior to the
     commencement of any works.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be of small scale, site-specific and,
     thus, easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected during project
     implementation.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     The choice of rehabilitation/construction civil works has been selected to minimize displacement
     of people and/or property. The overall project design remains the same under the AF.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     Safeguards are well mainstreamed into the implementation of the parent project and AF. All
     contracts and bidding documents include environmental and social management clauses in order to
     enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence during civil works. The
     capacity of the Recipient to address safeguards is considered adequate: safeguards implementation
     of the parent project has been satisfactory, and the environmental and social specialists in the
     executing agencies and the PMU have ensured that all physical investments/sub-projects were
     screened using the checklist contained in the ESMF. To date, four ESIAs/ESMPs (for the
     rehabilitation of drainage channels, a bridge, an access road and opening of a new cell in the
     landfill site) and 1 RAP have been prepared by the project, consulted upon, approved, and
     disclosed in-country and at the World Bank Info Shop. The World Bank team has been closely



                                               Page 4 of 6
  monitoring project safeguards elements, and will continue to ensure that the executing agencies
  comply with safeguards requirement under the AF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  All key stakeholders (relevant ministries, agencies, municipal authorities, local communes, chef du
  quartiers, development partners and NGOs) have been and will continue to be consulted regularly.
  The AF will continue the dialogue with the key stakeholders and the project will rely on the
  rigorous implementation of the ESMF and RPF, in ensuring that the appropriate mitigation
  measures are taken into account in accordance with Benin and World Bank’s safeguards policies
  in active consultation with the key stakeholders. Disclosure of safeguards documents has taken
  place as planned at the World Bank InfoShop and in-country, and will continue to similarly take
  place.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Jan-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jan-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Benin                                                            22-Jan-2014
  Comments: This was disclosed in two widely read newspapers
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Jan-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jan-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Benin                                                            22-Jan-2014
  Comments: This was disclosed in two widely read newspapers
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [     ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                            Page 5 of 6
    Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
    If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Sector Manager review the plan?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Africa Eshogba Olojoba
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 13-Mar-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)                               Date: 13-Mar-2014




                                               Page 6 of 6
