                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1815

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                           Project ID:      P133456
                            Project Name:      Sichuan Chongqing Cooperation: Guangan Demonstration Area Infrastructure
                                               Development Project (P133456)
                            Task Team          Joanna Mclean Masic
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       19-Aug-2014                        Estimated        26-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: EASCS                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Urban Transport (65%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                               (33%), Vocational training (2%)
                            Theme(s):          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (65%), Infrastructure services for
                                               private sector development (35%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    233.00                     Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    133.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       100.00
                              Total                                                                       233.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to support Linshui Town and Qianfeng District to
                           provide adequate infrastructure services to support current needs and projected growth. This would
                           be achieved through capacity building, strategic planning and optimizing infrastructure designs to
                           ensure a more efficient operation of services.
                         C. Project Description
                         The total indicative cost of the proposed project is US$ 233 million including an IBRD Loan of US
                         $100 million and counterpart funding making up the remaining 57 percent. The project is comprised
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the following four components.

                         Component 1: Strategic Planning for Current Needs and Projected Growth.
                         The component will support the Governments of Linshui Town and Qianfeng District to strategically
                         plan and optimize infrastructure designs, manage environmental resources and constraints and target
                         investment promotion activities to meet current and future needs. The component includes technical
                         assistance for: (a) strategic capital investment and asset management planning; (b) strategic
                         environmental planning; and (c) development of investment promotion services which reflect the
                         towns' comparative advantages and strategic plans for infrastructure and environment.

                         Component 2: Linshui Town Integrated Urban Revitalization and Expansion.
                         The component will: (a) replace the combined sewer and drainage system with a separate sewer
                         system (19km) in existing urban-industrial area; (b) create linkages to the urban core and Guang’an-
                         Chongqing highway by constructing two main and two secondary roads (15.51km) in the urban-
                         industrial expansion area with associated water supply, drainage and sewerage pipelines and tree
                         planning and lighting; (c) increase wastewater treatment capacity (by 30,000m³ per day) and provide
                         associated sewerage system and services in the urban-industrial expansion area (6km); (d) establish a
                         technical skills training center in the urban-industrial expansion area; and (e) provide technical
                         assistance and capacity building for skills training and employment services.

                         Component 3: Qianfeng District Integrated Urban Revitalization and Expansion.
                         The component will: (a) rehabilitate road networks (3.4km) in the urban core to improve linkages to
                         the urban-industrial expansion area; (b) construct four secondary roads (16.8km) in the urban-
                         industrial expansion area, including water supply, drainage and sewerage pipelines and tree planning
                         and lighting; and (c) establish a 1.6km riverside ecological belt.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Institutional Strengthening.
                         The component will support participating institutions to implement the project. The component
                         includes: (a) project management and implementation support; and (b) management capacity
                         building and associated training.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guang’an City is located in southeast Sichuan, bordering Chongqing Municipality. It belongs to the
                         sub-tropical humid monsoon zone with ample precipitation. Annual average temperature is 16-18 ℃.
                         Main landforms include low hills and river valleys.

                         Qianfeng District is located in the east of Guang’an City, around 17 km away from central Guang’an
                         City. Qianfeng’s long-term urban-industrial expansion area covers 23.86km². The current built-up
                         area is about 3.1km² (mainly industries) located in the south of the urban-industrial expansion area,
                         while in the north there is a residential area.

                         Linshui County is located to the southeast of Guang’an City, 38km away from central Guang’an
                         City. The long-term industrial-urban expansion area is located in south of Linshui County Town,
                         with an total area of 16.89km². The area is mostly hills and farmland. In the northern part of the
                           expansion area (about 3.5 km²), neighboring central Lishui County Town, industrial developments
                           have taken place.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The population of Qianfeng District and Linshui County Town and surrounding areas is still
                           predominantly rural. Over the next 10 – 15 years, urbanization in these areas is expected to result
                           from rural to urban migration. Urban-industrial expansion is required to ensure the necessary jobs,
                           housing and urban services can be created in these towns to absorb and provide good living
                           conditions for rural migrant workers. However, along with the urban-industrial expansion process,
                           land use change and industrial development will have a potential impact on local and regional
                           environmental quality and resources. Also, since most of the rural residents in urban-expansion areas
                           would lose their land permanently, it will be a challenge for them to generate and secure their family
                           income unless appropriate measures are taken. To address the potential risks, a comprehensive
                           assessment of direct, indirect and cumulative impacts is required as well as well-designed mitigation
                           and public communication plans to ensure environmental and social considerations are integrated
                           into planning processes and development decisions.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A Prefecture Project Management Office (PMO) under Guang’an Municipal Development and
                           Reform Commission will take overall responsibility for project preparation; while Linshui County
                           and Qianfeng District will establish a PMO respectively for day-to-day project management,
                           including safeguards. Neither MPMO nor Linshui County PMO or Qianfeng District PMO have
                           experience of Bank-financed projects. There is a need to enhance safeguards management capacity
                           through appointing qualified dedicated staff and providing training.

                           The PMO has engaged the China Railway Eryuan Engineering Group Company (CREEGC) to
                           prepare the project Environmental Assessment. CREEGC is a Class A EIA institute accredited by the
                           Ministry of Environmental Protection. CREEGC previously prepared the Environmental Assessment
                           for the Bank-financed Sichuan Small Towns Development Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Jun Zeng (EASCS)
                           Ning Yang (EASCS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The policy is triggered. The project is
                           BP 4.01                                              anticipated to result in environmental and social
                                                                                benefits through improving infrastructure
                                                                                services, enhancing environmental management,
                                                                                and providing employment opportunities.
                                                                                Although the physical activities of the project
                                                                                are fairly straightforward and the associated
                                                                                environmental impacts are anticipated to be
                                                                                limited, environmental and socially related
                                                                                issues related to changes in land use and urban-
                                                                                industrial expansion are the main issues to be
                                                                                assessed thoroughly in the EIA. Considering the
                         potentially significant impacts, it is prudent to
                         assign category A to the project. Full
                         assessment of potential project benefits and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts is needed. Applicable World Bank
                         Group Environmental, Health and Safety
                         Guidelines will apply to the project EA as well.

                         For each of the two project areas, an EIA and a
                         standalone EMP will need to be prepared. An
                         Environmental Assessment Executive Summary
                         for the entire project will also need to be
                         prepared.

                         The EA shall address the following key issues:

                         (1)      Assessment scope. It is noted in both
                         project areas, Bank financed and non-Bank
                         financed activities have been planned. A
                         Planning EA has been prepared for each of the
                         two industrial-urban expansion areas
                         respectively. EA will document concrete
                         information of implementation schedule of
                         planned development. Assessment scope and
                         depth shall be proportional to the information
                         available and risk levels. The EA ToR will
                         document the information upfront. The
                         delineation of the Project and its Area of
                         Influence will be one of the first steps in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conduct of the EIA to determine its scope and
                         that this will be spelled out in the ToRs.
                         (2)      Environmental baselines. Baselines will
                         need to be thoroughly described in the EIA,
                         including physical, ecological, and social
                         conditions in the region and project areas.
                         (3)      Alternative analysis. The EIA shall
                         include alternative analysis including “without
                         project” versus “with project” scenario, road
                         alignment and width, location of the wastewater
                         treatment plant, disposal of sludge and receiving
                         water body. The alternative analysis shall take
                         into account technical, economic, environmental
                         and social considerations.
                         (4)      Due diligence of existing municipal
                         services and industrial activities. The EIA shall
                         include water supply, wastewater treatment,
                         solid waste collection, transfer and landfill,
                         energy supply for the two areas’ parksurban-
                         industrial expansion areas. In addition, basic
                         information on waste streams, environmental
                         management performance of enterprises in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         two urban-industrial expansion zones shall also
                         be examined and documented in the EIA.
                         (5)      Cumulative and induced impacts
                         assessment. The EIA shall include a separate
                         chapter on cumulative and induced impacts
                         assessment beyond the immediate project sites,
                         particularly on land use change and urban-
                         industrial expansion. The assessment shall be
                         based on existing industrial and infrastructure
                         development, analyze planned development in
                         the project areas, and assess overlapping and
                         accumulation of the potential impacts, and
                         assess resource threshold and environmental
                         carrying capacity of the project area to conclude
                         whether the proposed urbanization and
                         industrial development is environmentally
                         sustainable. Key findings and recommendations
                         of the planning EIAs shall be appropriately
                         incorporated into the project EIA in order to
                         streamline the preparation process.

                         Given the amount of time and effort needed to
                         undertake a meaningful cumulative impact
                         assessment and its implication on the project
                         milestones and delivery it was agreed to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         undertake the main part of the cumulative and
                         induced impacts assessment during project
                         implementation. The cumulative impact
                         assessment therefore would be undertaken in
                         two phases, i.e., a first phase during project
                         preparation to identify the main issues and
                         potential cumulative impacts and agree on
                         further work to be done during project
                         implementation; and a second phase to conduct
                         a detailed assessment during implementation as
                         part of the capacity building component.


                         (6)     Information disclosure and public
                         consultation. The mission emphasized the
                         importance of conducting meaningful public
                         consultation. The consultation shall be
                         conducted through the EIA preparation process
                         to determine key environmental issues,
                                                                 safeguards policies to be triggered, extent of
                                                                 environmental and social impacts and how
                                                                 public concerns are to be incorporated into the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 project design and environmental management
                                                                 plan. Affected people, appropriate agencies and
                                                                 NGOs (if any) shall be consulted through
                                                                 questionnaire, interview and public meetings. In
                                                                 the case of questionnaire interview, the
                                                                 questions shall be designed in a specific and
                                                                 comprehensive manner. It’s compulsory that
                                                                 when the draft EIA is prepared, the full report
                                                                 shall be made available to the general public.
                                                                 (7)       Environmental Management Plan
                                                                 (EMP). The mission advised that a standalone
                                                                 EMP shall be prepared to address institutional
                                                                 arrangements, mitigation measures, monitoring
                                                                 and training requirements and environmental
                                                                 management budget.
                                                                 (8) The need for an environmental management
                                                                 framework will be further reviewed during
                                                                 preparation.
                                                                 (9) The EIA shall thoroughly address non-
                                                                 OP4.12 social impacts by incorporating findings
                                                                 and recommendations of social assessment.
                                                                 (10) Terms of reference for the environmental
                                                                 impact assessment which will include all the
                                                                 requirements listed above, are under preparation
                                                                 and will be reviewed by the Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The project areas apparently have been subject
                                                                 to long-term and intensive human activities and
                                                                 do not meet the definition of natural habitats by
                                                                 OP4.04. Further screening will be carried out
                                                                 during project preparation in the project area of
                                                                 influence to confirm whether the policy needs to
                                                                 be triggered.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The proposed project is not anticipated to
                                                                 involve forests. This policy is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The proposed project is not anticipated to result
                                                                 in use or procurement of pesticides. This policy
                                                                 is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   Initial screening shows that in the project area
                         BP 4.11                                 there are no cultural relics identified in the
                                                                 project areas. Further survey of physical
                                                                 cultural resource will be carried out during
                                                                 project preparation and documented in the EA.
                                                                 If no physical cultural resources are identified,
                                                                chance-find procedure will be included in the
                                                                EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The project will support one district and one
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                county in Guangan city in Sichuan province.
                                                                The task team visited the Qianfeng District and
                                                                Linshui County and had meetings with the
                                                                municipal departments in charge of the minority
                                                                affairs and the engaged villages. The task team
                                                                concluded there is not any community of a
                                                                Chinese minority identified by the Chinese
                                                                government in the project area, only Han
                                                                populations in those engaged villages. Han
                                                                populations do not fall into the Bank ethnic
                                                                minority definition. Thus, OP 4.10 is not
                                                                triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Involuntary resettlement is unavoidable for the
                         4.12                                   purpose of project construction. Major
                                                                involuntary resettlement impact will consist of
                                                                collective land acquisition and structure
                                                                demolition in both rural and urban areas. These
                                                                details will be updated once the resettlement
                                                                impact survey is conducted. A Resettlement
                                                                Action Plan will be prepared by the client in
                                                                both English and Chinese based on the
                                                                requirements of Bank’s OP/BP4.12. A
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                prepared for involuntary resettlement that is yet
                                                                to be determined but will take place during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                project implementation. A Due Diligence
                                                                Report will be prepared for involuntary
                                                                resettlement that has already taken place or that
                                                                is on-going. Terms of Reference for the RAP,
                                                                Due Diligence Report, and RPF are under
                                                                preparation and will be reviewed by the Bank.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    There is a long-term plan for a dam to be
                                                                constructed to the west of the Linshui Town
                                                                urban expansion area. However, these plans are
                                                                only tentative and there are currently no links to
                                                                the proposed Project. At this stage the Safety of
                                                                Dams is therefore not triggered. The task team
                                                                will seek further information on the status of
                                                                this proposed plan during preparation.
                         Projects on International        No    The project will not involve any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waters. This policy is not triggered.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                         7.60                                   This policy is not triggered.
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      In parallel with the project feasibility study reports, the EA/EMP and RAP/RPF will be drafted
                                      and submitted to the Bank for review by January 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Joanna Mclean Masic

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 28-Oct-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Mark R. Lundell (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 29-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
