                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6326
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina             Project ID:    P129961
                            Project Name:      Sustainable Forest and Landscape Management Project (P129961)
                            Task Team          Nathalie Weier Johnson
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Nov-2013                        Estimated   15-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEN                              Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Land degradation
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):         Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (50%), Climate change
                                              (25%), Land administration and management (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.58           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                           5.58
                              Total                                                                                       5.58
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           A.      Proposed Development Objective:
                           To build capacity of forestry sector stakeholders and to demonstrate approaches for sustainable forest


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         and land management through integrated management of vulnerable forest, scrub and pasture
                         landscapes.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Enhance the Planning and Monitoring for SFLM

                         This component focuses on selected activities through a targeted capacity building effort, building on
                         existing efforts introduced and identified under the FDCP. The component addresses current
                         remaining needs for broad-based institutional support that are aimed at both the productive and non-
                         productive forest areas and landscapes to improve management, production and sustainability.

                         Sub-component 1.1. Forest Block Management Plan Certification Support. This sub-component
                         focuses on improving the sustainability of forest management, and community engagement with
                         local peoples, through implementation of forest management to certifiable standards (e.g., FSC or
                         Program for Endorsement of Forest Certification PEFC) in regions of the country that have not had
                         the resources or capacity to move forward on this important forest certification effort. In FBiH this
                         will largely consist of assisting with initial certification efforts while in RS this will focus on
                         recertification. State level reviews of policy and legislation are already undergoing through existing
                         review processes to ensure that timber exports are in compliance with EU requirements; if needed
                         during this process, the sub-component will facilitate the FBiH and RS in engaging with this process
                         and in reflecting its outcomes in ongoing certification efforts.

                         Sub-component 1.2. Forest Road Strategic Plan. This sub-component will help identify the most
                         urgent forest road rehabilitation projects (to improve both environmental and economic performance
                         and help meet forest certification requirements) through the preparation of a model forest roads
                         master plan and by instigating the adoption of best practice forest road rehabilitation guidelines to
                         minimize environmental impacts, as part of the government’s expected efforts to rehabilitate the
                         forest road network in both entities. The resultant best practice guidelines would also ensure
                         environmental/social impact assessments of all road works and support the forest enterprises’
Public Disclosure Copy




                         certification efforts.

                          Sub-component 1.3. Forest Management Information System (FMIS) Enhancements for
                         Mainstreamed Decision-Making. Improving forest management operations through capacity building
                         and localized development of the FMIS was already introduced under the FDCP. Existing centralized
                         and decentralized IT capacity is already in place. This project will improve ability for the FMIS to be
                         used in decision-making through introducing selected information relating to climate change:
                         specifically this includes introduction of carbon stock accounting for mitigation efforts, and
                         introduction of systems to monitor incidence of losses related to fires and pests. In addition, this sub-
                         component will also support selected issues relating to governance improvement; these include social
                         and financial accountability, flow of information, and potential artificial export barriers.

                         Sub-component 1.4. Participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). Some additional M&E work
                         will be supported throughout the project to assess effectiveness of existing and innovative systems,
                         with a view to disseminate findings and lessons that encourage the replication of successful
                         techniques. In general, this can include support for community-based monitoring, participatory
                         processes, and supplementary monitoring being undertaken through existing extension services. It is
                         important to note that lessons will also be drawn and disseminated from failed pilots to determine
                         why they did not succeed and to ensure that any errors or deficiencies are not carried forward into
                         future attempts.


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         Component 2. Demonstration and Replication of SFLM Techniques in Vulnerable Areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As the scrub forest is currently poorly stocked and areas of grassland are only slowly and unevenly
                         converting to forest, there is potential to substantially improve forest/habitat management, which
                         would help BiH’s climate change mitigation and adaptation program. The Project would be looking
                         at landscape management in terms of forest, degraded scrub, and unutilized pastures. The techniques
                         to be demonstrated include already developed sustainable forest practices through undertaking the
                         activities as pilots.

                         Sub-component 2.1. Afforestation - Assisted Natural Regeneration and Stand Rehabilitation. These
                         activities will be undertaken consistent with existing management plans in the public forest estate.
                         Support will be given for sites on minimum areas of 50 ha, providing investment needs as well as
                         operational support for up to 3 years for monitoring and management. It is expected that a minimum
                         of 500-1000 ha will be directly targeted within each entity, for such activities as (i) afforestation with
                         native species; (ii) afforestation with new species appropriate to drying conditions or increased fire
                         hazard; (iii) stand management complementing natural regeneration through thinning, weeding; (iv)
                         stand rehabilitation using enrichment planting, limbing, or thinning; and, (v) forest conversion from
                         coppice forest to high forest.

                         Sub-component 2.2 Multi-purpose Forestry Demonstration Techniques. This generally will involve
                         integrated management for vulnerable forest, scrub and unutilized pasture within the forested areas
                         classified as state forests or on private or local community forest and non-forest lands. These will be
                         demonstration activities on a minimum area of 2 ha per sub-project; in addition to capital
                         investments the sub-project support will also provide about 6 months of operational support. The
                         intent is to undertake innovative activities that improve SFLM while also addressing objectives in
                         some other sector (e.g., energy, water management, agriculture, tourism). Examples of candidate
                         activities include: (i) non-timber forest product (NTFP) harvesting and value added; (ii) medicinal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         products; (iii) hunting and wildlife management complementing forest management; (iv) bio-mass
                         management for energy production; (v) bio-mass thinning for local use and fire management; and,
                         (vii) forest-based tourism.

                         Sub-component 2.3 Fire Management Technique Demonstration and Implementation. This sub-
                         component is intended to engage local communities in implementing appropriate small-scale fire
                         management interventions. While there are no restrictions on land ownership, areas targeted will be
                         those under fire hazard. Preference will be given to activities involving an element of local
                         engagement and participation. Examples of eligible activities include: (i) fuel buildup management
                         (clearing of deadwood before fire season); (ii) training in controlled burns; (iii) creation of defensible
                         space including improvements in access; (iv) innovative water management systems in high risk
                         areas; (v) emergency preparedness drills; (vi) appropriate small-scale fire fighting equipment and
                         relevant training for its use; (vii) glass removal; and, (ix) waste management interventions (dump
                         removal). Areas can be of any size with no minimum or maximum.

                         Sub-component 2.4 Local Extension Services. This sub-component will provide operational support
                         to existing extension services to engage in direct facilitation of local participation in the above
                         activities (innovative demonstration projects and fire management).

                         Component 3. Project Management

                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                         Based on past experience and recent discussions with the Entities, the Project will be implemented
                         through the two Entity Ministries responsible for Forestry, namely their mainstreamed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation units (i.e., FBiH PIU and RS-APCU).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Most of the specific locations of project interventions have been determined during preparation and
                         will be finalized during appraisal. The project will be implemented at various forested locations
                         throughout the two entities (FBiH and RS) of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Esma Kreso (ECSEN)
                         Sandra Kdolsky (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The project includes interventions within the
                          BP 4.01                                            forest estate and surrounding landscape intended
                                                                             to improve the environmental management of
                                                                             these areas. As such, an Environmental
                                                                             Management Framework has been prepared with
                                                                             a sample Environmental Management Plan. This
                                                                             EMP will be adjusted based on site-specific
                                                                             characteristics and in line with the existing Forest
                                                                             Management Plans and will be used for all
                                                                             activities within the areas. The project will
                                                                             support activities in lands managed by the Forest
                                                                             Enterprises (i.e no natural forests). Any tree
                                                                             planting will avoid the use of invasive non-native
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             species as well as creation of monocultures.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               This is not being triggered as the criteria for
                                                                             project intervention, as included in the EMF will
                                                                             specifically eliminate activities in any critical
                                                                             habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 Yes              The project specifically targets public and
                                                                             private forest management practices. It should be
                                                                             noted that there are existing forest management
                                                                             plans under implementation for all forest blocks
                                                                             that will be covered under the project.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No               This policy is not triggered since all of the FSD-
                                                                             accredited forests in BiH prohibit use of chemical
                                                                             agents and pesticides in their activities. This
                                                                             requirement will also be transposed to the non-
                                                                             certified forests, if any.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                          BP 4.11




                                                                     Page 4 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               Any areas and forests that are currently being
                            4.12                                                used in anyway will not be eligible for project
                                                                                activities and therefore this OP is not triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts, most of the identified impacts within
                              the existing EMP include small-scale and easily mitigated environmental impacts, which should
                              and will be eliminated through sound construction and forest management practices.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Borrower has prepared an Environmental Management Framework with sample EMPs for this
                              Project. In addition, both of the PIUs in Federation BiH and Republika Srpska have long-standing
                              experience in implementing World Bank projects and in specific environmental and social
                              safeguards compliance. A responsible person for environmental and social safeguards will be
                              appointed within each of the two PIUs.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The key stakeholders are the line agencies associated with forestry management in the country,
                              including in the Federation the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Management and Forestry, the
                              Cantonal Forest Management companies, and the Federation and Cantonal Forest Administrations.
                              In the RS the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management and the RS Sume.
                              Individuals and communities who are proximate to and reliant on the ecosystem goods and
                              services are also stakeholders. The EMF was disclosed for review in the country and a
                              consultative meeting was held to discuss any issues with respect to the EMF. Targeted invitations
                              were sent to all of the above listed stakeholders, as well as representatives of the Ministries of
                              Environment in both entities and pertinent NGOs. The announcement was also made publicaly in
                              the daily papers. The final EMF will remain disclosed on the websites of the PIUs/Ministries with


                                                                        Page 5 of 7
                           a contact address on these websites.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           25-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Nathalie Weier Johnson
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Kulsum Ahmed (SM)                         Date: 30-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
