                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2545
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                           Project ID:    P127241
                            Project Name:      Intermodal & Rail Development Project (P127241)
                            Task Team          Henry Des Longchamps Devi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-Feb-2014                        Estimated   24-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Railways (80%), General transportation sector (10%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (5%), General industry and trade sector ( 5%)
                            Theme(s):         Trade facilitation and market access (70%), Export development and
                                              competitiveness (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     300.00           Total Bank Financing:                 300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                300.00
                              Total                                                                                      300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to deliver a reliable open access infrastructure on the Dar es
                           Salaam-Isaka rail segment. The project will also strengthen the capacity of the rail agencies to
                           manage the infrastructure, the traffic operations and the network regulation. The main elements that
                           have been identified as being critical to improving both infrastructure and train operations and on

                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         which the project focuses, are: (a) capacity and reliability of the rail infrastructure, (b) availability of
                         rolling stock, (c) the strengthening of the logistics chain in the port and the line terminals, and (d)
                         strengthening of the organizational structure required to deliver a strong business model supported by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effective open-access, and efficient management. The project has been designed around intermodal
                         rail services as this constitutes a ‘model’ which can be further extended on to non-containerized
                         general cargo and passenger train operations.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project has been earmarked for an IDA credit of US$300 million. In line with the
                         PDOs, the project has been designed around the following four components:

                         Component A: Improvement of Rail Infrastructure. This component includes the rehabilitation of key
                         sections of the railway track (308 km) and other infrastructure improvements to guarantee a reliable
                         service between Dar es Salam Port and Isaka Terminal. The rehabilitation of this section is consistent
                         with the activities under the ‘rehabilitation of railway infrastructure and intermodal handling
                         facilities’ in the BRN. The following civil works would be implemented:
                         a)        The rehabilitation of some railway track sections requiring urgent repairs on the 970 km long
                         Dar es Salaam-Isaka line. This sub-component will also support a pilot performance-based
                         maintenance contract for US$5 million as part of one package to ensure introduction of a third party
                         in the maintenance programs and ensure dissemination of best practice in terms of asset management;
                         b)        The rehabilitation of “weak” bridges to increase the capacity to minimum permissible of 15
                         tons/axle load;
                         c)        Train Control and Track Warrant Systems; and
                         d)        Supervision of Track and Bridge Works .

                         Component B: Rolling Stock. Component B includes the procurement and leasing of locomotives
                         and wagons. The container block train rolling stock will be dedicated to the introduction of a new
                         inter-modal service to be operated by Tanzania Railway Ltd. (TRL) between Dar es Salaam and
                         Isaka. The improvement in TRL’s traction capacity together with the track improvements under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A are also expected to have a positive impact on the operation of existing train services
                         on the Dar-Isaka rail segment. Component B will also support Reli Assets Holding Company
                         (RAHCO) in leasing three locomotives and purchasing 15 hopper wagons for the civil engineering
                         works.

                         Component C: Development of Isaka Terminal, Ilala Terminal and Dar es Salaam Port Platform.
                         This component comprises the development of intermodal container terminals in the port of Dar es
                         Salaam, in Ilala and in Isaka to allow for more efficient modal transfers to and from the rail,
                         including design and civil works to construct rail exchanges in Isaka terminal, and to upgrade rail
                         exchanges in Dar el Salaam Port. Upon completion of the mentioned infrastructure, the Tanzania
                         Revenue Authority (TRA) will re-establish customs clearance procedures at Isaka, where custom
                         bonded freight containers will be cleared.

                         Component D: Institutional Strengthening, Capacity Building, and Implementation Support. This
                         component is supporting preliminary design studies for track and bridge works and providing
                         additional technical support to the implementing agency through the establishment of a project
                         implementation team under RAHCO. It further includes support to the strengthening of TRL
                         operations, the setting-up and implementation of a track maintenance contract, and of a leasing
                         agreement between TRL and RAHCO for the rolling stock equipment purchased under the project,
                         technical assistance to Surface and Marine Transport Regulatory Authority (SUMATRA), support to


                                                                        Page 2 of 10
                         Ministry of Transport (MoT) for monitoring and evaluation, and training. This component also
                         includes technical assistance to develop and implement a five year business plan for TRL
                         maintenance and train operations. The resources under this Component will ensure that the Project is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented successfully and complements the Big Results Now (BRN) transformation measures to
                         create an enabling environment for sustainable open access railway operations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project focuses on the rehabilitation of the Dar es Salaam – Isaka section of the central railway
                         line to achieve a minimum axle load capacity of 15 tons per axle. To achieve this, the Project
                         proposes to: relay 308 kilometers (km) of rails with 80 Lbs rails; establish three intermodal
                         terminals; repair or reconstruct 144 bridges below 15 axle load capacity; and support sector
                         transformation. Since most of the proposed rehabilitation works under Component A are expected to
                         be carried out along the existing alignment and mostly outside of the urban areas, except where the
                         rail enters the urban areas, envisaged negative environmental and social impacts are expected to be
                         limited.

                         The project is rated category B and triggers the following Safeguards Policies: OP/BP 4.01, Physical
                         Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12). An Environmental and
                         Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), including an Environmental and Social Management Plan
                         (ESMP) defining mitigation measures, and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been
                         prepared by RAHCO. The draft EISA/ESMP was consulted upon, and the final version disclosed in
                         the country and Infoshop on December 23, 2013. The draft RPF was also the subject of
                         consultations, and the RPF was disclosed both in the country and Infoshop on January 10th, 2014.

                         In accordance with the ESIA findings, overall, the project is expected to generate positive impacts
                         including: (i) improved reliable services and safety; (ii) improved income to railway side
                         communities; and (iii) prolonged lifespan of trunk roads for both passengers and goods train. The
                         main economic activities of the communities living along the railway line are mainly agriculture and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         livestock keeping, as well as small commercial activities such as petty trading. The existing land use
                         along the railway line is primarily agriculture, grazing, forest reserves, human settlement and stone
                         quarry. Overgrazing and poor cultivation methods close to the railway line have resulted in land
                         degradation, particularly soil erosion, near the railway line.

                         Activities/investments envisioned under Components A and C on infrastructure, including
                         rehabilitation of some sections of the railway track, replenishment of ballasts, rehabilitation of weak
                         bridges, and construction and upgrading of rail exchanges in the port of Dar es Salaam and the Isaka
                         terminal, may have short term environmental implications on the biological and physical
                         environment during construction/rehabilitation and operation phases. Anticipated negative impacts
                         include: soil erosion; generation of solid waste; temporary disturbance to wildlife due to human
                         presence during construction; erosion of riverbanks/flood plain areas; river flow change and local
                         inundation due to rehabilitation works on bridges; accidents to wildlife livestock and people mainly
                         at railway crossings; and injuries to workers during construction.

                         Of the four project components component A (rehabilitation of railway tracks) and C (development
                         of Isaka Terminal and Dar es Salaam Port Platform) has the potential for resettlement impacts. Since
                         most of the proposed works under Component A are expected to be carried out along the existing
                         alignment and mostly outside of the urban areas, the envisaged negative social impacts are expected
                         to be limited, and based on the existing design there is no need for land acquisition. Likewise, the


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         expected works under Component C will be undertaken within the boundaries of existing terminal in
                         Isaka and the existing terminal platform in Dar port, and hence have limited negative impacts and not
                         require land acquisition. The OP 4.12, however, has been triggered because of some encroachment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         onto the railway right of way along the segments of rail track selected for rehabilitation. The
                         proposed works are spread over the entire corridor and except at the entrance to some urban areas,
                         mainly Morogoro and Dar, they will be located in the rural areas. In both rural and urban areas there
                         is some encroachment, such as farming activities close to the railway and makeshift shops in the
                         urban areas. To avoid or minimize impact of the proposed rehabilitation works, RAHCO will restrict
                         all interventions to within 7.5 meters in the construction areas along the corridor, and will not clear
                         the entire right of way of 15 and 30 meters in rural and urban areas respectively. Considering this, as
                         well as possible modifications in the works design and limited information availability at this stage
                         on the location of construction camps, a RPF has been prepared, consulted on, and was disclosed in
                         the country and Infoshop on January 10th, 2014. The RPF provides the framework to guide the
                         preparation of RAPs and the provision of compensation. Once the exact locations of quarries and
                         workshops are decided one or more Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) may have to be prepared
                         based on the RPF, consulted upon, and disclosed. In this case, any RAP will likely cover a small
                         number of Project-Affected People (PAPs). The entitlement section of the RPF was translated to
                         Swahili and provided to the villages located along the railway that will be rehabilitated.

                         No documented physical cultural properties (PCPs) were observed along the railway line. In Dodoma
                         there is a graveyard located close to the railway line but outside the 15m railway reserve. It was
                         noted during field work that the graveyard is almost full, so encroachment in the reserve is likely to
                         occur in the near future. Due to the proximity to the railway reserve and in order to avoid future
                         expansion in the reserve, the use of this graveyard should be closely monitored. Since the project is
                         envisaged to involve some significant earthworks, there could be possibility for chance finds of
                         Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs) during project implementation. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 is
                         triggered. Chance finds procedures (CFP) , consistent with World Bank’s OP/BP 4.11 and Tanzanian
                         laws have been included in the ESMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The ESIA also examines social considerations and risk in terms of safety. It points to a number of
                         potential safety issues including possible injuries to workers during construction, human casualties
                         and livestock accidents mainly at railway crossings. The latter is especially a serious concern in the
                         Kilosa District, between Mkata and Kilosa stations. There are some underpasses throughout the
                         corridor, but not enough, and even the existing ones are not always used. As a result, the project will
                         address these safety concerns by improving the existing level and foot crossings, as well as by
                         improving signaling in the most exposed areas, especially in the urban areas.

                         In approaching urban areas, there are also some serious safety issues such as overcrowding near the
                         tracks, and a number of foot and road crossings within towns and cities as well as villages are
                         without proper signals. As a result, the project includes a number of safety measures for pedestrians
                         and livestock as well as public awareness campaign. The project will also include an HIV/AIDS
                         awareness campaign along the construction sites.

                         Safeguards Instruments: Appropriate mitigation measures will be undertaken to address
                         environmental impacts. Findings of the ESIA indicate that, since most of the proposed activities will
                         involve rehabilitation along the existing alignment, and will be confined within a construction
                         corridor of 7.5m within the way leave, the envisaged negative environmental impacts are expected to
                         be site specific and limited. Since the way leave /railway reserve is an area, which is clear of
                         vegetation and no longer harbors species of flora or fauna of ecological importance, the rehabilitation

                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         works are not expected to generate significant adverse impacts on biological diversity along the
                         railway line. The potential impacts defined in the ESIA have been incorporated into an ESMP, which
                         outlines specific environmental and social mitigation measures to address the identified impacts that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         may be generated by the project’s investments and activities during project implementation. Potential
                         impacts from the rehabilitation of bridges are also covered in the ESIA and associated ESMP.
                         Furthermore, the ESIA and ESMP address potential impacts from the old rails and sleepers that will
                         be replaced during rehabilitation and recommended disposal mechanism. In addition, a RPF has been
                         prepared, which is the basis for one or more future Resettlement Action Plans if needed.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Helen Z. Shahriari (AFTCS)
                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             Investments envisioned under Component A and
                         BP 4.01                                             C are likely to cause negative impacts which may
                                                                             include: soil erosion; generation of solid waste;
                                                                             erosion of riverbanks/flood plain areas; accidents
                                                                             to wildlife, livestock and people mainly at railway
                                                                             crossings; injuries to workers during construction.
                                                                             Rehabilitation works on bridges may cause
                                                                             changes in river flow and local inundation during
                                                                             heavy rains. An ESIA has been prepared to
                                                                             examine potential impacts from rehabilitation
                                                                             works on the railway section, weak bridges and
                                                                             replenishment of ballasts. An ESMP has also
                                                                             been prepared as part of the ESIA outlining
                                                                             environmental and social mitigation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             management measures to offset the identified
                                                                             impacts. The ESIA including ESMP was
                                                                             consulted on, and disclosed in the country and
                                                                             Infoshop on December 23, 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              N/A

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              N/A

                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No              N/A

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             No documented physical cultural properties
                         BP 4.11                                             (PCRs) were observed along the railway line.
                                                                             Since the project is envisaged to involve some
                                                                             significant earthworks, there could be possibility
                                                                             for chance finds of PCRs during project
                                                                             implementation. A procedure for dealing with
                                                                             chance finds has been included as an integral part
                                                                             of the ESMP. The ESIA and associated ESMP




                                                                     Page 5 of 10
                                                                                were consulted on, and disclosed in the country
                                                                                and InfoShop on December 23, 2013.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The project involves the rehabilitation of the rail
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                and adjoining right-of-way. There are no
                                                                                indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             Components A and C have potential resettlement
                            4.12                                                impacts. Since most of the proposed rehabilitation
                                                                                works are expected to be carried out along the
                                                                                existing alignment and outside of the urban areas,
                                                                                and within boundaries of existing terminal in
                                                                                Isaka and Dar port, the envisaged negative social
                                                                                impacts are expected to be limited. Based on the
                                                                                existing design there is no need for land
                                                                                acquisition. The OP 4.12, however, has been
                                                                                triggered in case of encroachment in the 7.5
                                                                                meters of construction corridor along the
                                                                                segments of rail track selected for rehabilitation
                                                                                or any design change during the implementation
                                                                                that may require new land. As a result, a RPF has
                                                                                been prepared, was consulted on, and disclosed in
                                                                                the country and InfoShop on January 10th, 2014.
                                                                                Once the locations of quarries and workshops are
                                                                                decided, one or more RAPs may be prepared
                                                                                based on the RPF, consulted upon, and disclosed.
                                                                                In this case, any RAP will likely cover a small
                                                                                number of PAPs.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No                 N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall project impact is expected to be positive. The project is envisaged to lead to reduced
                              transportation costs and contribute to increased profits and income to all involved in business
                              including communities along the railway line. Railway transport is cheap and more secure and
                              reliable for both passengers and cargos. However, rehabilitation activities are likely to cause
                              negative impacts including: soil erosion and local inundation of riverbanks/flood plain areas
                              during bridge construction; accidents to wildlife, livestock and people mainly at railway crossings;
                              injuries to workers during construction; generation of solid waste from waste gravel and stone in
                              construction phase, concrete mortar and waste asphalt concrete at construction site and domestic
                              solid waste of workers; demolition and disposal of old rails and sleepers; and domestic waste from


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                           workers’ camps.

                           There is no large scale adverse social impact. The project is aimed at rehabilitation and except for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           those who have encroached on land within the right-of-way, no resettlement impacts are expected
                           unless the design is modified to address some of the sharp curves. The upgrade and re-design of
                           rail exchanges in the Isaka terminal Dar Port platform are envisaged to be carried out within
                           boundaries of existing terminals and port with no impact on resettlement and land acquisition.
                           Even in the event that some of the curves will be modified, still the impacts are expected to be
                           minimal and there is a RPF in place (and RAPs will have to be prepared) to ensure that if there
                           will be affected people they are compensated as such that their livelihood will not be worse of as a
                           result of the project. Other possible adverse social impacts that were identified in the ESIA include
                           traffic or workers accidents, and HIV/AIDs for which an awareness campaign will be undertaken.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to create and widen local and international markets and promote access to
                           the market. It is anticipated that the project will lead to increased utilization of railway wagons,
                           coaches and locomotives for transporting both passengers and cargoes contribute to durability of
                           roads.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The following project alternatives were considered: modification of construction technology and
                           engineering designs; shifting of the location of the rail line; and a without project alternative.
                           Based on the findings of the ESIA study, the existing track designs, which will be slightly
                           modified during rehabilitation, provide the optimum alternative for implementing the proposed
                           project subject to the mitigation of the identified temporary environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has been carried out, and a
                           Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared. A Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) has also been prepared for use during the implementation phase of the Project.
                           The RPF establishes a process to involve potentially affected communities/stakeholders in
                           planning and implementation of the project and develop and implement RAPs if needed.
                           Environmental assessments in Tanzania are guided by the Environmental Management Act of
                           2004 (EMA), which endorse the preventive approach to environmental management and
                           established an environmental impact assessment framework/system and procedure. This
                           legislation assigns responsibility to the National Environment Management Council (NEMC) to
                           ensure compliance with laid down environmental impact assessment procedures in planning and
                           execution of development projects. At the implementing agency level, RAHCO is guided by the
                           Railway Act No. 4 of 2002, which also stipulates the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
                           should be carried out prior to any rail project development. However, the capacity of the borrower
                           is limited with respect to implementation of ESMP and RAP. Currently, RAHCO/TRL has no
                           requisite environmental, health and safety unit that could be responsible for overseeing the
                           safeguards obligations that TIRP comes with. It is recommended that a unit within the RAHCO/
                           TRL management structure be established to coordinate implementation of environmental and
                           social obligations. Capacity building will be provided for the client during project implementation.
                           Environmental Monitoring and implementation of mitigation measures, as outlined in the ESMP,
                           will also include the training of RAHCO staff and contractor’s employees.


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include Government of Tanzania (responsible ministries, departments and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Agencies), freight forwarders agencies/railway and road transporters, local government A
                           \authorities where railway line passes, civil society organizations, communities and businesses
                           located along the central corridor, and those directly affected by the project (PAPs). The
                           stakeholders have been consulted during ESIA and RPF preparation and will continue being
                           consulted regularly through RAHCO.

                           During consultations with the above mentioned stakeholders, the participants expressed positive
                           attitude towards the proposed project, reflecting the perception that the project would result in
                           more benefits than negative effects. The perceived benefits include (i) employment creation for
                           many people during the construction phase, (ii) reliable and efficient railway services, (iii) reduced
                           travel time and costs, (iv) improved travel safety and comfort, (v) improved railway services that
                           will spark and promote economic growth in Tanzania and neighboring countries, (vi) improved
                           access to social services, (vii) increase in land value in the impact areas and changes in land use
                           and occupation patterns along the central railway line as a result of improved rail services, (viii)
                           increased attractiveness of the project area to big investors, and (ix) increased life span of trunk
                           roads as a result of traders switching from road transport to rail. Meetings have been documented
                           in the ESIA with lists of participants.

                           Public participation and consultations take place through individual, group, or community
                           meetings. Additionally, radio programs and other media forms may be used to further disseminate
                           information. PAPs if any will be consulted in the survey process, implementation of activities, and
                           during the monitoring and evaluation process.

                           The project will continue the dialogue with the stakeholders and rely on the rigorous
                           implementation of ESIA/EMP and RPF and possible RAPs if needed to ensure the appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           prevention, mitigation and compensation, with an emphasis on PAPs, in accordance with the
                           policies of Tanzania and the Bank's safeguards in active consultation with key stakeholders.
                           Consultations with local communities will continue to be organized during project implementation
                           to minimize conflicts, enhance cooperation, and the implementation of the works contracts.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      23-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                            23-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         07-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      10-Jan-2014



                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                         10-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Henry Des Longchamps Devi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                    Date: 07-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Petrus Benjamin Gericke (SM)                 Date: 10-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
