                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSR9869
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mozambique                                   Project ID:           P121398
                            Project Name:      MZ - Spatial Development Planning Technical Assistance Project (P121398)
                            Task Team          Richard Damania
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          27-Apr-2010                                  Estimated   30-Sep-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                                        Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Public administration- Transportation (30%), Public administration- Agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry (20%), Public administration- Energy and mining (20%),
                                               Public administration- Industry and trade (20%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (10%)
                            Theme:             Other economic management (30%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                               development (20%), Regional integration (20%), Trade fac ilitation and market
                                               access (20%), Climate change (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       20.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          20.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                         0.00
                              Total                                                                                                20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                                 Page 1 of 8
                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         1.      The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed SDP-TA project is to
                         strengthen the capacity to use spatial development planning for social,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economic and environmental development planning as a means to improving its econ
                         omic, social and environmental planning capabilities. Within that overall PDO t
                         he project will support the Borrower to:

                          (a)    Establish a fully functional #Coordination Commission for Studies and Projects# (COCEP)
                         at the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications;

                          (b)    Develop the methods and human capacity to mainstream spatial development planning as a
                         core function of the MTC, and of the Government as a whole;

                          (c)    Assemble existing geo-referenced data for Mozambique and develop a standardized and
                         comprehensive set of interactive multi-sector GIS-based SDI planning dat
                         abases;

                          (d)    Identify and elaborate, at pre-feasibility stage, economic diversification and densification
                         opportunities, with major private sector participation, to comp                                   lement
                         two existing national/regional transport corridor initiatives (Maputo Cor
                         ridor and Beira Corridor), with a view to maximize their social and economic dev
                         elopment impact and increase their social and environmental sustainability and C
                         limate Change resilience;

                          (e)    Identify and elaborate, at pre-feasibility stage, and promote two new national/regional multi-
                         sector spatial development initiatives (Nacala SDI and Lubombo
                         SDI), with major private sector participation, and based on socially and enviro
                         nmentally sustainable and Climate Change-resilient investment programs/projects;
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (f)    Identify, at advance profile stage, two new secondary national multi-sector spatial
                         development initiatives (Lichinga SDI and Mueda SDI), with major private
                         sector participation, and based on socially and environmentally sustainable and
                         Climate Change-resilient investment programs/projects; and,

                          (g)     Promote public-private partnerships (PPPs) and the leveraging of private sector investments
                         on critical programs and projects of national and regional strat                               egic
                         interest, especially for socially and environmentally sustainable investmen
                         ts with high employment generation impacts for the youth and women.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         1.      The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) of the proposed SDP-TA project is to
                         strengthen the capacity to use spatial development planning for social,
                         economic and environmental development planning as a means to improving its econ
                         omic, social and environmental planning capabilities. Within that overall PDO t
                         he project will support the Borrower to:

                          (a)    Establish a fully functional #Coordination Commission for Studies and Projects# (COCEP)
                         at the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications;


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                          (b)    Develop the methods and human capacity to mainstream spatial development planning as a
                         core function of the MTC, and of the Government as a whole;
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (c)    Assemble existing geo-referenced data for Mozambique and develop a standardized and
                         comprehensive set of interactive multi-sector GIS-based SDI planning dat
                         abases;

                          (d)    Identify and elaborate, at pre-feasibility stage, economic diversification and densification
                         opportunities, with major private sector participation, to comp                                   lement
                         two existing national/regional transport corridor initiatives (Maputo Cor
                         ridor and Beira Corridor), with a view to maximize their social and economic dev
                         elopment impact and increase their social and environmental sustainability and C
                         limate Change resilience;

                          (e)    Identify and elaborate, at pre-feasibility stage, and promote two new national/regional multi-
                         sector spatial development initiatives (Nacala SDI and Lubombo
                         SDI), with major private sector participation, and based on socially and enviro
                         nmentally sustainable and Climate Change-resilient investment programs/projects;

                          (f)    Identify, at advance profile stage, two new secondary national multi-sector spatial
                         development initiatives (Lichinga SDI and Mueda SDI), with major private
                         sector participation, and based on socially and environmentally sustainable and
                         Climate Change-resilient investment programs/projects; and,

                          (g)     Promote public-private partnerships (PPPs) and the leveraging of private sector investments
                         on critical programs and projects of national and regional strat                               egic
                         interest, especially for socially and environmentally sustainable investmen
                         ts with high employment generation impacts for the youth and women.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Project Description
                         1.      The proposed SDP-TA project will be divided into two components: (i) Institutional and
                         Capacity development Component; and, (ii) Spatial Development Initiatives Component.

                         2.       Component 1: Institutional and Capacity development Component. This component will be
                         divided into three sub-components: Strengthening and Capacity Development of the Coordination
                         Commission for Studies and Projects (COCEP); (ii) South-South Cooperation Schemes; and (iii)
                         Cross-cutting Institutional Development Programs.

                         3.        Strengthening and Capacity Development on Spatial Development Planning Sub-
                         component. This sub-component will support the institutional strengthening and capacity
                         development of the Coordination Commission for Studies and Projects (COCEP) at the Ministry of
                         Transport and Communications (MTC), for the purpose of establishing a proficient and sustainable
                         capacity on spatial development planning within MTC and for creating an effective multi-sector and
                         inter-ministerial spatial development planning coordination mechanism. MTC will assign national
                         staff, office space and basic logistic support for the COCEP. This sub-component of the project will
                         finance: (i) Consultants: (a) a set of senior national and international experts for a maximum period
                         of five years (initially three years with possibility of extension of key personnel for an additional two
                         years) to bring in the SDI expertise into the Unit and to develop through on-the-job training and work


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         program and methods development a full cadre of MTC staff to take over the full functioning of the
                         Unit; and, (b) a small set of temporary high-level advisors to provide advisory guidance to the
                         Ministry and COCEP on highly specialized areas of expertise such as SDI methodologies, spatial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         economics and econometrics, financial and transaction advisers, etc.; (ii) training and capacity
                         development for the COCEP staff on SDI and related tools (Geographical information systems, geo-
                         economic analytics, economic modeling, etc.), including participation in short-term local and
                         international courses, seminar, workshops and conferences on SDI issues; (iii) local and international
                         travel expenses (tickets and perdiem) for SDI research and field-work; (iv) office equipment and
                         supplies, including hardware and software necessary for all SDI work; (v) vehicles, deemed essential
                         to the operation of the COCEP, for field and in-city work; and (vi) operating costs for the COCEP,
                         the decentralized MTC offices working on the Cross-cutting Institutional Development sub-
                         component of the project, and for the SDP-TA Steering Committee.

                         4.        South-South Cooperation Support Sub-component. This sub-component will finance the
                         mobilization of South-South cooperation for the COCEP and for the development of the SDI. The
                         existence of public, private and academic centers of excellence in developing countries, particularly
                         in South America, Asia and other parts of Africa -- particularly South Africa which developed the
                         SDI concept since the early 1990's -- is an established fact. The mobilization of expertise from those
                         centers of excellence is, however, routinely constrained by the lack
                         of funding to cover the basic costs of the establishment of concrete working arrangements (basic
                         stipend for visiting professionals, travel expenses, exchange technical visits, costs of documentation,
                         etc.). Having to develop a broad SDI work program will require COCEP to have the capacity to
                         access many such center of excellence in different technical areas, specially is those outside of the
                         direct competence of the Ministry of Transport and Communications (agriculture and agro-industry,
                         mining, fisheries, natural resource management, energy, GIS,
                         spatial analysis, spatial economics, etc). In those cases MTC will -- working in close collaboration
                         with the relevant line ministries and national agencies and/or academic centers -- will identify
                         sources of expertise in the South-South cooperation (S-SC) domain and will seek their mobilization.
                         To that end, the sub-component will finance travel and perdiem expenses, costs of documentation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and communication. Special attention will need to be given to the proper identification of S-SC needs
                         and opportunities in order to maximize outcomes and outputs of the        limited resource provided for
                         it in the budget. Thereto specialized consultant support should be mobilized, as needed, to help MTC/
                         SDP-TA identify and design a high value added S-SC program. Furthermore, possibilities for
                         expanding the use of S-SC mechanisms within the project should be explored during the actual
                         implementation process.

                         5.              Cross-Cutting Institutional Development Programs Sub-component. This sub-
                         component will also finance TA, studies, consulting services, information instruments and
                         campaigns, office equipment and field operational equipment (vehicles, communications, etc.) for
                         the implementation of specific cross-cutting pro-active institutional development programs which
                         should be integral part of the design and of the subsequent implementation of concrete Spatial
                         Development Initiatives. These program are:

                          (i)     HIV/AIDS Prevention and Mitigation Program: The same way that the opening-up or
                         expansion of transport and trade corridors increases access to human development services (health
                         and education) to previously isolated rural populations, it has also shown to be an accelerating factor
                         in the spread of contagious diseases, particularly including STDs. Because of that the SDP-TA
                         project will factor in the design of SDIs and will seek to operationalize, as an advanced institutional
                         development element, an HIV/AIDS prevention and mitigation Program. The HIV/AIDS prevention

                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                         program will not finance population testing as this is expected to be financed from other sources, and
                         is outside the scope of the Project;
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (ii)   Traffic Safety Awareness and Enforcement Program: The development of new and/or
                         expansion of existing transport and trade corridors will bring an increased volume of traffic and in
                         the absence of safety improvements -- a concomitant increase in the level of accidents and fatalities.
                         Because of that the SDP-TA project will factor in the design of SDIs and will seek to operationalize,
                         as an advanced institutional development element, a Traffic Safety Standard Improvement Program;
                         and,

                          (iii)   Commercial Cargo Load Management Program: there is currently no public or private cargo
                         loads management system in operation in Mozambique. Because of that, load "back-hauling"
                         planning and practice does not take place leading, inter alia, to considerably higher transport costs,
                         longer driving hours for drivers (resulting in higher accidents), sector and system inefficiencies, etc.
                         The rationalization of cargo loads within an SDI is a critical requirement for an efficient operation of
                         the transport and trade functions of that SDI. The proposed project will support cargo load
                         management studies, piloting of cargo load management systems, including the setting-up of public-
                         private partnerships and/or private sector concessions of pilot cargo load management centers to
                         support proposed SDIs.

                          (iv)    Rural Mobility Strategy and Pilot Programs: Rural populations have a very limited access to
                         the existing transport corridors (highways, roads and rail) because of lack of sufficient feeder rural
                         roads, due to the high vulnerability of unpaved rural roads to weather (i.e., poor maintenance
                         condition an d closed for several months during rainy season) and because of high services costs.
                         That limits their access to markets, to productive inputs, and many different economic and human
                         development services. It is estimated that less than 5 percent of the population in the existing
                         transport corridors like Beira and Nacala have access to the road and systems. In particular, the
                         implementation of economic diversification and densification activities within SDI will require
                         finding technically and economically viable ways to increasing rural mobility and access to markets.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will support studies and the development of a rural mobility strategy to
                         increase rural mobility within the existing infrastructure constraints, and will support the
                         implementation of small pilot programs to improve rural mobility within the SDI areas of the project.
                         This sub-component will, inter alia, tap into the wealth of information and experience of the World
                         Bank's Rural Travel and Transport Program (RTTP) and of the "Development Market Place
                         Program" and on broader South-South Cooperation opportunities.

                          6.      Component 2: Spatial Development Initiative Component. This component will have two
                         parallel objectives: (i) to serve as the principal training and capacity and institutional development
                         activity of the SDP-TA project; and (ii) prepare six actual SDI packages for the country, broken-
                         down into three different types of SDIs.

                          7.     The Spatial Development Initiative (SDI) methodology seeks to increase the viability of
                         inherent economic potential through the Coordinated and synergic configuration of unrealized
                         economic projects and the infrastructure projects necessary to realize them, within a Development
                         Corridor. The developmental potential of such large projects is further enhanced through the
                         "deepening" (project linkages) and "densification" (provision of feeder infrastructure) of the SDI.
                         Before an SDI is implemented in a selected area, a thorough and comprehensive concept study has to
                         be undertaken in order to identify and assess at pre-feasibility level the economic potential (usually
                         high-rent resources) and whether they can support (service) the provision of the requisite

                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                         infrastructure.

                          8.      Within the context of the above SDI approach and methodologies, this component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance the elaboration of three different types of SDI proposals for a selected set of six development
                         areas in the country. While those six areas have already been selected by the Borrower, subject to the
                         approval by the SDP-TA Steering Committee, the project will have implementation flexibility to
                         accommodate possible limited changes in the selection of the Type II and/or Type III SDIs to realign
                         the selection of development areas with unforeseen but legitimate changes in government policy and/
                         or investment programs. The three types of SDI to be developed by the project are:

                          Type I: will identify and elaborate, at pre-feasibility stage, economic diversification and
                         densification opportunities, with major private sector participation, to complement two existing
                         national/regional transport corridor initiatives (Maputo Corridor and Beira Corridor), with a view to
                         maximize their social and economic development impact and increase their social and environmental
                         sustainability and Climate Change resilience. These two specific existing corridors were selected for
                         inclusion in the project by the Borrower because they are the principal transport and trade corridor in
                         the country at present and already have th e main infrastructure components in place and "anchor"
                         projects under implementation or operation. The next evolutionary phase is thus becoming spatial
                         development corridors through the identification and subsequent implementation of sustainable
                         economic diversification and densification of economic activities;

                          Type II: will identify and elaborate, at pre-feasibility stage, and promote two new national/regional
                         multi-sector spatial development initiatives (Nacala SDI and Lubombo SDI), with major private
                         sector participation, and based on socially and environmentally sustainable and Climate Change-
                         resilient investment programs/projects. These two specific SDI were selected by the Borrower for
                         inclusion in the project because they represent the second tier of spatial development opportunities in
                         the country. The Nacala corridor already exists, albeit with only on                           e third of
                         paved highway and a railway line in need of significant rehabilitation and expansion. On the other
                         hand, the Nacala port, situated in a completely protected harbor, is the best and safest deep-sea port
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in East Africa, and will become a major trade gateway for Mozambique and the region (Malawi,
                         Zambia, Zimbabwe, etc.). The Lubombo SDI was selected because it constitutes a priority eco-
                         tourism corridor and a regional integration corridor; and,

                          Type III: will identify, at advance profile stage, two new secondary national multi-sector spatial
                         development initiatives (Lichinga SDI and Mueda SDI), with major private sector participation, and
                         based on socially and environmentally sustainable and Climate Change-resilient investment
                         programs/projects. These two specific secondary SDI cases were selected by the Borrower for
                         inclusion in the project because they constitute logical spatial extensions from the Beira and Nacala
                         SDIs. Thus their planning and subsequent implementation will greatly benefit from the economic
                         dynamic of the other SDIs facilitating their implementation and allowing for a rapid development.

                          9.       This component will finance: (i) Consultants: a specialized "Senior SDI Technical Manager"
                         for each SDI portfolio, and additional short- and medium-term local and international consultants;
                         (ii) travel expenses (airfare/surface tickets and perdiem) for local and regional field work; (iii)
                         production and publication costs of technical and promotional reports; (iv) Annual Investor
                         Conference: organization of an annual Investor Conference promote the SDI portfolios prepared and/
                         or under preparation by the project; (v) office equipment and supplies for the decentralized SDI
                         offices (where applicable); and, (vi) operating costs for the functioning of the specific SDI teams,
                         especially for the decentralized SDI offices (where applicable).

                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           National and specific SDI analytical preparation work in the Maputo Transport Corridor, Beira
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Transport Corridor, Nacala SDI, Lubombo SDI, Lichinga SDI, and, Mueda SDI.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Mohamed Arbi Ben-Achour (GURDR)
                           Robert A. Robelus (AFTA1)
                           Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/      No
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               N.A.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               N.A.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               N.A.



                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment
                               N.A.      of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                N.A.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Technical Assistance Project
                            For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                            indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                            N/A
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Richard Damania
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 02-Sep-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:

                                                                      Page 8 of 8
