                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC9157

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Belarus                         Project ID:      P148181
                            Project Name:      Belarus Education Modernization Project (P148181)
                            Task Team          Igor Kheyfets
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          16-Feb-2015                     Estimated        15-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Secondary education (50%), Primary education (25%), General education sector
                                               (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Education for all (50%), Education for the knowledge economy (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                     Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       50.00
                              Total                                                                       50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the proposed Project is to: (i) support the Government’s efficiency reforms by
                           ensuring an adequate learning environment in general secondary education and (ii) strengthen the use
                           of information in education system management.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project is organized into three components:
                         COMPONENT 1: Increasing efficiency in general secondary education by supporting the
                         Government’s school network optimization program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to ensure that school consolidation efforts are supported with
                         adequate learning environment and technology in receiving schools, and by introducing efficiency-
                         enhancing school financing mechanisms. This component will implement activities at the level of
                         schools and local authorities.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Implementing minimum learning environment standards in institutions which
                         receive (or plan to receive) students from closed or reorganized schools.

                         The objective of this sub-component is to ensure that a network of receiving schools created as a
                         result of the optimization program provides an adequate physical environment for the affected
                         students.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Improving access to and use of laboratory equipment and information
                         technologies in the educational process.

                         The objective of this sub-component is to ensure that the schools rehabilitated in sub-component 1.1
                         are equipped with the necessary scientific materials and information technology to provide an
                         adequate learning environment.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Developing and introducing efficiency-enhancing resource allocation
                         mechanisms in general secondary education.

                         The objective of this sub-component is to encourage the efficient allocation of resources to schools
                         through the use of a formula-based per-student financing mechanism.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         COMPONENT 2: Modernizing system management through the enhancement of education quality
                         assessment systems and evidence-based policymaking.

                         The objective of this component is to bring current methods of gathering and utilizing information
                         about the education system in line with modern global practices of evidence-based policymaking.
                         This component will implement activities at the level of central authorities tasked with managing the
                         general secondary education system.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Improving the national student assessment system.

                         The objective of this sub-component is to revise the current system of national sample-based
                         assessments for monitoring of educational quality in grades 4, 9, and 11 to bring it in line with
                         international best practices.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Supporting participation in international student assessments.

                         The objective of this sub-component is to enable the Belarus authorities to prepare for and join an
                         internationally recognized system of student learning assessments.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Developing a modern EMIS and strengthening the use of data analysis for
                           informing sector management decisions.

                           The objective of this sub-component is to modernize the systems and practices of data collection and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis in the education sector.

                           COMPONENT 3: Supporting project implementation.

                           The objective of this component is to ensure adequate implementation of the proposed Project
                           activities.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will be implemented country-wide. Beneficiary educational facilities are not pre-
                           identified and therefore their locations are not known at present. A set of criteria for selection of
                           schools to benefit from the Project will be developed during preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Overall responsibility for project implementation will rest with the Ministry of Education. Because
                           this is the first ever World Bank investment operation in the education sector of the Republic of
                           Belarus, a capacity assessment will be performed during project preparation to understand the
                           Ministry’s capabilities and to inform them of Bank procedures. The Ministry may also benefit from
                           existing capacity in the country from other entities that are familiar with Bank procedures and
                           safeguards policies. Based upon the results from preparation, appropriate safeguard capacity
                           strengthening actions will be proposed as part of the Project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Solvita Klapare (GENDR)
                           Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)
                           Klavdiya Maksymenko (GURDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Component 1 of the proposed Project includes
                           BP 4.01                                                activities to rehabilitate school facilities. Exact
                                                                                  nature of rehabilitation needs will be assessed
                                                                                  during project preparation, but may include
                                                                                  work on external walls, roofs, windows, floors,
                                                                                  basements, laboratories, gymnasiums, and
                                                                                  heating and sewer systems. Rehabilitation
                                                                                  works are expected to have some temporary
                                                                                  negative impacts typical for reconstruction/
                                                                                  rehabilitation of relatively small size
                                                                                  constructions. The potential negative impacts
                                                                                  are perceived to be relatively minor and readily
                                                                                  mitigable with standard procedures, and the
                                                                                  works to be performed within existing school
                                                                                  site. Based on the policy and given the expected
                                                                                  nature of the works, the project team proposes
                                                            the project to be classified as Category B.

                                                            Since the exact location of schools to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            refurbished are not known and will not be
                                                            known prior to project appraisal, the potential
                                                            environmental impacts and risks will be
                                                            managed by development of an Environmental
                                                            Management Framework (EMF). The EMF will
                                                            present: the nature of the proposed investments;
                                                            potential environmental impacts; applicable
                                                            laws, policies and procedures; procedure for
                                                            environmental screening, procedure for
                                                            preparation of environmental mitigation
                                                            measures (e.g., Environmental Management
                                                            Plan/EMP) given the type of sub-project; and
                                                            implementation responsibilities.

                                                            Environmental risks of the project are expected
                                                            to be modest and limited to the construction
                                                            sites and to the period of construction works.
                                                            Managing these impacts and keeping them to
                                                            the acceptable minimum will be achieved
                                                            effectively by adhering to the good construction
                                                            practice and applying mitigation measures to be
                                                            provided in the site-specific Environmental
                                                            Management Plans (EMPs or simplified EMP
                                                            Checklists for buildings requiring minor
                                                            reconstruction).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            An important principle for selecting buildings
                                                            for rehabilitation and preparing design
                                                            documents will be to screen them for revealing
                                                            any structural damage and instability to address
                                                            these faults. The screening will include
                                                            potential environmental issues, such as
                                                            asbestos-containing materials, lead-based paint
                                                            and adequate waste water disposal. The EMF
                                                            will include measures for the project sub-
                                                            component that may finance upgrade of school
                                                            laboratories and purchase of equipment,
                                                            including design aspects (e.g., ventilation hood
                                                            if applicable), operating procedure and disposal
                                                            of old equipment.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            All project works are anticipated to occur within
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         the existing school site and it is unlikely that
                                                                                                                                 any of the school buildings selected for the
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation will have a historic value and/or
                                                                                                                                 have present physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                                                 Nevertheless, as part of the environmental
                                                                                                                                 management under OP/BP 4.01, the EMF will
                                                                                                                                 include procedures for addressing physical
                                                                                                                                 cultural resources encountered during
                                                                                                                                 implementation (‘chance finds’).
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            All rehabilitation works under the project are
                                 4.12                                                                                            expected to take place within the existing
                                                                                                                                 footprint of educational facilities and no land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition is expected. The actual situation in
                                                                                                                                 Belarus is supported by the well-enforced
                                                                                                                                 regulatory framework that prohibits squatters
                                                                                                                                 and vendors within territory of the school
                                                                                                                                 compound, thus permanent or temporary
                                                                                                                                 physical or economic displacement as the result
                                                                                                                                 of the project is not expected.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Feb-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Social implications of the project activities will be analyzed by a Social Assessment to be
                                      performed during the project preparation. Since the exact location of schools to be refurbished are
                                      not known and will not be known prior to project appraisal, the potential environmental impacts
                                      and risks will be managed by development of an Environmental Management Framework (EMF).
                                      The EMF will present: the nature of the proposed investments; potential environmental impacts;
                                      applicable laws, policies and procedures; procedure for environmental screening, procedure for
                                      preparation of environmental mitigation measures (e.g., specific Environmental Management
                                      Plans/EMPs to be prepared for each individual site) given the type of sub-project; and
                                      implementation responsibilities.

                                      EMF will be disclosed in English and in Russian in country through the web site of the Ministry of
                                      Education. If any of the sub-projects are identified before appraisal, EMPs of these sub-projects



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             will also be disclosed in the same way. In addition, hard copies of site-specific EMPs (if any) will
                             be delivered to the administrative or community centers of the beneficiaries. Public consultation
                             on the safeguard documents will include nation-wide discussion of the EMF to be held in Minsk,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and consultation on site-specific EMPs (if any) with local communities in an appropriate format.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Igor Kheyfets

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                 Date: 18-Jun-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Andrea C. Guedes (SM)                               Date: 19-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
