                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA2744
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Sep-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                             Project ID:    P132979
                            Project Name:      Kenya Urban Water and Sanitation OBA Fund for Low Income Areas (P132979)
                            Task Team          Patrick Nduati Mwangi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                            Estimated   28-May-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GPOBA                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (70%), Wastewater Collection and Transportation (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Other urban development (60%), Municipal finance (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         18.00             Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   6.30
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                    11.70
                              Total                                                                                     18.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase the number of people in low income areas with
                           access to improved water supply and sanitation services in Kenyan towns and cities. This objective
                           will be realized by incentivizing urban Water Services Providers to invest in water supply and
                           sanitation improvement subprojects to benefit households in low income areas by applying one-off
                           Output-Based Aid subsidies to make water and sanitation access affordable.


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The project comprises two components. These are: (1) Implementation Support to the Project
                         Implementing Unit – the Water Services Trust Fund (WSTF), a state corporation under the Ministry
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of Water and Irrigation supporting pro-poor investments in water and sanitation. This component will
                         support the WSTF with project management, supervision and independent verification of outputs,
                         and the WSPs to develop and supervise the construction of subprojects, (2) OBA subsidies to provide
                         low income households with access to water and sanitation services. The proposed activities under
                         each component are presented below.

                         Component 1 (Total amount $2,200,000) – Implementation Support for project management,
                         subproject preparation and supervision, and to contract an independent verification agent (GPOBA
                         US$2.20 million). This component will fund a proportion of the costs of the activities listed in Table
                         1 below. The funds will be administered by the WSTF, and consultants will be procured in
                         accordance with the World Bank Guidelines for the "Selection and Employment of Consultants
                         January 2011?

                         Activities under Component 1 - Implementation Support Activities
                         1.         Project manager based at WSTF (fees and travel costs). The function will: support
                         subproject identification, preparation and implementation, including overseeing the procurement of
                         consultant and goods and works contracts; review subproject implementation support and subsidy
                         applications and assist in establishing and verifying output targets; support monitoring and evaluation
                         of subprojects; track development indicators, objectives and outcomes; perform the fiduciary
                         responsibilities of WSTF under the grant; and, monitor the compliance of WSPs with the project
                         operating guidelines. (Estimated Amount $300,000)
                         2.        Capacity building support for WSP subprojectsa. Project preparation surveys; development
                         of financial and technical analyses and business plans; environmental, health and safety, and social
                         safeguards analyses; subproject implementation and completion supervision; system operating and
                         financial diagnostics and performance improvement related activities. (Estimated Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                         $1,350,000)
                         3. Independent Verification Agent (IVA). Role of the IVA: to establish baseline coverage
                         indicators at WSPs applying for OBA grants; assist in the setting of output targets; carry out
                         verification of outputs; verify subproject costs eligible for subsidies; recommend to WSTF to release
                         subsidy payments to WSPs on achievement of outputs; analyze socio-economic indicators before and
                         after subproject investments. (Estimated Amount $400,000)
                         4. Publicity and workshops administered by WSTF (Estimated Amount $50,000)
                         5. WSTF administrative overheads including project audits            (Estimated Amount $100,000)

                         Component 2: OBA subsidies for water and sanitation subprojects (GPOBA US$9.50 million). This
                         component will provide one-off OBA subsidies for sub-project investments made by WSPs to
                         increase access to water and sanitation services in low income areas. The subsidy funds will be
                         administered by the WSTF, and WSPs will follow the World Bank Guidelines on “Procurement of
                         Goods, Works, and Non - Consulting Services January 2011? when implementing the subprojects.

                         Principles for selection of WSP subprojects. Selection of subprojects by WSPs for subsidy support
                         will be guided by the following principles:
                         •        WSPs will implement subprojects that allow residents of low-income areas to access water
                         and sanitation services
                         •        The subprojects will be pre-financed with commercial loans from licensed commercial banks


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         in Kenya on market terms, potentially with co-financing from the IFC for selected subprojects.
                         •        Subprojects may also be pre-financed by lending facilities that are capitalized with bonds or
                         other debt instruments. Subprojects financed through such facilities / instruments will only be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         eligible for subsidies up to 60 percent of the amount pre-financed by domestic debt at market rates
                         •        The subsidies will be paid to the WSPs against achievement of service delivery related
                         outputs as agreed between the WSTF and eligible WSPs prior to commencement of the development
                         of subprojects
                         •        The subsidies payable to WSPs on achievement of outputs will be calculated as follows:
                          - 60 percent of the subproject investment cost pre-financed by local commercial lenders
                          - Subsidy cap: Each subproject is subject to a subsidy cap of $115 per beneficiary i.e. where 60
                         percent of subproject cost is greater than $115 per beneficiary, a maximum of $115 per beneficiary is
                         payable to a WSP as subsidy. Where different investments are financed under one subproject, such as
                         water kiosks, public toilets and household connections, the cap will apply to the number of
                         beneficiaries served by the subproject as a whole.
                          - Failure to reach output target: Where the agreed outputs have not been achieved, the WSP will be
                         paid a subsidy based on the proportion of outputs achieved
                         •        The portion of the project cost not covered by the subsidy will be repaid to the lenders by the
                         WSPs through revenues generated from the provision of water and sewerage services. The WSPs
                         may finance a portion of the subprojects using internal funds such as working capital or equity, or
                         external funds such as grants or soft loans , but project costs financed using these sources of funding
                         will not be eligible for subsidies. For example, Ruiru-Juja WSP is a beneficiary of upstream
                         infrastructure investments made under the World Bank’s Water and Sanitation Services
                         Improvement Project. Hence only additional investments financed using market debt would be
                         eligible for subsidies under this project.
                         •        The WSPs will develop financial and technical analyses of the subprojects for appraisal by
                         domestic lenders and the WSTF
                         •        WSPs will charge connection fees and consumers tariffs approved by the Water Services
                         Regulatory Board (WASREB). The WSP business plans will discuss tariff affordability in the
                         targeted areas in order to assess consumer willingness to pay water and sewerage tariffs on an on-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         going basis. Where consumers are willing to pay consumption tariffs but cannot afford connection
                         fees, utilities will be encouraged to offer household loans to consumers to recover the connection
                         fees over a period of time. The loan applications and financial models developed for the subprojects
                         will propose such repayment options to ensure access is not hindered by the inability of consumers to
                         pay connection fees. A similar initiative has been successfully piloted by Nairobi Water Company
                         and the method will be replicated.
                         •        WSPs will be in compliance with WASREB and Water Resources Management Authority
                         regulations and any other statutory requirements governing the operation of WSPs
                         •        WSPs will demonstrate that the economic impacts of the subprojects are positive when
                         preparing subproject feasibility studies

                         Outputs under the project. For each subproject, a baseline survey will be carried out by the IVA prior
                         to implementation and output targets will be established as per the business plan. WSPs will be
                         eligible for 10 percent of the projected subsidy amount on establishing output targets in agreement
                         with the WSTF and signing a loan agreement with a commercial lender. The balance subsidy
                         payments will be paid in two tranches on achievement of the following outputs:
                         •        Household water connections
                         •        Household sewer connections
                         •        Public water kiosks
                         •        Public toilets, where the WSP has a mandate to build and service such facilities

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Table 2: Key results targeted under the project:
                         Output indicator         Output Target Number of people targeted
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Number of water connections made under the project - Output target: 19,000 - Number of people
                         targeted: 95,000
                         Number of water kiosks constructed under the project - Output target: 140 - Number of people
                         targeted: 40,000
                         Number of sewer connections made under the project - Output target: 1,000 - Number of people
                         targeted: 5,000
                         Number of public toilets constructed under the project - Output target: 30 - Number of people
                         targeted: 10,000

                         The project will also support at least 7 WSPs to access US$15.8 million in investment from the
                         private financial sector supported by US$9.5 million in subsidies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Sub-projects are expected to be implemented in urban and peri-urban areas country-wide, with the
                         exclusion of the capital City of Nairobi. These may include but are not limited to: Ruiru-Juja,
                         Muranga, Meru, Embu, Malindi, Mathira, and Nyahururu. All WSPs licensed by the WASREB will
                         be eligible for subsidies under the project. There are currently approximately 132 licensed WSPs
                         operating in Kenya but the project will target only creditworthy utilities. WSPs will implement
                         subprojects that involve the rehabilitation, expansion and development of water supply, sanitation
                         and sewerage infrastructure. Activities may include:
                         •        Network extensions to connect new customers to water and sewerage services, including
                         water points and kiosks
                         •        Water source augmentation, treatment and distribution works to the extent required to
                         support achievement of the outputs listed in Table 2
                         •        Sewerage treatment and distribution works to the extent required to support achievement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the outputs listed in Table 2
                         •        Public toilets, where the WSP has the mandate to build and service such facilities

                         The provision of water and/or sewerage services to low income households and the construction of
                         public water kiosks and toilets in low income areas will trigger the release of subsidies from WSTF
                         to WSPs. Upstream investments to obtain these results, such as source augmentation and treatment,
                         will be eligible for subsidies subject to the principles for selection of subprojects listed under
                         “Project Description? above. The investments will however be subject to a subsidy cap of US$115
                         per beneficiary receiving services from any of the outputs listed in Table 2. As a result of the cap, the
                         extent of upstream works is limited to interventions such as elevated water tanks, installation of
                         tertiary distribution lines, improvements to water supply intakes, and rehabilitation and extension of
                         small scale treatment facilities needed to accommodate new connections. The provision for
                         allocating some funding to support upstream works provides flexibility to ensure that each
                         connection or public toilet is properly serviced, thereby enhancing the sustainability of the project.
                         The project is not designed to support major infrastructure investments such as bulk water extraction
                         and transmission.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes             The project was categorized as B and triggers
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                         OP 4.01 due to the rehabilitation, expansion and
                                                                         development of water supply, sanitation and
                                                                         sewerage infrastructure. However, it has been
                                                                         determined that these activities will have site-
                                                                         specific risks, none of which are irreversible and
                                                                         can be avoided or mitigated. For WSPs to benefit
                                                                         from the OBA subsidies, they will need to have
                                                                         their subprojects positively appraised by
                                                                         commercial lenders for loan finance and by
                                                                         WSTF for eligibility for subsidies. Commercial
                                                                         banks will pre-finance the subprojects and part of
                                                                         the costs will be eligible for subsidy on
                                                                         achievement of the outputs. As a result, the
                                                                         eligible WSPs will only be identified during
                                                                         implementation. As the project locations are not
                                                                         known at the time of project preparation, an
                                                                         ESMF developed for WaSSIP project was
                                                                         updated and will be publicly disclosed in country
                                                                         and in InfoShop prior to project approval. The
                                                                         WSPs implementing the sub-projects are required
                                                                         to comply with Government of Kenya
                                                                         environmental legislation, which requires
                                                                         development of project-level Environmental
                                                                         Impact Assessments and their review by the
                                                                         National Environment Management Authority.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         The subprojects specific EIAs will be prepared,
                                                                         consulted upon and disclosed prior to beginning
                                                                         of works on each subproject.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The Project targets already developed urban
                                                                         areas with high population density, and is
                                                                         therefore unlikely to cause significant conversion
                                                                         or degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The Project targets already developed urban
                                                                         areas with high population density, and is
                                                                         therefore unlikely to cause significant conversion
                                                                         or degradation of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The Project does not involve the use of
                                                                         pesticides or have any impact on pest
                                                                         management practices.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The Project targets already developed urban
                         BP 4.11                                         areas with high population density, and is
                                                                         therefore unlikely to affect any physical cultural
                                                                         resources. The policy is not triggered. However,




                                                                 Page 5 of 9
                                                                                ESMF for the project includes a screening
                                                                                mechanism for handling “chance finds?.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No                 The Project targets already developed urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                areas with high population density, which are
                                                                                highly unlikely to house indigenous communities.
                                                                                The policy is not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes                The Project involves the construction of water
                            4.12                                                towers and treatment facilities. As discussed in
                                                                                the Section 4 above, the extent of upstream works
                                                                                is limited to interventions such as elevated water
                                                                                tanks, installation of tertiary distribution lines,
                                                                                improvements to water supply intakes, and
                                                                                rehabilitation and extension of small scale
                                                                                treatment facilities needed to accommodate new
                                                                                connections. In general, these will be located on
                                                                                land that has been acquired on a willing buyer/
                                                                                seller basis or in public lands owned by the
                                                                                country. Installation of underground water and
                                                                                sewer pipes will pass through inhabited areas and
                                                                                in such cases the project will need to manage
                                                                                compensation for households and businesses that
                                                                                are temporarily affected. No permanent
                                                                                resettlement is anticipated under the sub-projects.
                                                                                The project updated the Resettlement Policy
                                                                                Framework, based on the RPF for Kenya WaSSIP
                                                                                project. The RPF will be publicly disclosed in
                                                                                Kenya and in the Bank InfoShop prior to project
                                                                                approval. Based on the results of the screening for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                each sub-project, Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                                (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                                publicly disclosed prior to beginning of works on
                                                                                the subprojects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No                 The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of dams.
                            Projects on International        No                   The project activities will not be located near or
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                negatively affect any international body of water.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The subprojects will not be located in disputed
                            7.60                                                areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The implementation of the project is not expected to lead to adverse environmental impacts and
                              social concerns; these, if any, are expected to be minor, localized and readily managed. The main
                              benefits of the project will be improved urban water supply, sanitation, hygiene and decrease in


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           waterborne diseases incidents.
                           Adverse environmental impacts will include construction-related impacts, such as temporary
                           negative effects on public health and safety, soil erosion related to excavation and transportation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           equipment, solid waste management. Water waste management is another aspect the WSPs
                           operating close to wetlands need to address during and after project implementation to help
                           counter to maintain water quality levels and prevent pollution of water bodies within the project
                           area of intervention. There is also a potential for increase of STD & HIV/AIDS due to influx of
                           construction workers. Adverse social issues may include restrictions to land use during installation
                           and management of right-of-way encroachments in accordance with OP 4.12.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project’s indirect and long term impacts are anticipated to be positive and include a possible
                           increase in the social economic status of the people living within the selected project areas -
                           arising from increased access to safe water and better hygiene and sanitation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project will be implemented by the Water Services Trust Fund (WSTF), a state corporation
                           under the Ministry of Water and Irrigation that invests in pro-poor water and sanitation
                           infrastructure projects. At utility level, subprojects will be implemented by urban water services
                           providers (WSPs). WSTF is a state owned corporation, which manages grants from international
                           development partners. However, WSTF has limited experience in implementing safeguards policy
                           requirements for the World Bank projects. Capacity of the implementing agency will be enhanced
                           through the technical assistance under Component 1 of the project, which will include
                           environmental and social expertise building for WSTF, WSPs and the participating commercial
Public Disclosure Copy




                           banks.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The primary project beneficiaries are residents of low income areas. An estimated 30,000
                           households (150,000 people) in low-income urban areas in Kenya will gain access to water and
                           sanitation services through a combination of individual household connections andpublic water
                           and sanitation facilities.

                           The other key stakeholders for the project will include the Ministry of Water and Irrigation, in
                           particular WSTF responsible for overall implementation of the project. Municipal / county owned
                           water services providers (WSPs), loan financing facilities, such as commercial banks.

                           ESMF and RPF for the project will be finalized and publicly disclosed prior to approval of the
                           fund.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          20-Jun-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       23-Sep-2013


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Kenya                                                            23-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            23-Sep-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Patrick Nduati Mwangi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 06-Nov-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Rosemary Mukami Kariuki (SM)                 Date: 13-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
