                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC5879

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                         Project ID:      P147521
                            Project Name:      Second Regional and Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (P147521)
                            Task Team          Ahmed A. R. Eiweida
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Apr-2014                     Estimated        23-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSUW                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (35%), Sanitation (25%), Urban Transport (30%), Sub-national
                                               government administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%), Urban services and
                                               housing for the poor (40%), Other Private Sector De velopment (20%),
                                               Municipal governance and institution building (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     70.80                     Total Bank Financing:        45.00
                            Financing Gap:           4.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                    11.80
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       45.00
                              Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                   10.00
                              Total                                                                       66.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to improve access to and quality of municipal services and
                           infrastructure.
                         C. Project Description
                         Component 1. Infrastructure Investments: This component will finance the rehabilitation and
                         expansion of priority municipal services such as roads, water and sanitation, wastewater treatment,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         solid waste management, street lighting, municipal markets, and community facilities. It will also
                         support public infrastructure that will attract private sector investments in tourism and agro-
                         processing. The latter builds on a series of successful interventions piloted under the Regional
                         Development Project, where private sector entities were willing to invest in an area but required
                         complementary public infrastructure to make their investments viable (e.g. road/sidewalk, water/
                         sanitation, etc.). This component will be driven by the demand from Local Self Governments
                         (LSGs). Consequently, the full pipeline of sub-projects will not be known upfront. However,
                         investments will be based on a clearly defined criteria, and the Operations Manual (OM) will include
                         a list of eligible investments.

                         Financial resources will be provided on a combined credit and grant basis to large LSGs based on
                         their borrowing capacity. Performance-based grants will be provided to LSGs with weaker capacity
                         based on a list of eligibility criteria aiming to improve their service delivery.

                         It is expected that this Project will apply outcomes of studies undertaken under the Regional and
                         Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (RMIDP), such as the Road Design Guidelines, and
                         the Wastewater Management Strategy. It is also expected that selected investments will be informed
                         by feasibility studies for wastewater treatment plants in six cities (financed under RMIDP), and the
                         Tbilisi City Development Strategy (financed by the Cities Alliance). The Project will also take into
                         account outcomes of other relevant safeguards studies, such as the Kakheti and Imereti Strategic
                         Environmental, Social and Cultural Heritage Assessments (SESCHAs), noting in particular where
                         these have been prepared or are under preparation under other WB-financed projects.
                         Recommendations of such safeguards studies will also reflected in the process of updating the
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) of this Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2. Institutional Development: This component will support LSGs and the Municipal
                         Development Fund (MDF) in improving their institutional capacity and performance. It will also
                         finance Project Management activities.

                         (a) Enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of LSGs: LSGs will be supported in (i)
                         developing human resource plans; (ii) improving fiscal discipline, accounting, budgeting, and
                         reporting; (iii) developing participatory strategic plans, building civic engagement and social
                         accountability; and (iv) developing technical standards, specifications, and asset management plans
                         to ensure sustainability of investments.

                         (b) Enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of the MDF: The MDF will be supported in
                         strengthening its technical appraisal capacity, credit risk management ability and fiduciary functions.

                         (c) Project Management: This component will also finance feasibility studies, engineering designs,
                         construction supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of Project outcomes, with special attention
                         to the gender dimensions of Project impacts.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The Second Regional and Municipal Infrastructure Development Project (RMIDP II) will be
                           implemented nationwide, with no geographic limitations.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The MDF under the Ministry of Regional Development and Infrastructure (MRDI) will be an
                           implementing entity for RMIDP II. MDF has a long history of implementing World Bank supported
                           projects, including the active RMIDP, and two Regional Development Projects (RDPs). However,
                           MDF's in-house institutional capacity for safeguards application and monitoring is relatively weak.
                           Arrangements for safeguards management under the currently ongoing RDPs imply using of external
                           international consultant services for technical supervision of works, including supervision of
                           application of safeguards. This arrangement may be used for the purposes of RMIDP II; however, the
                           MDF shall enhance its own capacity for handling environmental and social aspects of its portfolio.
                           Consultant service provision cannot substitute basic in-house capacity by MDF required to manage
                           the quality of consultants' work and to take adequate action on the information provided by
                           consultants. Track record of MDF on environmental and social management performance is mixed:
                           safeguards rating on a lesser challenging RMIDP has been satisfactory throughout is implementation,
                           while there have been glitches in environmental and social compliance of under more challenging
                           RDPs, that include inefficient reaction on behalf of MDF to the issues reported by supervisors, and
                           shortfalls in managing contracts with supervisors. The described situation is likely improve as a
                           result of a deep institutional reform being undertaken in the MDF. Institutional changes shall affect
                           the internal flow of information in the MDF. Namely, safeguards monitoring reports submitted by
                           supervision consultants must be reviewed and analyzed by MDF's in-house safeguards specialists,
                           who will then inform the management on any deviations from reporting timetable, as well as on the
                           outstanding issues reported by consultants, and recommend remedial actions.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                           Nicolas Perrin (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             RMIDP II carries investment component in
                           BP 4.01                                             support to infrastructure development and,
                                                                               therefore, triggers OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
                                                                               Assessment. Infrastructural improvements to be
                                                                               supported under the project will include
                                                                               rehabilitation of the existing roads,
                                                                               communications, water supply and wastewater
                                                                               collection systems, waste water treatment plans,
                                                                               municipal markets and other elements required
                                                                               for the improved provision of municipal
                                                                               services. No large-scale new construction will
                                                                               be financed. Overall, the project will support
                                                                               those of the proposed investments that fall under
                                                                               environmental Category B. Category A
                                                                               activities will not be eligible for financing from
                                                                               the project proceeds.
                                                                 Environmental Management Frameworks
                                                                 (EMFs) used by MDF for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 the ongoing Regional Development Projects and
                                                                 a Program for Improved Waste Water
                                                                 Management in Georgia will be re-worked for
                                                                 the purposes of producing an Environmental
                                                                 and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for
                                                                 RMIDP II. The document will be disclosed and
                                                                 opened for comments from stakeholders. The
                                                                 ESMF will provide an outline of procedures to
                                                                 be applied for environmental screening,
                                                                 approval, assessment, management planning,
                                                                 and monitoring of the individual interventions.
                                                                 It will guide the MDF in the assessment of
                                                                 environmental risks related to the proposed
                                                                 investments and defining the scope of
                                                                 environmental work required for preparing
                                                                 them. Carrying out the Environmental Impact
                                                                 Assessments (EIAs) and developing
                                                                 Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), may
                                                                 be required for high risk Category B activities,
                                                                 while the use of EMP Checklists for Small
                                                                 Construction and Rehabilitation Activities may
                                                                 surface for low-risk investments. EIA reports
                                                                 and EMPs will be disclosed and discussed with
                                                                 the Project affected people and other
                                                                 stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   RMIDP II will predominantly support
                         BP 4.11                                 rehabilitation of the existing infrastructure or
                                                                 small scale construction supplemental to the
                                                                 existing systems. These activities will not have
                                                                 impact on any known monuments of culture and
                                                                 history. The bulk of works will be undertaken
                                                                 within settlements or along existing
                                                                 communications between them. Hence the
                                                                 likelihood of chance finds during earth works is
                                                                 low. Nonetheless, the OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to
                                                                 provide guidance for handling such cases. A
                                                                 blueprint of action upon encountering of chance
                                                                 finds will be provided in the ESMF and will be
                                                                 included into the OM.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The OP/BP.4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 4.12                                                                                            triggered is response to the possibility of land
                                                                                                                                 acquisition under civil works for sub-projects in
                                                                                                                                 Component 1. A Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared. The RPF
                                                                                                                                 will provide outline of the conditions when
                                                                                                                                 potential land acquisition and/or livelihoods’
                                                                                                                                 loss and/or other social impact may occur and
                                                                                                                                 will provide general principles to be applied to
                                                                                                                                 mitigate those impacts on affected persons. If,
                                                                                                                                 during the preparatory phase of sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 potential impacts as defined by the OP/BP 4.12
                                                                                                                                 on Involuntary Resettlement are identified, then
                                                                                                                                 site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                                                                                 shall be developed. The responsibilities for sub-
                                                                                                                                 project screening mechanisms and the RPF and
                                                                                                                                 RAPs will be clearly stated in the OM. The RPF
                                                                                                                                 and the RAPs shall be consulted and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 to the public as well as on the WB website.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           The project may finance rehabilitation of water
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            intakes, other hydraulic structures, and
                                                                                                                                 municipal water supply networks, as well as
                                                                                                                                 waste water collection schemes and waste water
                                                                                                                                 treatment plants. In Georgia, most of the natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 water bodies used for water abstraction and
                                                                                                                                 discharge, are international waterways. The OP/
                                                                                                                                 BP 7.50 is triggered for RMIDP II, however, a
                                                                                                                                 need for communication to riparians will be
                                                                                                                                 further explored during the project preparation.
                                                                                                                                 Depending on whether the project investments
                                                                                                                                 may influence quality and quantity of
                                                                                                                                 international waterways, an exemption from
                                                                                                                                 communication may be sought.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             ESMF and RPF will be developed, disclosed, discussed with stakeholders, finalized and approved
                             by the Bank before appraisal. For several investments, intended for the first year of the project
                             implementation, detailed designs will be prepared and site-specific EMPs and RAPs, if required,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             will be produced and disclosed also by appraisal. Environmental and social safeguard documents
                             will be worked out, disclosed, and discussed with the affected communities later on, as the
                             detailed designs arrive on the rolling basis.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                               Date: 03-Jan-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Sumila Gulyani (SM)                               Date: 23-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
