                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8016

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Feb-2014, 06-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Lao People's Democratic                        P149130
                                                                               Project ID:
                                                Republic
                            Project Name:       Second Global Partnership for Education (P149130)
                            Task Team       Pedro Cerdan-Infantes
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       06-Aug-2014                          Estimated        22-Jan-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEDDR                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (90%), Pre-primary education (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        16.80               Total Bank Financing:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                     16.80
                              Total                                                                         16.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the project is to support the Government in improving school effectiveness at the
                           pre-primary and primary education levels.

                           The effectiveness of schools will be increased by: (i) providing additional grant funding at school
                           and district levels and overall capacity strengthening to manage these resources increase and (ii)
                         enhancing the teaching and learning environment in schools, through improved pedagogies and
                         instructional resources to support early grade reading.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project seeks to improve the effectiveness of schools by strengthening the capacity for SBM,
                         increasing funding at the school level and improving the teaching and learning of early grade
                         reading. This will be done through two main components and a component to support project
                         management. Component 1 will support the strengthening of SBM, by contributing funding at the
                         school and district levels through school and district grants and building capacity for districts,
                         schools and VEDC to manage these resources effectively. Very low performing districts will receive
                         additional support in the form of larger district grants and more capacity building. Complementing
                         the improvements in management and increased funding at the school level, component 2 supports
                         the development, piloting, and evaluation of a new approach to reading instruction in Lao language,
                         as well as the development of a framework to support ethnic students.

                         Phased approach. Component 1 will be rolled out in two phases, with the most disadvantaged
                         districts getting support first and continuing to get support throughout the project. Disadvantaged
                         districts are selected using rates of girl survival to grade 5, which in addition to measuring gender
                         inequality captures a number of educational outcomes. By the end of the project, all districts, schools
                         and VEDC will have received capacity building and at least one round of block grants and follow-up
                         support from the district officers using district grants. The phased approach requires a four-year
                         implementation period rather than the usual three for GPE projects. Component 2 will be
                         implemented in a selected sample of schools, with the objective of providing rigorous evaluation
                         results by the end of the project that can inform future policy changes.

                         Component 1: Strengthening School-Based Management (SBM)

                         This component will support the development of a national SBM framework and the strengthening of
                         SBM by financing: (i) development of capacity of school principals, VEDCs, DESB staff in SBM,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including effective SDP and improved financial reporting (both to districts through the Financial
                         Reporting System and to communities in order to improve transparency and accountability); (ii) the
                         provision of complementary SBG funds to primary schools and pre-primary classes or kindergarten 3
                         for five-year-olds and grants to DESB (for monitoring and support of schools) and iii) additional
                         capacity development and grant support for very low performing districts.

                         This component will first strengthen capacity for school-based management at the central, provincial,
                         district, school and community levels. In particular, the component will finance (i) technical
                         assistance to develop a national SBM framework, revise and standardize SBM tools, training
                         packages, and communications materials, and train a national team; (ii) training of DESB carried out
                         by the national SBM team with technical assistance from the project on preparing SDPs, the use of
                         SBG and reporting (including financial reporting); (iii) technical assistance for DESB to support
                         schools and VEDCs in preparing, implementing and monitoring these SDPs, (iv) technical assistance
                         for the existing system for management and reporting of school finances (transparency and
                         accountability).

                         The project will finance complementary SBG to schools after they have received capacity building.
                         The grant will be on a per student basis and will complement, not substitute, the government SBG.
                         The amount will be per student and will match that provided by the Government. To ensure a
                         minimum level of benefit to small schools, the project will fund a minimum level of 30 students,
                         regardless of the actual enrollment. The scope of eligible expenditures for the complimentary grant
                         will be the same as for the government block grant. Funds will be used to finance non-salary
                         operational costs defined under chapter 12 of the Government's Chart of Accounts. This will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supplement support from UNICEF in the reprinting and distribution of primary school textbooks for
                         all grades. Remote and disadvantaged schools in each district will receive additional technical and
                         financial assistance support during project implementation.

                         This component will also provide grants to strengthen DESB capacity building and monitoring of
                         SBM activities. The size of the grants will be based on the number of schools in the district and
                         geographical conditions. Districts will be required to draw up district education plans to utilize GPE
                         and government funds in support of SBM and other school related activities and districts that are
                         getting comparable support from other development partners would not be eligible for these grants.

                         Component 2: Improving Reading Outcomes and Assessment Capacity

                         This component will focus on promoting effective teaching and learning of early grade reading in
                         Lao language. This will be done through a combination of targeted interventions for reading
                         development in Lao language in Grades 1 and 2, instructional approaches for students with weak Lao
                         language skills, and capacity building to MoES in key areas around student assessment, and
                         curriculum development.

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Reading Development Intervention for Grades 1 and 2 in Lao language.

                         The pilot intervention will finance: (i) a review of the Grades 1 and 2 Lao language curriculum and
                         teaching to identify instructional gaps; (ii) the development of a scope and sequence for reading
                         development in Lao language for Grades 1 and 2, (iii) the development of the reading intervention
                         instructional materials; (iv) the training of teachers in the new pedagogical approach, training of
                         principals, pedagogical advisors and DESB on relevant aspects of teacher support and monitoring;
                         and (v) the evaluation of the effectiveness of the reading intervention to promote better teaching and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         learning of reading in selected schools, using the Lao EGRA and SSME tools. Pilot results are
                         expected to inform ongoing and planned reforms around primary curriculum and reading
                         development, instructional approaches and Lao language development to ethnic students.

                         The project will also support RIES’s capacity building in four possible major areas: (i) survey
                         design; (ii) data analysis; (iii) student assessment, and (iv) the design of evidence-based instructional
                         and curriculum materials. Capacity building activities will be mainly short-term in nature.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Lao Language Teaching to Ethnic Students

                         This sub-component will finance technical assistance to broaden the evidence base around effective
                         approaches to reading development in contexts of ethno-linguistic diversity. The objective of these
                         studies is to inform the MoES’s evaluation of policy options to address the gaps in learning outcomes
                         among ethno-linguistic groups in Lao PDR. Laos. In particular, this sub-component will finance the
                         production of: (1) a review of country experiences with significant ethno-linguistic diversity in
                         advancing effective approaches to reading development of students with weak skills in the official
                         language of instruction; (2) a study on the orthographic and linguistic features of the main ethnic
                         languages in Lao PDR; (3) an analysis of policy options and costing to address the reading deficits
                         among non-proficient Lao speakers; and (4) an evaluation framework of polices / programs for
                         instruction in Lao language for the MoES to assess the technical and implementation specifications
                           of pilot programs and activities for struggling readers.

                           Component 3: Capacity Building and Project Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           This component will support the delivery of the project activities on planning and execution,
                           financial management, procurement, internal audit and monitoring and evaluation. A particular focus
                           will be on strengthening financial management capacity on managing the fund flows and control of
                           the complementary grants to schools. The component includes activities designed to ensure efficient
                           project management and early identification of corrective measures to solve any implementation
                           problems. A series of workshops such as a launch workshop and annual review workshop are
                           included in this component, together with financing for the required financial audits to support the
                           Department of Finance. This component will also support the monitoring and evaluation of project
                           activities, by strengthening the existing mechanisms for monitoring and data collection, and
                           supporting project specific data collection when needed.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This is a nation-wide program.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The proposed program is a follow-on operation of the IDA-financed Second Education Development
                           Project (EDP II) and the ongoing GPE Program, in which the recipient demonstrated the capacity to
                           comply with Bank safeguards policies throughout project and program implementation. Local ethnic
                           teachers have been trained to teach ethnic students, especially those in pre-primary schools and
                           Grades 1 and 2. Teachers are allowed to explain lessons in ethnic languages with drawings and
                           available visual objects as needed. These mitigation measures are in line with the Ethnic Group
                           Development Plan (EGDP) applied by the current program to help students overcome their language
                           difficulty. Under the ongoing project, the District and Provincial Education officers are familiar with
                           the social safeguards compliance requirements, which include: (i) adherence to the safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                           procedures as described in the Operational Manual, which includes monitoring and reporting of the
                           program’s performance in relation to safeguards compliance, and (ii) validation of the safeguards-
                           related results on the ground. MoES will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of the grant at
                           the operational level. MoES will appoint a designated Safeguards Officer who will be responsible for
                           scrutinizing the social safeguards issues involved. The institutional capacity is deemed adequate for
                           the program.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              No civil works will be financed and no
                           BP 4.01                                               environmental impact is anticipated under the
                                                                                 program. However, the policy is triggered due
                                                                                 to the need to assess and take into account, in an
                                                                                 integrated manner, the social aspects of the
                                                                 project particularly any impacts on Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples (ethnic groups) communities. However,
                                                                 no additional instruments need to be prepared as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 a result of triggering OP/BP 4.01.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    The program will not cause any degradation of
                                                                 natural habitats as defined under the safeguard
                                                                 policy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    The program will not degrade critical forest
                                                                 areas as defined under the safeguard policy.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The program will not involve any procurement
                                                                 of pesticides nor cause any increased use of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The program will not adversely affect sites with
                         BP 4.11                                 archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                 religious, or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   OP 4.10 is triggered because this is a nation-
                                                                 wide program because this is a nation-wide
                                                                 program covering the districts inhabited by poor
                                                                 ethnic groups (as Indigenous Peoples are called
                                                                 in Lao PDR).

                                                                 During program preparation, the MoES will
                                                                 undertake a social assessment in areas where
                                                                 ethnic groups are present, in order to assess the
                                                                 program’s potential effects on ethnic groups.
                                                                 Free, prior and informed consultations will be
                                                                 conducted during program preparation with a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 representative sample of ethnic groups who are
                                                                 likely to participate in or be affected by the
                                                                 program. This process will allow their
                                                                 perspectives to be collected and reflected in the
                                                                 program design and will ascertain their support
                                                                 for the program. The existing Ethnic Group
                                                                 Development Plan (EGDP) for the proposed
                                                                 Early Childhood Education Project in Lao PDR
                                                                 will be updated based on the social assessment
                                                                 and consultations, and disclosed both through
                                                                 the InfoShop and in-country at convenient
                                                                 locations prior to program appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    No civil work will be financed by the program.
                         4.12
                                                                 No acquisition of private land, or loss of private
                                                                 assets including trees and structures, is
                                                                 anticipated. It is not anticipated that physical
                                                                 relocation will be necessary.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The program does not involve any dams.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The program does not involve international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The program will not be located in any known
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Jul-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      A.    Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
                                      ISDS would be prepared: May 2014

                                      B.             The target date for preparing the PAD-stage ISDS: July 2014

                                      C.      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
                                      needed.

                                      The existing EGDP for the proposed Early Childhood Education Project will be updated based on
                                      the social assessment and consultations, and disclosed both through InfoShop and in-country in an
                                      accessible place and understandable form and language to key stakeholders prior to program
                                      appraisal, currently scheduled for June 2014.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Pedro Cerdan-Infantes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Surhid P. Gautam (RSA)                                                                                               Date: 05-Aug-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Prateek Tandon (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 06-Aug-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
