INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO98
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Democratic Republic               P150148
of                         Project ID:
Project Name:   DRC-Statistics Development Project (P150148)
Task Team       Franck M. Adoho
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Apr-2015                Estimated     13-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GPVDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (60%), Analysis of economic
growth (20%), Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (2 0%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      40.00            Total Bank Financing:   40.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
o         International Development Association (IDA)                     40.00
Total                                                           40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
1.    The development objective of this project is to strengthen the National Statistical System in
the production, dissemination and the use of timely and robust statistics relevant to policy and
decision making.
2.     Project Beneficiaries: Major beneficiaries of the project are data producers and users in


﻿DRC, including: (1) the National Institute of Statistics and sectorial ministries (2) policy makers and
planners in the public and private sectors, including civil society organizations; (3) researchers,
associations and academia; (4) international, regional, and global organizations and entities; and (5)
members of the general public, who will also benefit from better and faster access to information.
o
C. Project Description
Project Components.
o       Project activities will focus on improvements in: (i) the coordination of the NSS and the management
of the INS; (ii) the physical working environment and information technology (IT) infrastructures;
(iii) data production methodologies; (iv) the output of reliable statistics by consolidating and
strengthening existing surveys and administrative sources, and by designing and conducting new
data-generating activities; (v) training activities; (vi) human resources policies and procedures, and
organizational structure; and (vii) data dissemination. The project will be carried out through three
components designed to support the implementation of the National Strategy for the Development of
Statistics (NSDS). Priority has been given to agencies that are expected to produce sectoral statistics
relating to poverty and living standards, and agriculture. The description of each of the three
components is presented below.
Component 1: Strengthen the operational capacity of the national statistical system (US$ 10.09
million)
3.     Subcomponent 1.1: Renovations of the INS facilities (3.1 million): The project will finance
the renovation and furnishing of the INS offices at Limite in Kinshasa. The Bank through the DRC
Catalytic Project to Strengthen the INS (P125509) is financing the renovation of a part of the INS
offices (the economic synthesis unit) at Limite in Kinshasa. In addition, the proposed project will
complete the renovation of the remaining offices including the Data processing unit, the Consumer
price index unit, and the demographic and social statistics units. While the INS facilities are being
renovated, the project will support the rental of temporary facilities for the INS to allow continuity of
statistical operations.
4.     Subcomponent 1.2: Upgrading infrastructure and equipment (1.6 million): This
subcomponent will build up NSS statistical and IT infrastructure and data management systems. The
project will support acquisition and maintenance of computer hardware, data management systems,
and other equipment needed to collect, analyze, and disseminate data. Consultancy services will then
be supported for: (a) development of a web-based data portal for access to NSS data for policy
making, commercial, or research purposes; and (b) establishment of an electronic archive to allow
users to access micro-data while protecting the privacy of survey respondents.
Subcomponent 1.3: Design and implementation of an information system strategic plan (0.6 million):
The strategic plan will define long-term statistical requirements for economic analysis and policy
making, recommend options for technology architecture, and prepare well ahead of time for system
implementation, equipment acquisition, and staff training. The IS SP will be the foundation upon
which the new NSS will be built in an integrated, orderly manner to support DRC sectoral and
national priorities.


﻿Sub-component 1.4: Organizational Reform of National Statistical System (0.89 million)
This component will support implementation of the organizational reform of the NSS including the
O
C-      reform of the NSS. Specifically the project will support the implementation of activities of the
National Statistical Committee (Comit6 Nationale de la Statistique). The activities include: (i)
support to set up the High Council of Statistics (nature, composition, functioning/role, power/
decision) (ii) the establishment of the INS Board; and (iii) the establishment of the financial and
independent audit body of the INS.
The project will support the Government by providing technical Assistance to prepare a reform
strategy paper that outlines the rationale for reform, the sequence of activities to be undertaken and a
timeframe for implementation.
Sub-component 1.5: Human resources development (3.9 million
This sub-component will help the NSS to attract, motivate, and retain qualified staff. It will closely
integrate with the work supported by the Public Service Reform and Rejuvenation Project
(Rejuvenation Project, P 12229), which pursues the project development objective to: improve the
human resource management capacity of selected ministries and rejuvenate their workforce. This
includes the National Institute of Statistics. In close alignment with the Rejuvenation project sub-
component activities include:
(a) Staffing and HR policies: This activity will review and establish strategic staffing plans to enable
NSS to attract and retain qualified statisticians and provide the necessary support to statistics
departments in line ministries. Policies and guidelines will be elaborated to cover recruitment, career
management, job mobility in a decentralized environment, and rewards and recognitions. The
emphasis will be on output-based work programs and performance-based career management.
(b) Management and incentive structures: The project will support development of management and
leadership skills across the NSS with special attention to values and ethical behavior. The focus will
be on the quality of leadership as a driver of success in implementing reforms.
(c) Knowledge and learning: These activities will produce a training program linked to career
a       development throughout NSS. The objective is to accelerate and facilitate the transfer of knowledge
to both new and current staff within and across the decentralized departments through: (i) Formal
pre-service training that will prepare Congolese for competitive examinations for admission to
regional statistical schools and (ii) Preparing staff for training programs in regional statistical
schools.
Sub-component 1.6: Reform of the DRC's statistical schools (0.5 million)
As part of the reform of its statistical system, the government intends to create a single statistical
school that will offer formal degrees (equivalent to bachelor and masters) in statistics, demography,
applied economics and related information technology. In addition to reviewing the training capacity
of the local statistics schools, the project will look into partnerships with countries in Africa that have
already invested in building statistical capacity. These partnerships based on south-south knowledge
exchange will also leverage basic technical curricula, particularly in French-speaking countries.
Among the activities to be supported are:


﻿*      Institutional assessment of the local statistics schools in terms of how the skills of its
graduates respond to current and expected needs and where innovative learning techniques and
methodology can be introduced. The assessment will present a diagnostic report along with an action
plan that will be supported by the project.
o
* Review of the statistical training curricula and drafting of syllabi and training materials for
teaching applied statistics, demography.
*      Creation of an internship program for Congolese graduate students from regional or local
statistics schools to accelerate the availability of technical skills, particularly in response to the needs
of decentralized departments.
Component 2: Data Production, Dissemination and Use (US$ 26.06 million)
This component will finance the implementation of a program of activities designed to improve the
quality and timeliness of statistics produced by the NSS, by supporting the development of new
statistical products and services as well as the dissemination and use of statistical information.
Component 2.1: Generation of core economic statistics in DRC (6.75 million)
The project will start with a review of methodologies for generation of core statistics in DRC. The
objective of this review is to evaluate the methodologies, processes, skills, and information systems
that are being used for the production of core statistics, assess their validity, reliability and quality
against international norms and concepts and make recommendations about how to address the issues
identified. This review aims to ensure that the methods and processes used to produce the core
statistics are aligned with international norms and standards and that metadata, the information that
accompanies the data files, are available to data users. Its findings and recommendations will provide
inputs for the implementation of key improvements and the design of capacity building activities.
Core economic statistics. INS faces the challenge of producing credible data on prices, national
income and trade in a timely manner; as well as to ensure that the metadata for each of these series
are available to describe the methodology by which they are constructed and updated. The immediate
focus of the project under this sub-component will be the national accounts statistics (NAS), the
consumer price index (CPI), the industrial production indices (volumes and prices) and external trade
statistics.
Component 2.2: Improve the timeliness and consistency of Core Sectoral Statistics (17.51 million)
Sub-component 2.2.1: Improvement in Health and Educations Statistics (0.8 million)
Human Development (HD) statistics: The Bank through the Human Development Systems
Strengthening Project (P145965) is financing the development of decentralized and computerized
information management systems in both education and health. The immediate focus for the project
is to improve the existing information systems: SIGE for education and SNIS for heath. In addition
to the activities financed by the Human Development Systems Strengthening Project, this project will
provide technical assistance to Ministries of Education and Health to: (i) improve data collection and
data processing methods and (ii) support regular dissemination of education and health data.


﻿Sub-component 2.2.2: Improvement in Agriculture Statistics (6.8 million)
O
Agriculture is an extremely important sector in the DRC economy, accounting for a significant share
of GDP and the majority of employment. However, DRC has never conducted an agricultural census.
As a result, it is difficult to understand how the sector has evolved over time and the issues and
problems it is confronted with. This sub-component will finance collection, processing and updating
of Agricultural statistics including an agricultural sample census.
Sub-component 2.2.3: Improvement in Demographic, welfare and social statistics (8.2 million).
Household living conditions statistics-poverty and inequality: The sub-component will finance a
multi-year survey program (3 to 4 years) as part of the NSDS and its approval by INS and donor
partners which would be a good basis for coordination, efficiency, and effectiveness of the resources
used. The continuous survey program will rotate modules to collect different types of data depending
on specific needs at any given time and will also collect regular consumption and well-being data for
monitoring and assessing poverty, inequalities and progress toward the MDGs and thereafter
Vital statistics and migrations. To have any meaningful population projections, it is important that
the statistical system has an efficient vital registration system. Without a reliable vital registration
system, existing population data in DRC do not meet international standards. This subcomponent
will finance setup of a viable vital registration system in a few pilot provinces.
Forestry Statistics: Improvement in Forestry Statistics: produced by the Ministry of Water and
Forests. These statistics were last published in 2008. Informal activities are covered only partially.
The project will support the drafting of a national plan for collecting forestry statistics.
Mining and oil statistics: Improvement in Mining, and oil statistics: The project will finance a
diagnostic study; draw up an action plan to promote production and dissemination of reliable
statistics on mining, and oil activities in DRC; and support implementation of the action plan.
O
5.     Sub-component 2.2.4: Improvement of local Government statistics (1.71 million): Given the
a       size of the country and the weak institutional capacity at national level the decentralization of the
central government was adopted as a response to the increasing need to improve service d elivery to
large populations. The project aims to develop at provincial level the production and dissemination
of core economic statistics, demographic, welfare, social and sectorial statistics. The main outputs
will be provincial GDP The project will (i) finance a diagnostic study; draw up an action plan to
promote production and dissemination of reliable statistics at provincial level; and (ii) support
implementation of the action plan in a pilot province (Bas-Congo). The experience could scale up to
other provinces.
Component 2.3: Data Management, Use and Dissemination (1.8 million)
The project will support activities that promote the use of statistics to support policy decisions. Five
aspects of project design promote demand for statistics:
(a)  Linking statistical output to the Development Programs Monitoring Systems. Objectives and


﻿outcomes that appear in policy documents will be examined carefully to identify monitoring needs
and the statistics needed to address them.
(b) Promoting the use of data through knowledge products. The project will support the Congolese
Poverty and Inequalities Observatory (OCPI) and economic monitoring activities at the Direction of
O
U       Macroeconomic Studies (DEME) by publishing collaborative analytical works on many themes for
greater public scrutiny. Technical discussions, forums, and workshops will stimulate debate on
development issues.
(c)    Development and activation of a comprehensive information dissemination and micro-data
access policy. The project will also support activities that encourage student use of NSS data for their
dissertations.
(d)    Creation of an open data portal for dissemination of statistical products and services and as a
platform for users to provide feedback on the quality of NSS statistical products and services.
(e)    Statistics literacy: The project will promote the importance of statistics to the scientific
community, business and government data users, the media, policy makers, employers, students, and
the general public.
(f)    Archiving: Most DRC data producers still use archaic means to store data. The project will
promote use of modem techniques to archive data.
Component 3: Project Management (US$ 3.85 million)
This component will support activities to strengthen the capacity of the Project Coordination Unit for
the day to day coordination, implementation and management (including, fiduciary aspects,
monitoring and evaluation, carrying out of audits and reporting) of Project activities and results, all
through; the provision of technical advisory services, non-consulting services, Training, Operating
Costs and acquisition of goods for the purpose.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Activities will be implemented at the INS offices in Kinshasa, with the exception of surveys and
gathering of statistical data, which are potentially taking place across the entire country. Project
benefits will be nationwide.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
At national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
environmental management. In addition, the DRC has signed a number of international treaties and
conventions. However, implementation capacity is weak. Environmental policies and their
compliance are governed by the Ministfre de l'Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du
Tourisme (MECNT) - (Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism). The MECNT has
three departments in charge of environnemental monitoring and management: i) Le Groupe d'Etudes
Environnementales du Congo (GEEC); ii) le Centre National d'Information sur l'Environnement
(CNIE); and iii) La Cellule R6glementation et Contentieux Environnementaux (CRCE). The GEEC
is responsible for safeguards compliance of all projects in the country, but with emphasis on
environmental category A projects. The unit is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite several
donor-funded capacity building initiatives, the unit still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its
field supervision duties. At project level, the project recognizes the above institutional framework for
safeguards compliance so it will draw from other projects experience to minimize potential
safeguards related issues.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         The project will finance the renovation and
OP/BP 4.01                               furnishing of the INS facilities in Kinshasa under
sub-component 1.1. This activity is expected to have
potential environmental adverse impacts, even if on
limited scale. As the exact location where the
renovation will be realized has been already
determined and taking account that the whole project
is classified as EA category "B" a Limited
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment(ESIA)
should be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed
within DRC and at the Infoshop prior appraisal.
However, the project overlaps the renovation
activities of DRC Catalytic Project's (P125509). The
later project finances renovations in the same areas
(INS's headquarter) for which a safeguard instrument
(EMP) already exists. This EMP will serve as
guidance for the ongoing project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          Project activities will not be undertaken near or
inside critical ecosystems or natural habitats
according to World Bank's definitions.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          No activity of the project is expected to promote
timber exploitation or to finance activities which will
contribute to destroy the forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project does not have any relation with pest
management.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The renovation and furnishing of the INS's building
OP/BP 4.11                              will not involve excavations. Taking into account
that factor, the policy on physical cultural resources
is not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          Not relevant. There are no people on targeted area
4.10                                    (INS headquarters) even less indigenous people.
Also the data gathering activities will be based on
random sampling.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         There will be rehabilitation in a walled compound
BP 4.12                                 that belongs to the INS but no land acquisition
leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No          The project will not rely on a dam, or finance dam or
dam-related investments.
Projects on International   No          The project will not depend on international


﻿Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        waterways and will not finance water resources use
activities.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           This project is not being implemented in any
BP 7.60                                     disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Not applicable.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Franck M. Adoho
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                    Date: 06-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (PMGR)                     Date: 12-Mar-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


