                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA7557
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-May-2013, 02-Oct-2013, 17-Jan-2014, 24-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                       Project ID:    P127741
                            Project Name:      Philippines National Community Driven Development Program (P127741)
                            Task Team          Sean Bradley
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Apr-2013                       Estimated   20-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASPS                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads
                                              and Highways (20%), Water supply (20%), Primary educ ation (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (34%), Participation and civic engagement
                                              (33%), Other social development (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     663.90           Total Bank Financing:                479.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                184.90
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   479.00
                              Total                                                                                   663.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                            To empower communities in targeted municipalities to achieve improved access to services and to
                            participate in more inclusive local planning, budgeting and implementation.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The proposed KC-NCDDP will draw on the successful experiences of the Government’s various
                         CDD programs, particularly the KALAHI-CIDSS program managed by the Department of Social
                         Welfare and Development (DSWD). From 2002 to June 2012, KALAHI-CIDSS financed a total of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5,949 community sub-projects in 6,167 barangays worth a total of Php. 6.4 billion (approximately
                         US$ 156 million) and benefiting about 1,227,500 households in the poorest provinces and
                         municipalities in the country. Basic social services facilities (water systems, school buildings, day
                         care centers, health stations) are the most commonly financed (53 percent) followed by access
                         infrastructure such as roads and bridges (25 percent). The end-of-project impact evaluation showed
                         improvements in measures of household income, year-round access, and local level trust and
                         governance. Separate evaluations of the project have also shown that overall sub-project investments
                         yield an average economic internal rate of return of 21 percent, and that unit costs are between 8 and
                         76 percent lower than similar public sector works. The KC-NCDDP components and core areas of
                         investment would be closely aligned to those of KALAHI-CIDSS.

                         Component 1: Barangay (community) grants (estimated US$ 398 million IBRD). This component
                         would support two types of assistance to participating barangays. First, planning grants will be made
                         available to communities to support the so called “Community Empowerment Activity
                         Cycle” (CEAC). These grants would be used for the orientation, consultation, participatory priority-
                         setting, action planning, review and approval processes for different community subprojects at
                         barangay and inter-barangay (municipal) levels. Planning grants would also support technical
                         assistance inputs to ensure the quality of design and implementation of community infrastructure.
                         Second, investment grants will support community subprojects and activities (community based
                         public infrastructure and services such as roads, bridges, schools, day cares, etc.) that respond to
                         community-identified priorities, including in those communities affected by a qualified emergency or
                         disaster, such as with Typhoon Haiyan. An open menu of sectoral investments would be eligible for
                         financing under these grants. The component would also support efforts to strengthen the barangay
                         assembly as a forum for community-local government engagement and local-level governance.
                         Block grant financing would be shared between national government (including ODA) and local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level counterpart contributions (LCC) from municipal, barangay and communities themselves. Under
                         KC-NCDDP, allocations of municipal block grants would be based on a formula that factors in
                         population and poverty incidence, and the effects of Typhoon Haiyan.

                         Component 2: Local capacity building and implementation support (estimated US$ 67.5 million
                         IBRD). This component supports the strengthening of municipal LGUs and staff to facilitate, support
                         and oversee the participatory assessments, planning and sub-project implementation of community
                         infrastructure; to ensure quality of infrastructure investments and the integrity of resource
                         management; and to monitor and report on subproject progress and results. The component would
                         also provide for greater support and capacity building of local government units (LGUs) to enhance
                         local poverty reduction action planning, budget execution and public financial management, and for
                         national government agencies at sub-national level to enhance their own community based activities
                         and participation in the KC-NCDDP. This component specifically would finance training, consultant
                         services and other incidental costs.

                         Component 3: Program Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation (estimated US$ 12.3 million
                         IBRD) to finance the oversight, coordination and overall management of the program. This would
                         include contracting specialized staff and procurement of required goods and financing of incremental
                         operating costs to assist DSWD in the execution, monitoring and reporting of the program at
                         national, regional and sub-regional levels. The component would also support enhancements and


                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         streamlining of the current KALAHI-CIDSS monitoring and reporting system, the hiring of
                         additional regional level monitoring officers, design and contracting for specialized studies, and to
                         facilitate regular review of monitoring and evaluation data for management decisions. Such studies
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will include a review of technical quality and maintenance of infrastructure, an economic analysis of
                         KC-NCDDP subprojects, specific household surveys to track key outcome indicators and a detailed
                         process evaluation of KC-NCDDP, including of procedural variations that are expected to be
                         implemented in different contexts (conflict, disasters, indigenous populations) and of the links with
                         the regular LGU planning processes. This component would also support the dissemination of
                         lessons learned and relevant training events for different stakeholders, and provision of operational
                         assistance to regional and municipal offices of DSWD in disaster affected areas to reestablish
                         operational capacity. The component would specifically finance consultant services, training/
                         workshops and operating costs (including project-specific staff).

                         Financing from the World Bank, as well as proportional Government and counterpart funds, would
                         support an estimated 477 poor rural and typhoon-affected municipalities in the Philippines. Based on
                         the 2010 census, the project would therefore cover an estimated 16.85 million people (or
                         approximately 18 percent of the overall population of the country). It is expected that the project will
                         directly benefit one-half of this population, either through active engagement in project processes or
                         through access to public infrastructure financed by the project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The program would cover an estimated 477 of an estimated 847 poor rural or Typhoon Haiyan-
                         affected municipalities in the country. The program will work in nearly all regions of the country and
                         therefore would engage with all varieties of environmental and social contexts that are present in the
                         Philippines.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Roberto B. Tordecilla (EASPS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gerardo F. Parco (EASPS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             This CDD project is expected to finance
                          BP 4.01                                             community infrastructure sub-projects such as
                                                                              health centers, classrooms, day care centers etc.
                                                                              The potential impact of any subproject will
                                                                              depend on the nature, location and specific
                                                                              characteristics of the investment. Based on
                                                                              experiences under KALAHI-CIDSS, in most
                                                                              cases the environmental and social impacts of
                                                                              such projects are expected to be minor,
                                                                              temporary, site-specific, reversible and limited to
                                                                              the construction phase. They include typical
                                                                              construction related impacts such as, noise
                                                                              vehicle emissions and dust generation during
                                                                              construction, small-scale vegetation loss,
                                                                              management of construction waste, and
                                                                              temporary and intermittent elevated noise levels.



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                                     Potential adverse impacts would be easily
                                                                     mitigated through a combination of a negative list
                                                                     of inappropriate types or locations of sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     projects, sub-project specific Environmental and
                                                                     Social Management Plans (ESMP) and technical
                                                                     guidance on appropriate construction designs and
                                                                     practices, as well as general good housekeeping.
                                                                     Technical manuals developed by DSWD under
                                                                     KALAHI and Thematic Environmental
                                                                     Management System materials developed with
                                                                     the support of MCC will be used for this purpose.
                                                                     The overall environmental and social due
                                                                     diligence approach in the project is governed by
                                                                     EIA Guidelines and the Environment and Social
                                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) used in the
                                                                     KALAHI-CIDSS project, which have been
                                                                     revised, updated and streamlined into one
                                                                     document by the DSWD, and would be applied
                                                                     under the KC-NCDDP. This document would
                                                                     serve to screen for and identify potential negative
                                                                     impacts and plan the implementation of relevant
                                                                     mitigating measures.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No            Because of the small scale nature of the
                                                                     community infrastructure done under this project,
                                                                     there would likely be no impact on natural
                                                                     habitats. In addition, the ESMF includes
                                                                     screening criteria and mitigation actions to
                                                                     safeguard natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            Because of the small scale nature of the
                                                                     community infrastructure done under this project,
                                                                     there would likely be no impact on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           Experience in the previous project KALAHI-
                                                                     CIDSS has shown approximately 1% of
                                                                     subprojects related to irrigation. To prevent a
                                                                     potential increase in the use of pesticides, current
                                                                     and future beneficiary communities that chose to
                                                                     invest in small-scale irrigation will be trained in
                                                                     Integrated Pest Management practice by
                                                                     coordinating with the Municipal Agricultural
                                                                     Officer of the LGUs and the Dept. or Agriculture
                                                                     extension services (through the
                                                                     KASAKALIKASAN Program). Experience in
                                                                     Kalahi-CIDSS also revealed the potential use of
                                                                     termiticides in treating soils around infrastructure
                                                                     projects. Applicable Integrated Pest management
                                                                     Practices will be promoted.



                                                             Page 4 of 10
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The small footprint of community infrastructure
                         BP 4.11                                         projects, inherent flexibility in selecting a site for
                                                                         these structures, and the fact that the community
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         members themselves would be involved in
                                                                         identifying the site makes it highly unlikely that
                                                                         there would be any impact on Physical Cultural
                                                                         Resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           IP communities were found and engaged in eight
                                                                         regions covered by KALAHI CIDSS (KC)
                                                                         implementation (CAR, Regions IV-B, V, IX, X,
                                                                         XI, XII and XIII). The probability of engaging
                                                                         and affecting IP communities under KC-NCDDP
                                                                         is high since most of the estimated 477 of the 847
                                                                         poorest municipalities targeted are located in
                                                                         these regions. While no specific IP Plans were
                                                                         prepared under KALAHI, the sub-project plans
                                                                         from IP communities (18% of total), prepared
                                                                         through a FPIC process, include the main
                                                                         elements of an IPP. The existing Indigenous
                                                                         Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF) has been
                                                                         enhanced (to improve on the consultative process)
                                                                         based on a specific review of engagement with IP
                                                                         communities under KALAHI as part of the KC-
                                                                         NCDDP preparation ("Developing an IP Lens in
                                                                         Development Projects").
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Based on the experiences in KALAHI-CIDSS
                         4.12                                            implementation, no involuntary physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         relocation is anticipated under the project.
                                                                         However, some sub-projects may require the
                                                                         acquisition of land. Therefore, an enhanced Land
                                                                         Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation
                                                                         Framework (LARRF) has been prepared and
                                                                         integrated into the ESMF based on the existing
                                                                         LARRF for the KALAHI- CIDSS project, the
                                                                         assessment of its (LARRF) implementation, as
                                                                         well as through public disclosure and
                                                                         consultations with local communities and civil
                                                                         society organizations that have been involved in
                                                                         the implementation of the KALAHI-CIDSS
                                                                         project.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            The Project will not finance dams.

                         Projects on International        No             not applicable
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             not applicable
                         7.60



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              This CDD project is expected to finance community infrastructure sub-projects such as health
                              centers, classrooms, day care centers etc. The potential impact of any subproject will depend on
                              the nature, location and specific characteristics of the investment. Based on the KALAHI-CIDSS
                              experience, in most cases the environmental and social impacts of such projects are minor,
                              temporary, site-specific, and reversible, and occur primarily during the construction phase. They
                              include typical construction related impacts such as vehicle emissions and dust, small-scale
                              vegetation loss, management of construction waste and temporary and intermittent elevated noise
                              levels. There is also a potential for the increased use of pesticides in areas where small irrigation
                              projects are selected by the community (which happened in 1% of KALAHI subprojects).
                              Termiticides are also commonly used to treat the soil around structures. Nonetheless, the purchase
                              of pesticides would not be financed under the project and integrated Pest Management methods
                              and practices will be promoted.

                              The Project will cover poor regions that are home to indigenous peoples (IP) who have a long
                              history of marginalization and neglect. If not properly managed, project activities could potentially
                              further exclude them or harm their lives and culture. While the underlying participatory principles
                              of the KC-NCDDP generally serve to increase voice and power of IP communities (effectively
                              serving as a parallel mechanism for obtaining Free and Prior Informed Consent), a study
                              conducted as part of the preparatory work under the KC-NCDDP found that efforts under
                              KALAHI-CIDSS to fully engage IP communities were not always fully successful. In response
                              and to ensure that IP communities under KC-NCDDP receive culturally appropriate benefits,
                              operational changes have been agreed to with DSWD to further enhance consultations and
                              engagement of IP communities (including additional IP specific staff, training and improved
Public Disclosure Copy




                              facilitation guidelines, explicit engagement of elders and the National Committee of Indigenous
                              People (NCIP), and increased weighting for IP community sub-project proposals). These are
                              reflected in the IP Policy Framework (IPPF), which is part of the KC-NCDDP Environmental and
                              Social Management Framework (ESMF). During preparation of the KC-NCDDP several meetings
                              have taken place between DSWD and the NCIP to discuss the IPPF, leading to the latter's strong
                              support to the project and formal endorsement (in its letter of May 3, 2013) of the IPPF. As part of
                              the preparation for KC-NCDDP, additional enhancements to the Community Empowerment
                              Activity Cycle (the process used to engage with communities and facilitate decisions around
                              priority development needs) were made in pursuit of the objective of ensuring free and prior
                              informed community consultations resulting in broad community support.

                              More than 90% of the sub-projects under KALAHI-CIDSS used government or public lands for
                              new infrastructure. All instances which required private land were for very small areas (e.g.,
                              pathways for the laying of water pipes), which were readily and voluntarily donated as part of the
                              community mobilization processes and negotiations. Such acquisitions were executed through a
                              deed of donation in accordance with the Philippine laws. Under the KC-NCDDP it is similarly
                              expected that land would be acquired mostly through use of existing government lands or
                              voluntary donation of private lands.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                           Overwhelmingly, the direct long term impacts of the subprojects are positive-- such as better
                           access to basic services among poor households due to improved community infrastructure, and
                           enhanced economic activity in the community.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           not applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           During the preparation of KC-NCDDP, an assessment of the effectiveness of the safeguards
                           instruments used under KALAHI-CIDSS) was carried out. The assessment found that the DSWD
                           team especially at the municipal and community levels was satisfactorily implementing safeguards
                           screening and supervision of subprojects per relevant (and Bank approved) guidelines. However,
                           the relevant safeguard procedures that were outlined in three separate documents—an ESMF,
                           (including a LARRF and an IPPF), an EIA Guideline and a Safeguards sub-manual-- were found
                           to be quite complicated. To address these issues, it was agreed that for KC-NCDDP, all safeguards
                           instruments should be integrated into one document, the ESMF, which complies with the relevant
                           safeguards policies for this program: OP 4.01, OP 4.09, OP 4.10, OP 4.12.

                          These procedures have been further streamlined into two steps: 1) screening for different types of
                          impacts using checklist questionnaires, and 2) preparation of appropriate safeguards instruments
                          (EIA, ESMP, LARRP, IPP, etc.), based on the findings of the screening stage to identify potential
                          negative impacts and relevant mitigating measures. For instance, sub-projects that involve the
                          construction/ rehabilitation of health care facilities, the ESMP will include procedures and
                          measures for proper handling of solid and liquid medical waste. Beneficiaries of irrigation
                          projects will be trained in Integrated Pest Management practices to minimize use of pesticides (in
                          coordination with the extension services provided by the Department of Agriculture and the
                          Municipal Agricultural Officer of the LGUs under the KASAKALIKASAN Program). While
Public Disclosure Copy




                          involuntary land acquisition is not expected as per experience under KALAHI-CIDSS, all types of
                          land acquisition will be done and documented through the procedures and forms outlined in the
                          Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation (LARR) framework, an annex to the ESMF,
                          and which includes a comprehensive compensation matrix. This would include the preparation of
                          Voluntary Land Acquisition forms, or a Land Acquisition, Resettlement and Rehabilitation Plan
                          (LARRP) in the unlikely event of land acquisition or displacement. The LARRP is fully consistent
                          with World Bank OP 4.12, including the requirements for a Resettlement Action Plan.

                          The existing IP Policy Framework (IPPF) applied under KALAHI-CIDSS was reviewed and
                          updated as part of the NCDDP preparation process based on a review of issues and constraints to
                          IP participation. The review resulted in the following adjustments: (i) the development of specific
                          facilitation modules for IP areas with a strong focus on capacity building of communities,
                          awareness raising on IPRA and meeting the documentation requirements for Ancestral Domain
                          Claims (ii) changes in the sub-project criteria setting process in mixed communities to ensure that
                          greater weight is given to proposals from IP communities (therefore making some adjustments to
                          the competitive process to the advantage of IP groups). The IPPF includes requirements on the
                          mechanisms for participation and representation of IPs in all phases of the community-driven
                          development program; documentation/preparation and implementation of sub-projects, social
                          analysis, and free, prior and informed consultations leading to broad community support that are
                          proportional to the scale of potential impacts on IP communities. Sub-project plans (including


                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                           related social investigations and participatory situational analysis) would include the relevant
                           elements of an IPP. DSWD will establish a protocol with the National Commission on Indigenous
                           Peoples (NCIP) for addressing land issues and clarify roles and responsibilities at National,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Regional and Municipal levels. Finally, IP specialist positions will be established at NPMO and
                           Social Development Unit staff at Regional level will be tasked with the coordination of the
                           additional activities proposed; and a Technical Working Group on IP issues will be created at
                           National level for closer engagement with NCIP and civil society organizations active in this area.
                           The IPPF, the preparatory study, and the project document have been discussed with relevant IP
                           organizations in-country and endorsed by the NCIP.

                           DSWD as well as other partner agencies such as the Department of Agriculture have been
                           implementing World Bank-assisted projects and programs and have shown strong capacity to
                           implement safeguards. For DSWD the same set of staff and units will be involved in safeguards
                           supervision for the KC-NCDDP. Regional safeguards officers will be hired/designated to take
                           charge of overall supervision, monitoring and reporting at regional level. Additional staff with
                           specialized IP skills will be hired in those regions where there are higher relative concentrations of
                           IP communities. Community Facilitators and Deputy Area Coordinators at municipal level will be
                           trained and supervised to ensure that relevant project safeguards are addressed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are rural poor communities who will be consulted through a participatory
                           process, local government units (barangays and municipalities) and key agencies of the
                           government such as the Department of Agriculture, Education, Health, Local Government, and the
                           National Commission on Indigenous People. Project facilitation will emphasize the inclusion of
                           vulnerable groups within the community, especially the IPs, when they are present, and enhanced
                           IP facilitation procedures have been agreed upon. Participating communities and LGUs will sign
                           an agreement with DSWD, which will require them to support the participatory planning process.
                           The project principle of full transparency will be implemented through a program of disclosure of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           plans, budgets and expenditures supplemented by independent civil society monitoring. At the
                           national level, DSWD has established strong coordination with NCIP to ensure IP-sensitive
                           activities across implementation levels.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              09-Apr-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                 12-Apr-2013
                           Comments: disclosed on DSWD's main website and that of KALAHI-CIDSS, revised ESMF
                                         disclosed on May 21, 2013
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                 03-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                              09-Apr-2013



                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                       12-Apr-2013
                           Comments: as above
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03-Apr-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    09-Apr-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                       12-Apr-2013
                           Comments: as above
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?



                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Sean Bradley
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Ousmane Dione (SM)                            Date: 24-Jan-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
