                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA6449
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Turkey                            Project ID:    P144534
                            Project Name:     Renewable Energy Integration (P144534)
                            Task Team         Mikul Bhatia
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         31-Jan-2014                       Estimated   23-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSEG                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (50%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Regional
                                              integration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     475.00           Total Bank Financing:               300.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                125.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   300.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                    50.00
                              Total                                                                                   475.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is “To assist Turkey in meeting its increased power demand by strengthening the
                           transmission system and facilitating large-scale renewable energy generation”.


                                                                     Page 1 of 13
                         The GEO is “To avoid Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from fossil fuel based power through
                         greater integration of renewable energy sources based generation in Turkey”.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project components are expected to help alleviate the key barriers that inhibit faster development
                         of wind energy in Turkey as identified in Section-1C.

                         > Component-1: Development of transmission infrastructure to facilitate faster development of
                         WPPs (CTF:USD 25 million, IBRD: USD 25 million)

                         Within the Aegean and Marmara regions that hold the highest wind energy potential in Turkey, the
                         provinces of Izmir, Canakkale and Istanbul rank the highest with installed wind capacity of 877 MW,
                         407 MW and 382 MW respectively. The wind power investments in these three provinces together
                         constituted nearly 70 percent of the installed wind capacity in Turkey in 2012. Due to their high wind
                         potential, these provinces will continue to attract more investments in WPPs. Availability of upfront
                         transmission infrastructure to cater to growing needs of new WPPs in these provinces could enable
                         faster implementation of wind energy projects.

                         The first component of this project would therefore develop three 380kV 500 MVA highly
                         digitalized sub-stations with associated grid connection structures for evacuation of wind power in
                         the areas of Can, Izmir and Vize. The proposed structures would include high voltage (HV)
                         substations, HV grid interfacing equipment, smart-metering systems, feeders (underground cables),
                         tele-metered dispatch systems, digital protection systems, supervisory systems, and automatic
                         voltage control systems.

                         > Component-2: Smart-grid investments to strengthen grid operation and management in face of
                         higher wind energy generation (CTF: USD 25 million, IBRD: USD 32.5 million)

                         These investments will enable TEIAS to monitor network status in real-time and operate entire
Public Disclosure Copy




                         network reliably and securely. It would enable TEIAS to handle the increasing amounts of wind
                         energy. It consists of:
                            (i) Upgrade of SCADA system in two national control centers and the addition of Renewable
                         Energy Resource (RER) Operator Desk on SCADA system to manage rapidly increasing WPP.
                            (ii) Remote Terminal Unit (RTU) installation to substations and power plants to monitor and
                         control them from dispatching centers.
                            (iii) Digital Protection Relay deployment which will make faster fault clearing in order to
                         minimize network disturbance and outage area.
                            (iv) Shunt Reactor installation to bulk-transmission network to control load flow and to secure
                         appropriate system voltage among network.

                         > Component-3: Lapseki-Sutluce 380 kV Submarine Power Cable to better inter-connect wind
                         energy locations with other parts of Turkey (IBRD: USD 67.2 million)

                         As the second double-circuit submarine cable route having 4.35 km length across the Dardanelles
                         strait, this cable will connect Anatolian side and Thrace side of Turkey with a capacity of 2 GW.
                         Along with the first submarine cable being implemented under APL-6, the aggregate submarine
                         cable capacity across the Dardanelles strait will be 4 GW, connecting wind power sub-stations in
                         provinces of Can, Izmir and Istanbul. As a result of this sub-component, the 380kV bulk-
                         transmission network to Istanbul across the Bosphorus and Dardanelles straits will form a secure


                                                                     Page 2 of 13
                         strong loop network around Marmara Sea.

                         > Component-4: Strengthening of Transmission Networks to cater to growing demand and supply of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         electricity in Turkey (IBRD: USD 175.3 million)

                         This component will cater the investment needs for 380 kV bulk-transmission and 154 kV sub-
                         transmission network expansions to meet rapidly increasing demand and supply. This component
                         consists of the 380 kV Yeni Ambarli – Yenibosna single-circuit underground cable (route length 16.7
                         km), four 380 kV substations (total transformer’s capacity is 2100 MVA), four 154 kV substations
                         (total transformer’s capacity is 800 MVA), and four 154 kV single-circuit underground cable (total
                         route length is 31.2 km). For the sake of urgent requirement, procurement of the 380 kV Yeni
                         Ambarli – Yenibosna underground cable has been initiated under APL-6 though most of the
                         investment will be financed by this REIP.

                         > Technical Assistance for implementation of smart-grid technologies and strengthening
                         environmental aspects of wind energy development (To be funded under EU-IPA program)

                         In addition to the above four components, support would be needed for: (i) design, implementation
                         and capacity building for smart-grid technologies, (ii) simplification of market and regulatory
                         processes for allocation of licenses for wind power (and other renewable energy) development, (iii)
                         strengthening the wind energy markets, and (iv) strengthening environmental and social safeguards
                         in wind power projects (especially from the perspective of cumulative impact assessment). These
                         aspects would be covered through the ongoing EU-IPA 2012 program, which is supported by the EU
                         through funds channeled through the World Bank for the benefit of Turkish energy sectors agencies.

                         The renewable energy component of the EU-IPA program is planned for helping MENR accelerate
                         renewable energy development including through the review of regulatory framework, legislation,
                         tariff mechanism, and principles and procedures regarding the site selection of the renewable energy
                         plants; streamlining of licensing processes and permits; and preparation of a renewable energy road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         map and action plan. This program also includes efforts to strengthen the upfront ecological
                         assessment of wind energy locations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         TEIAS has identified a tentative list of investments within the scope of the new project. The list
                         includes GIS substation installations (in Can, Izmir and Vize Provinces), underground cable
                         construction and a Phase II stage of the Lapseki-Sutluce undersea cable (in Canakkale region) (the
                         first phase is being financed under ongoing APL 6 project, the second phase will also be started from
                         the APL 6 loan but when REIP becomes effective will be financed from the new project).

                         While the provinces are predetermined, the exact locations of the substations and the routes of the
                         transmission lines are not determined yet. As soon as the exact footprints of the sub projects are
                         clear, relevant environmental assessment documents (partial EA or EMPs) and resettlement
                         documents (RAP or ARAPs) will be prepared for these sub-projects.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (ECSSO)
                         Esra Arikan (ECSEN)



                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           There are both direct and indirect/induced
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      potential impacts of the project, during both
                                                                      construction and operational phases.

                                                                      Expected direct environmental impacts of the
                                                                      proposed list of investments (substations,
                                                                      underground transmission lines and 1 undersea
                                                                      cable) are generation of dust, noise, disposal of
                                                                      non-hazardous waste (packing materials,
                                                                      vegetation from ROW clearing), construction of
                                                                      any access roads, and issues related to worker
                                                                      camps if any (water supply, sewage, and domestic
                                                                      waste disposal). Environmental impacts of a 4.5
                                                                      km long undersea cable is expected to be
                                                                      temporary and short term on undersea/aquatic
                                                                      environment and marine traffic. Expected
                                                                      environmental issues associated with operation of
                                                                      the substations include electric and magnetic field
                                                                      strength.

                                                                      The area of influence of the project extends
                                                                      beyond the substation footprints. Indirect
                                                                      impacts relate to the construction and operation of
                                                                      WPP which will be connected to the national grid
                                                                      through the project-financed substations and
                                                                      cable. An Environmental and Social Due
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Diligence (ESDD) Review, including a Rapid
                                                                      Ecological Assessment (REA), was carried out
                                                                      during project preparation to identify potential
                                                                      indirect impacts and recommend approaches to
                                                                      avoid, reduce and mitigate them. Among the
                                                                      results of this ESSD/REA was that one substation
                                                                      was removed from the project (see sections II A1
                                                                      and II A 2 below).

                                                                      The project is categorized as Category B under
                                                                      OP 4.01, as the types of potential impacts are
                                                                      limited and should be relatively easy to assess and
                                                                      mitigate through careful siting and good
                                                                      construction practices. Since the exact footprints
                                                                      of the sub-projects are not determined yet, an
                                                                      environmental management framework (EMF)
                                                                      has been prepared by TEIAS to provide guidance
                                                                      for screening, assessing, consultation, reporting
                                                                      and monitoring practices. The draft EMF was
                                                                      disclosed in country and in Infoshop. The


                                                              Page 4 of 13
                                                                         consultation meetings were held in Ankara on
                                                                         November 1, 2013 and in Izmir on November 7,
                                                                         2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         The EMF sets out procedures for sub-projects to
                                                                         be reviewed by TEIAS to first ensure that they
                                                                         have completed all required national
                                                                         environmental clearances and then ensure that the
                                                                         requirements of OP 4.01 are met. Consistent
                                                                         with Category B requirements, it is expected that
                                                                         this will mean the preparation of limited (partial)
                                                                         EAs/EMPs (rather than full EIAs as would be
                                                                         required for Category A investments). Sub-
                                                                         project partial EAs/EMPs will be submitted to
                                                                         WB for prior review and after getting no-
                                                                         objections these will be disclosed in client's
                                                                         websites and will be included in the
                                                                         corresponding bidding documents of the
                                                                         investment projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Based on the results of the Rapid Ecological
                                                                         Assessment, one sub-station (and the related wind
                                                                         power plant) which had a risk of causing negative
                                                                         induced impacts on areas of critical natural
                                                                         habitat has been dropped from the original project
                                                                         list (subsequently the national EIA process of the
                                                                         planned WPP has also been suspended by the
                                                                         Ministry of Environment and Urbanization).
                                                                         However, the REA also identified some sensitive
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         natural habitat areas in the area of influence of
                                                                         some of the remaining investments, and made
                                                                         specific recommendations for sub-project design
                                                                         and siting to avoid or minimize these impacts. As
                                                                         the REA indicated that significant negative
                                                                         impacts can be avoided through appropriate
                                                                         design, the project was not elevated to Category
                                                                         A. The designs and EAs/EMPs for the
                                                                         substations will be carefully reviewed to ensure
                                                                         that these issues are adequately addressed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Since sub-project specific civil works could
                         BP 4.11                                         potentially be within a historic district, the World
                                                                         Bank safeguard policy on Physical Cultural
                                                                         Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is applicable to these



                                                                 Page 5 of 13
                                                                        investments. For sub-projects in recognized
                                                                        historic areas and/or involving cultural property
                                                                        issues, the local authority of Ministry of Culture
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        and Tourism is responsible for application of
                                                                        Turkish laws and regulations, including those
                                                                        relating to cultural heritage. The sub-borrower
                                                                        will be required to secure all necessary permits
                                                                        and approvals from these local authorities. For all
                                                                        sub-projects, whether or not they are in historic
                                                                        areas, any sub-project EMP/Mitigation Plan/
                                                                        Checklist will include procedures and
                                                                        responsibilities for managing accidentally
                                                                        discovered or chance find cultural artifacts.
                                                                        Consideration of such concerns is provided in the
                                                                        works contracts that will include requirements
                                                                        that the contractor is obliged to look for chance
                                                                        finds and immediately stop work at the contested
                                                                        location and alert responsible authorities in case
                                                                        of chance finds, and only continue works after
                                                                        official approvals from the responsible authorities
                                                                        are secured. Since the national regulations on the
                                                                        conservation of cultural properties are strict, it is
                                                                        not anticipated that any additional requirements
                                                                        would arise from the World Bank safeguard
                                                                        policies.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The proposed list of investments (substations and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                           undersea cable) will require land acquisition,
                                                                        though exact locations are not known at the
                                                                        moment due to the designs not being finalized.
                                                                        The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                        prepared by TEIAS for APL6 and disclosed by
                                                                        TEIAS in June 2010 has been revised for this
                                                                        project to cover possible impacts that will result
                                                                        from this project's components. The "Land
                                                                        Acquisition Policy Framework" has been
                                                                        disclosed in country and in Infoshop. For each
                                                                        sub-project, TEIAS will prepare a RAP or ARAP
                                                                        (depending on the magnitude of impacts) that will
                                                                        need to be reviewed and cleared by the World
                                                                        Bank, and disclosed on the TEIAS website and
                                                                        the local project site. All project affected people
                                                                        will be compensated at replacement value before
                                                                        any land acquisition takes place.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No



                                                                Page 6 of 13
                            Projects on International           No              The laying of a submarine cable under the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                Dardanelles does not require triggering of this
                                                                                policy, as was confirmed by LEGEN in relation to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                the first submarine cable established under APL6.
                                                                                Adequate systems are in place to notify ship
                                                                                traffic of the temporary closure of the Strait
                                                                                which will be required for the cable laying.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are both direct and indirect/induced potential impacts of the project, during construction and
                              operational phases. Expected direct environmental impacts during construction of the proposed list
                              of investments (substations, underground transmission lines and the undersea cable) are clearance
                              of vegetation at the substation locations, generation of dust, noise, disposal of non-hazardous
                              waste (packing materials, excavation waste, etc), construction of any access roads, and issues
                              related to worker camps if any (water supply, sewage, and domestic waste disposal). There are no
                              anticipated impacts of the substations during the operational phase except management of the SF6
                              - a non-toxic, non-corrosive, non-flammable but potent greenhouse gas used in gas-insulated
                              switchgear (GIS). The GIS technology is state of the art, and has very rigorous monitoring and
                              alarm systems built in, so chances of a leakage of gas are negligible, and there are good remedies
                              in place for the rare eventuality. Environmental impacts of the undersea cable are expected to be
                              temporary and short term on undersea/aquatic environment and marine traffic.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             During the preparation of the project, it was agreed that the area of influence for the substations to
                             be financed under this project will not be limited to the substation footprints. Since, the substations
                             are intended for connecting the energy produced by wind power plants to the national grid, TEIAS
                             should also consider the potential impacts of the construction and operation of these wind power
                             plants on natural habitats (potential induced impacts of the project). As the “power shed” for the
                             proposed substations included natural habitat areas, the WB policy on Natural Habitats (OP 4.04)
                             was triggered. In order to identify any potential high risk areas, a Rapid Ecological Assessment
                             was conducted as a part of an Environmental and Social Due-Diligence (ESDD) study. The results
                             of the assessment was shared with TEIAS to help ensure that the substations financed under the
                             project are not receiving energy from wind power plants that are located within critical natural
                             habitats or creating significant adverse impacts on natural habitats. Based on the REA findings,
                             one proposed substation was dropped from the project as it was considered to present a risk of
                             inducing development leading to significant impacts on critical natural habitat (Ministry of
                             Environment and Urbanization also suspended the national EIA process of the wind power plant
                             which was planned to be connected to the planned substation). The REA also provided specific
                             recommendations for the location and design of associated infrastructure such as transmission
                             lines and access roads, to avoid or minimize potential negative impacts. The specific issues and
                             mitigation measures will be detailed in the EAs and EMPs, which will draw upon the REA for
                             baseline information as well as design recommendations.



                                                                        Page 7 of 13
                         Since sub-project specific civil works could potentially be within a historic district, the World
                         Bank safeguard policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) was also triggered for the
                         REI Project. For sub-projects in recognized historic areas and/or involving cultural property
Public Disclosure Copy




                         issues, the local authority of Ministry of Culture and Tourism is responsible for application of
                         Turkish laws and regulations, including those relating to cultural heritage. The borrower or its
                         contractor will be required to secure all necessary permits and approvals from these local
                         authorities. For all sub-projects, whether or not they are in historic areas, any sub-project partial
                         EA/EMP will include procedures and responsibilities for managing accidentally discovered or
                         chance find cultural artifacts. Consideration of such concerns is provided in the works contracts
                         that will include requirements that the contractor is obliged to look for chance finds and
                         immediately stop work at the contested location and alert responsible authorities in case of chance
                         finds, and only continue works after official approvals from the responsible authorities are
                         secured. Since the national regulations on the conservation of cultural properties are strict, it is not
                         anticipated that any additional requirements would arise from the World Bank safeguard policies.
                         The environmental management framework also provides clear guidance about addressing the
                         physical cultural issues during sub-project environmental assessment.

                         As it was detailed in the environmental management framework, the sub-projects will be reviewed
                         by TEIAS for having national environmental clearances and then necessary environmental
                         assessment documentation in line with OP 4.01 requirements will be completed by the TEIAS.

                         Sub-project partial EAs/EMPs will be submitted to WB for prior review and after getting no-
                         objections these will be disclosed in client's websites and will be included in the corresponding
                         bidding documents of the investment projects.

                         OP 4.12 is triggered for this project as land acquisition is expected during implementation. Social
                         impacts of the proposed list of investments (substations and transmission lines) are not expected to
                         be significant: Small sizes of land will be expropriated for the substations. For transmission lines,
                         long term easements will not limit use of land significantly. Physical relocation of households is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         not expected, nor is impacts on structures. Alternative lands for purchase exist in the surrounding
                         areas, if farmers whose lands are expropriated want to continue farming. There are also alternate
                         lands for grazing in these areas. The Environmental and Social Due Diligence (ESDD) study
                         conducted in the area found that the area experiences out-migration to urban areas and a sizable
                         portion of affected people may choose to use the compensation provided for expropriation to
                         purchase houses in urban areas. Overall, different impacts on men and women are not expected
                         during land acquisition and in other phases of the project. The Environmental and Social Due
                         Diligence study conducted has consulted men and women, and did not observe any differential
                         impacts due to the WPPs.

                         Apart from land acquisition, there may be some damages on the lands during construction. In such
                         cases, damages have to be compensated and/or reinstated (if possible) immediately by the relevant
                         contractor.

                         The exact routes and locations of the proposed list of transmission investments are not known at
                         this time. As a result, TEIAS has prepared a Land Acquisition Policy Framework satisfactory to
                         the World Bank for the project. For this, the RPF prepared by TEIAS for the APL6 Project and
                         disclosed by TEIAS in June 2010 has been revised. The final draft of the LAPF was disclosed on
                         the TEIAS website and World Bank’s Infoshop in February 2014. For each sub-project TEIAS



                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                           will prepare a RAP or ARAP (depending on the magnitude of impacts) that will need to be
                           reviewed and cleared by the WB, and disclosed before land acquisition and start of construction.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           As described above an environmental and social due diligence study has been conducted in order
                           to assess the environmental and social safeguard issues at the locations of the substations to be
                           financed under REIP, as well as the wind power plants expected to be connected to them. TEIAS
                           took actions in accordance with the guidance provided with this report and will continue taking
                           mitigation and monitoring measures as outlined in this report. The ESSD undertaken during
                           project preparation covered all licensed WPPs, which are planned, under construction and in
                           operation. For other wind power projects which could be connected to the Izmir, Can and Vize
                           substations in the future, TEIAS agreed that a similar environmental and social due-diligence
                           should be conducted by TEIAS. In addition to this, it was agreed that the potential sites for WPPs,
                           which may be licensed in the future and will be considered to connect to the Bank financed
                           substations, could carry some risks. TEIAS agreed that, for the implementation period of the
                           project, they will conduct a site assessment, which will be similar to the ESDD study, from their
                           own resources and will share the assessment results with the Bank before providing the connection
                           permit to the WPPs. Also for the transmission lines, which will connect these future WPPs to
                           Bank financed substation, TEIAS will use the guidance in the ESDD report, especially for the
                           routing process to conserve the no-go areas. The Bank will also continue to encourage and work
                           with the Borrower to integrate this type of environmental and social review more broadly into the
                           process for screening and approving applications for WPP licenses.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Initially 4 substations which will connect the wind power generated energy to the national grid
                           were suggested by TEIAS for WB financing. The project list was finalized only after the
                           completion of the Rapid Ecological Assessment (undertaken as part of the broader Environmental
                           and Social Due Diligence study). Based on this assessment, it was agreed that one of the 4
Public Disclosure Copy




                           substations (Catalca substation) would not be financed by REIP because WPP that would connect
                           to this substation would likely have significant impacts on a critical natural habitat. Moreover, one
                           of the planned wind power plants (Mahyadag WPP), was assessed to have potential impacts on a
                           sensitive habitat and therefore TEIAS agreed not to connect it to the Vize substation which will be
                           financed by the REI project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The exact locations of the proposed list of investments are not known at this time. As a result,
                           TEIAS is preparing an Environmental Management Framework and a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework satisfactory to the World Bank for the project.

                           Environment:

                           An Environmental Management Framework satisfactory to the World Bank has been prepared for
                           the project. The Framework includes criteria for screening the sub-projects and guidance for the
                           methodology of the environmental assessment to be conducted for the sub-projects in compliance
                           with OP 4.01. During the project preparation stage, it was agreed that some support will be
                           necessary to TEIAS for understanding the Natural Habitats Policy. As agreed during the concept
                           stage Bank supported TEIAS by conducting some baseline studies and rapid ecological/


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                         biodiversity assessments, which will provide an initial indication of whether there are any critical
                         or important natural habitats within the areas of influence of the substations. TEIAS benefited a
                         lot from the ESDD report prepared to understand the methodology of the rapid ecological
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment and also will continue benefiting from the results of the study during the sub-project
                         EMP preparations.

                         The environmental assessment document (EMP) of the Lapseki-Sutluce Undersea cable (Phase II),
                         which will be financed in part under REIP, has already been prepared and cleared by WB since it
                         has been decided that the financing of the project will start from the ongoing APL6 project and
                         then moved to REIP after it becomes effective. As indicated in the environmental assessment
                         document of the project, the cable is not expected to impact navigation and is expected to have
                         minor environmental impacts which are adequately reflected in the EA document.

                         Social:

                         The ESDD and discussions with TEIAS have identified that some gaps remain between TEIAS’
                         implementation practices and the World Bank Policy, namely: 1) Due to urgent expropriations
                         procedures under Turkish National Law, consultations are not mandatory prior to land acquisition.
                         2) There is no grievance redress mechanism in place, other than recourse to the formal court
                         system. 3) While interviewed land owners noted that compensation for land acquisition was
                         sufficient, Turkish law states that the compensation should be at “market value” rather than
                         “replacement cost.”

                         These three issues were specifically discussed with the TEIAS team and the following was agreed
                         upon, and are reflected in the revised Resettlement Policy Framework of the project: 1)During
                         initial site visits, in the preparation and socio-economic information collection, and during the
                         meetings TEIAS already has with landowners on agreement of prices, TEIAS will inform and
                         consult with affected people on their rights, entitlements and the land acquisition process. . 2) A
                         grievance redress mechanism will be set up at the local regional TEIAS office level. Affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                         persons will be notified that they can reach TEIAS for questions and grievances related to the
                         project. Grievances and responses will be documented. 3) TEIAS will provide sufficient
                         compensation to allow land owners to buy land of equivalent value to those that have been
                         expropriated. Close supervision by the Bank will ensure that these gaps are bridged as discussed
                         and that documentation will be handled timely and adequately.


                         TEIAS Capacity for Safeguards Implementation:

                         TEIAS has several decades experience in meeting World Bank safeguard requirements, and in
                         particular safeguard requirements for the ongoing ECSEE APL projects, which are very similar in
                         nature with the REI Project. Their environmental team has been effective in supervising and
                         monitoring individual sub-projects in accordance with the specifications of their EMPs which
                         were prepared along with the procedures outlined in the framework documents. TEIAS is
                         successfully implementing the APL 6 project and previously had implemented APL 2 and 3.
                         TEIAS team participated in the recent comprehensive training on WB safeguard policies together
                         with some of their selected regional staff to increase TEIAS' capacity (both in central and regional
                         level) for implementing the requirements of the policy and providing necessary documentation to
                         WB. TEIAS will also continue monitoring the implementation of the partial EAs/EMPs under
                         REIP closely, and works with the contractors to ensure that impacts are mitigated in time and

                                                                   Page 10 of 13
                           effectively, as they are already doing with the APL6 portfolio. TEIAS team participated in the
                           recent comprehensive training on WB safeguard policies together with some of their selected
                           regional staff to increase TEIAS' capacity (both in central and regional level) for implementing the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           requirements of the policy and providing necessary documentation to WB.

                           TEIAS has been effective in supervising and monitoring individual sub-projects in accordance
                           with the specifications of their EMPs which were prepared along with the procedures outlined in
                           the framework documents . The company maintains a fully staffed environmental department for
                           the preparation of the sub-project environmental assessment documents and TEIAS will also
                           monitor the implementation of the partial EAs/EMPs closely, and works with the contractors to
                           ensure that impacts are mitigated in time and effectively.

                           TEIAS team, including some of their selected regional staff, has participated in the comprehensive
                           training on WB safeguard policies to increase TEIAS' capacity (both in central and regional level)
                           for implementing the requirements of the policy and providing necessary documentation to WB.

                           TEIAS has a fully functional land acquisition department that has worked with the World Bank in
                           previous projects. In addition, upfront training for TEIAS staff on OP 4.12 has been conducted in
                           May 2013 to increase TEIAS's capacity for implementing the requirements of the policy and
                           providing necessary documentation to the World Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders would be people living in the vicinity of: (a) the substations to be built,
                           rehabilitated or upgraded, (b) the right-of-way of the transmission lines, underground cables, (c)
                           interface locations of the undersea cable

                           The draft EMF prepared for the project, including procedures for complying with OP 4.01, OP
                           4.04, OP 4.11, has been shared and consulted with stakeholders in two different platforms. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           first consultation meeting took place in Ankara on November 1, 2013 and the second one was
                           conducted in Izmir (selected as being one of the regions where the basin substation will be
                           established) on November 7, 2013. The draft EMF at an advanced stage has been also disclosed at
                           TEIAS's website (December 9, 2013) and at Infoshop (December 11, 2013).

                           TEIAS will also share the environmental assessment documents which will be prepared for the
                           sub-projects at the project sites (village headmen’s office, TEIAS’s regional directorate, TEIAS's
                           website, etc.) to obtain views/comments from local people. The compiled questions/answers/
                           comments obtained from public will be integrated into the final versions of environmental
                           documents which will then be made public again and sent to Infoshop.

                           The Land Acquisition Policy Framework (LAPF) prepared for the project, has been disclosed on
                           the TEIAS website in February 2014. In addition, the RAP or ARAPs that will be prepared for the
                           sub-projects during implementation will be disclosed and consulted on at the local project sites to
                           obtain views/comments from local people. These consultations will be documented and
                           documentation included in what is disclosed on TEIAS’ website and Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Oct-2013


                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Turkey                                                           09-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Dec-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Turkey                                                           11-Dec-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Mikul Bhatia
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 26-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                          Date: 27-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
