                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC9308

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cambodia                        Project ID:      P150631
                            Project Name:      KH-Land Allocation for Social and Economic Development Project II
                                               (P150631)
                            Task Team          Mudita Chamroeun
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       27-Oct-2014                        Estimated        10-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFADR                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Sub-national government
                                               administration (20%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads an d Highways (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (60%), Land administration and management
                                               (20%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     27.00                    Total Bank Financing:         25.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          2.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                25.00
                              Total                                                                      27.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to help improve agriculture-based livelihoods
                           for project beneficiaries.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project is proposed to cover a total of 15 SLC sites in provinces of Kratie, Kampong Cham,
                         Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Thom, Kampong Speu and Battambang. These include the existing
                         eight (8) LASED and six (6) JSDF-funded sites, as well as one (1) new/additional SLC site in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kampong Thom Province. The total area is proposed to cover approximately 17,000 hectares with
                         5,400 households. The project activities and interventions are expected to focus on the: (a) scaling
                         up of agricultural support activities and provision of remaining infrastructure in the existing SLC
                         sites; and (b) development of the new SLC which includes planning and provision of social and rural
                         infrastructure and service delivery. Its main purpose is to provide infrastructure where it is still
                         missing, link up to and harmonize the agricultural service delivery approaches under the project with
                         national research and extension systems and scale up livelihood support activities to project
                         beneficiaries. The service delivery approaches that will be adopted under the project will build on
                         the lessons learned and experiences of pilot approaches implemented under the original/pilot projects
                         that have shown the most development potential. These, combined with increasing government
                         capacity in decentralized planning and implementation and secure land tenure for eligible
                         households, will ensure sustained benefits from the scaled-up activities under the project.

                         The project will have two components and will be implemented over a five-year period. Component
                         1, Infrastructure and Livelihood Systems will include three sub-components: (i) Social Land
                         Concession Investment Planning and Prioritization; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii)
                         Agriculture and Livelihood Development. Component 2 will deal with related Project Management
                         activities.

                         1. Component 1: Infrastructure and Livelihood Systems (USD 22.5 million)

                         a. Sub-component 1.1: Social Land Concession Investment Planning and Prioritization (USD2.5
                         million) - The sub-component would finance preparation of the additional SLC plan for the new site
                         (land surveying, land use planning, processing of requests for land allocation, sensitization,
                         participatory review processes by communal authorities, land allocation and land demarcation), and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         related land titling process, which will include verification of eligible land recipients. The sub-
                         component will also fund identification, prioritization and planning of appropriate investments in
                         infrastructure development and service delivery, as well as related environmental and social
                         safeguard assessments. This will include field and laboratory work for detailed site-specific Agro-
                         Ecological Analysis (AEA) and water management and small-scale irrigation options so as to be able
                         to provide with the best solutions to enhance their agricultural productivity.

                         The long-term sustainability of the land distribution and land management investments will be
                         enhanced by supporting and linking project investments with the respective Commune Development
                         Plans/Commune Investment Plans (CDPs/CIPs), which include budgeting, prioritization and
                         identification of the post-project or complementary funding possibilities. To improve project-
                         specific planning, the project will support the improvement of the project and SLC-related
                         management information system. Evidence-based planning will ensure that government resources are
                         effectively and efficiently deployed for the maximum benefit of land recipients and their
                         communities.

                         b. Sub-component 1.2: Infrastructure Development (USD12.0 million) - The sub-component will
                         cover additional infrastructure investments in existing SLCs (especially in 6 sites implemented
                         through JSDF) and investments in the new SLC site. The specific investments would include: (a)
                         initial land preparation of the SLC sites; (b) provision of settling-in assistance to land recipients; (c)
                         development of productive community infrastructure (construction of rural roads, small-scale
                         irrigation systems and rural water supply); and (d) construction of social community infrastructure,
                         such as school buildings, teacher houses, health posts and community centers. The sub-component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would support initial development of plots that are allocated to agricultural activities. This is an
                         improvement from the original LASED approach where land development was left to recipients. The
                         LASED Mid-Term Review pointed out that such capital-intensive land development works were
                         often beyond the means of the land recipients thus resulting, in some cases, in delays in the
                         utilization of the allocated land. In order to speed up the development of agriculture livelihood
                         activities, the project would provide contract services for the initial land development/preparation
                         services.

                         The provision of infrastructure assets under the project will continue to build on the established
                         government decentralization process, which is based on the enhanced participatory planning and
                         involvement of communities in the identification, prioritization and procurement of small-scale
                         infrastructure and other investments through community participation processes. Community-level
                         operation and maintenance (O&M) groups, assisted by Community Development Facilitators (CDFs)
                         in each site, will support the process towards sustainability. Where feasible and economically
                         warranted, the project will also support infrastructure provision where benefits might not exclusively
                         occur to land recipients only. Benefit sharing would be improved in places where connecting roads
                         could unlock communication and trade within communes. Support to small-scale irrigation
                         development that could provide benefits beyond the land recipients will likewise be considered.
                         Close coordination and cooperation will be pursued with KfW which will provide parallel funding to
                         other infrastructures that would complement the project investments. The project team will also work
                         closely with the implementing unit in the Ministry of Rural Development to ensure coherence with
                         processes in planning and implementation. The Ministry of Rural Development will be the project
                         executing agency for KfW’s related supports. It will receive the financial cooperation and the
                         government counterpart funds for the project measures, and government national safeguard policies/
                         laws and KfW regulations will be strictly applied.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         c. Sub-component 1.3: Agriculture and Livelihood Development (USD8.0 million) - This sub-
                         component will fund the support for the consolidation and further improvement of agricultural
                         production systems, livelihoods and food security of land recipients, including facilitation and
                         provision of support services and technical assistance. Support will be provided for: (a)
                         establishment and strengthening of agriculture cooperatives, savings and credit groups, production
                         and marketing groups and other community interest groups; (b) establishment of demonstration plots
                         and model farms; (c) provision of service and extension support following a pluralistic service
                         provider approach; (d) provision of in-kind and cash support to strengthen successful local
                         initiatives; and (e) linking SLC planning and implementation with the respective CDPs/CIPs. The
                         sub-component will scale-up and deepen the delivery of agricultural advisory services for improved
                         livelihood activities and food security of land recipients through community interest groups. Specific
                         support will also be provided to female-headed households (34% of beneficiary households in the
                         original LASED Project) through labor-saving production technologies, intensive home gardening
                         and other techniques that address limited time and availability of labor. Core to this sub-component
                         is the more intensive delivery of agriculture technology transfer and advisory services which builds
                         and utilizes more pluralistic service delivery model s and approaches through partnerships between
                         government agencies and third party service providers (NGOs, private sector, machinery service
                         providers, etc.). Between the original LASED and LASED II, the main difference the project makes
                         is the LASED II is strong focus on agriculture production and productivity. The original LASED has
                         directly ensured that allocated land can be cultivated. Now the project support land preparation,
                         plow and put a cover crop. This will speed up the process by which families can harvest/live from
                         their own land. Agriculture support services were previously part of the (weak) general line
                         department support to beneficiaries. Now project has dedicated sub-component with a defined and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tested approach. The services and infrastructure support will base on a solid and participatory
                         assessment of local conditions. Earlier planning documents (LIP) have not always been the best
                         possible. Community Development Facilitators (CDF) will help strengthening social cohesion and
                         assist in establishing interest groups that will address primarily livelihood issues.

                         Communities and farmers’ groups will continue to be the main entry points for the implementation of
                         the following activities under this sub-component: (a) introduction of modern agricultural production
                         systems and technologies in crop and animal husbandry through on-farm demonstration and advisory
                         activities; (b) farm management training; (c) better access to and use of means of production (inputs,
                         mechanization services), including provision of hand tractors to farmers’ groups, with farmers being
                         assisted with small machinery services, that will facilitate land cultivation and transport activities; (d)
                         establishment of market linkages with private sector traders and processors; and (e) support to
                         savings and credit groups. The main delivery mechanism for the agriculture extension services will
                         be Farmer Field Schools (FFS). This methodology follows government policies and the included
                         pluralistic service provider approach.

                         The issues of access to finance will the addressed through establishment and strengthening of savings
                         and credit groups. Support will be provided to encourage the establishment of savings and loan
                         associations at the community level in order to foster the initial development of rural credit and help
                         improve local farmers’ access to financial capital. This will build on Cambodia’s experience in rural
                         credit and micro-finance, including as well the experience of the Project for Agriculture
                         Development and Economic Empowerment (PADEE) funded under the International Fund for
                         Agriculture and Development (IFAD). Community funds will be established to scale-up existing
                         demand-driven initiatives, including above-mentioned savings and credit groups but also food banks,
                         animal banks, or other activities identified by the community that foster socio-economic
                         development and benefit sharing. Interest groups will benefit from the establishment of the funds that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will provide supplemental resources to leverage the groups’ own savings and initiatives.

                         2. Component 2: Project Management (USD2.5 million)

                         This component will include project administration and coordination activities. It will ensure in
                         particular the timely and transparent flow of funds, procurement, auditing and reporting. It will also
                         support project implementing entities at all levels (including communes) to further strengthen their
                         fiduciary, administrative and reporting capacities. Support would include technical assistance,
                         training, incremental operating costs, and vehicles and equipment, among others. Specific attention
                         and support will be provided to expand and strengthen the project’s M&E system. With the MAFF’s
                         General Directorate of Agriculture (GDA) as a new implementing partner, and a focus of the project
                         on the necessary support systems for sustainable development, the project M&E will need to reflect
                         these changes and be able to collect, analyze and feedback timely information to project stakeholders
                         at all levels.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         LASED II will be implemented in the existing LASED and JSDF-funded sites and in one new site in
                         Dong Commune, Kampong Thom Province. Social and environmental safeguard screening reports
                         were prepared by the implementing agency and were endorsed by the Bank environmental and social
                           safeguards specialists during the LASED Additional Financing preparation in October 2013. The
                           new proposed SLC site in Dong Commune has been verified as not a protected forest or
                           environmental hotspot. There are no Indigenous Peoples in existing LASED sites, while a screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                           for the presence of Indigenous Peoples in the new SLC will be undertaken during project preparation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower has gained rich experiences in safeguards implementation and satisfactorily ensured
                           environmental and social safeguard compliance under the original project. The following lessons
                           learned from LASED have been/will be taken into account under LASED II:

                           -       Land use plan preparation and implementation—the participatory land use maps and site
                           development plans of all SLCs have to carefully delineate different land uses. The land use plan must
                           integrate the remaining patches of forests, water bodies, and planned green buffers which are all
                           declared for community conservation and protection. The land use plan will also take into account
                           early environmental and agricultural carrying capacity.

                           -        Infrastructure investments—the provincial LASED team worked closely with the commune
                           council to monitor the contractors and ensure environmental safeguard and safety measures at the
                           construction sites. However, recording of the contractor monitoring results requires more
                           improvement since written record, especially of the environmental safeguard, was limited. Therefore
                           LASED II will include procedure for monitoring and recording the EMP which include
                           environmental and safety measures for infrastructure investments at the commune level. In addition,
                           basic infrastructure such as water supply and sanitation will also be provided early on as part of SLC
                           site development before the re-settlers moved into the new SLC.

                           The borrower will continue to perform this role and also provide capacity building and mentoring on
                           the implementation of safeguards tools to the implementing agencies, especially those who are based
                           at the sub-national level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bunlong Leng (GENDR)
                           Jun Zeng (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             The project activities such as civil works for
                           BP 4.01                                              small scale community infrastructure and
                                                                                agricultural and livelihood activities may have
                                                                                environmental and social impacts during
                                                                                implementation. Typical impacts for small scale
                                                                                civil works include land clearance, erosion and
                                                                                sedimentation of water bodies, dust and waste
                                                                                generation, etc. Given the small scale nature of
                                                                                these activities, impacts as experienced under
                                                                                LASED are temporary and manageable using
                                                                                simple Environmental Management Plan
                                                                                (EMP). In addition, agricultural and livelihood
                                                             activities though also small scale and done
                                                             manually may have some impacts on land and
                                                             soil, but then again the project based on LASED
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             will be promoting soil and water conservation,
                                                             hence impacts are also expected to be minor and
                                                             manageable. There may be some remnant
                                                             forests/remaining patches of forests within the
                                                             new SLC that maybe affected during the land
                                                             development, however the experience of
                                                             LASED will be taken into account, i.e., to
                                                             carefully include different land uses in the
                                                             planning and mapping processes and delineate
                                                             those forest patches as communal forests for
                                                             community protection and conservation. This
                                                             has proven to be successful under LASED and
                                                             will continue to be adopted under LASED II.

                                                             All the existing LASED and JSDF-funded sites
                                                             are cleared from UXO. The new proposed site
                                                             (in Dong Commune, Kampong Thom Province)
                                                             was screened and confirmed to have no UXO
                                                             during the LASED Additional Financing
                                                             preparation in late 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The infrastructure investments (under sub-
                                                             component 1.1) and the land use plan
                                                             implementation (under sub-component 1.2) may
                                                             impact on the natural habitat such as wetlands,
                                                             natural ponds or remnant forests/remaining
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             forest patches. However the impact of small
                                                             scale civil works on natural habitats will be
                                                             avoided through a screening process and if
                                                             cannot be avoided the EMP will be developed
                                                             and implemented to manage those impacts. In
                                                             addition, the land use planning process will also
                                                             identify different land uses within the SLC and
                                                             delineate natural habitats for community
                                                             protection and preservation, as practiced under
                                                             LASED.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The infrastructure investments and the
                                                             development of new SLC site may impact on
                                                             remnant forests. However, the practice under
                                                             LASED of including and delineating different
                                                             land uses, including the community forest, in
                                                             land use planning will be continued. Remnant
                                                             forests will be delineated and reserved for
                                                             community protection and conservation.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            While LASED II will have a strong focus on
                                                                                                                                 agricultural production, it is not expected to lead
                                                                                                                                 to increase usage of pesticide as experienced
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 under LASED. Communities in LASED sites
                                                                                                                                 rely solely on crop rotation, inter-cropping and
                                                                                                                                 multiple cropping to manage pests and diseases
                                                                                                                                 rather than on pesticides because of the
                                                                                                                                 prohibitive costs of pesticides and impacts on
                                                                                                                                 health. The adoption of sound agricultural
                                                                                                                                 practices will continue to be promoted and
                                                                                                                                 supported under LASED II.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The infrastructure investments may impact on
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         unknown, buried physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                                                 Chance Find Procedures are part of the EMP to
                                                                                                                                 address chance find during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation. Thus far, no PCR issue has
                                                                                                                                 been encountered under the LASED project.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     TBD                           Social screening indicated that no indigenous
                                                                                                                                 people’s community is present in or has
                                                                                                                                 collective attachment to the existing SLC sites.
                                                                                                                                 However, it is not clear whether there will be
                                                                                                                                 indigenous people’s community in the new
                                                                                                                                 project site in Dong Commune. The IP
                                                                                                                                 screening will be undertaken during project
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           The new infrastructure investments might need
                                 4.12                                                                                            some land taking. However, exact locations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 new infrastructure could not be determined
                                                                                                                                 during project preparation. In this regard, a
                                                                                                                                 Resettlement Policy Framework will be
                                                                                                                                 prepared by the client to address these potential
                                                                                                                                 impacts. The RPF will be prepared based on the
                                                                                                                                 RPF prepared for the previous LASED project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            LASED II does not have any activity involving
                                                                                                                                 any dam.
                                 Projects on International        No                                                             LASED II does not involve any activity that
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            will affect international waterway.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             LASED II does not involve any activity in any
                                 7.60                                                                                            know disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 12-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             During the preparation of LASED Additional Financing in November 2013, the government has
                             consulted with local authorities and local people in completing the environmental and social
                             safeguard screening reports for a new proposed SLC site in Dong Commune, Kampong Thom
Public Disclosure Copy




                             province. There was no record of any critical environmental or social issue. The Bank team will
                             guide the government to verify the screening reports again before the appraisal in September 2014.

                             The EMP and RPF under LASED will be updated for LASED II.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Mudita Chamroeun

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                               Date: 06-Sep-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager/   Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                           Date: 08-Sep-2014
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
