                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC8278

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Brazil                           Project ID:      P147157
                            Project Name:       BRAZIL BAHIA SUSTAINABLE RURAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
                                                (P147157)
                            Task Team           Maria de Fatima de Sousa
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       09-Apr-2014                          Estimated        30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: LCSAR                                 Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Agro-industry,
                                                marketing, and trade (30%), Water supply (20%), Information t echnology
                                                (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural markets (40%), Technology diffusion (20%), Trade facilitation and
                                                market access (20%), Rural policies and institutions (10%), Gender (10%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    260.00                      Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Financing Gap:         110.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         150.00
                              Total                                                                         150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           8.       The proposed PDO is to support the Borrower’s strategy for poverty reduction and shared
                           prosperity in rural areas of the State of Bahia by: (i) promoting productive alliances and value chain
                           integration in order to increase incomes of family farmers; (ii) making smart-agriculture investments
                         to improve, climate resilience, nutrition and food security; and (iii) expanding access to water and
                         sanitation services, and complementary rural infrastructure.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         11.      In order to achieve the PDO, the Project will support Borrower efforts to:
                         (a)      Promote the conditions necessary for the generation and increase of employment and income
                         for family farmers through increased productivity and greater market integration;
                         (b)      Strengthen delivery and quality of appropriate technical assistance and training for Project
                         beneficiaries and their organizations;
                         (c)      Improve basic infrastructures required to support production and marketing (e.g. energy,
                         logistics, water for production) and to improve the quality of life (e.g. WSS for improved public
                         health, crop diversification for improved nutrition and food security);
                         (d)      Make investments needed for the restoration and conservation of cultural and environmental
                         assets;
                         (e)      Promote the social and economic inclusion of women, youth, indigenous and other
                         traditional communities.
                         12.      Project Components would be organized in the following fashion in support of Borrower
                         efforts:
                         13.      Component 1: Productive Inclusion and Access to Markets (US$ 221.9 million of which US$
                         120.4 million IBRD financing). This Component aims to reduce regional inequalities by increasing
                         productive inclusion and access to basic infrastructure through the following Subcomponents.
                         14.      Subcomponent 1.1 - Productive subprojects (US$ 153.0 million of which US$ 64.2 million
                         IBRD financing), consisting of matching grants and technical assistance to selected producer
                         organizations to: (i) increase levels of productivity, support their integration into eight priority value
                         chains , and increase their access to markets (both private and public), resulting in increased levels of
                         net revenues; and (ii) support nutrition, food security, environmental and cultural asset recovery,
                         restoration and protection. Productive subprojects will be identified through participatory local
                         development planning and selected based on a review of subproject proposals and business plans
                         identifying beneficiary contribution (financial and/or in-kind), and presenting social environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and economic sustainability analysis.
                         15.      Subcomponent 1.2 - Basic Rural Infrastructure (US$ 68.9 million of which US$ 56.2 million
                         IBRD financing) subprojects to (i) increase coverage of WSS systems in rural areas; (ii) support
                         modernization and expansion of electricity provision for productive units; and (iii) improvement of
                         rural access roads and bridges.
                         16.      Component 2: Institutional Development and Technical Assistance (US$ 19.4 million of
                         which US$ 19.4 million IBRD financing). This Component seeks to develop participatory
                         methodologies and provide capacity building to Project beneficiaries and their organizations. It will
                         also support capacity building of Project implementing agencies & partners, strengthen strategic
                         analysis and planning capacities and the development of sub-project business plans. It will consist of
                         the following sub-components:
                         •        Subcomponent 2.1 – Research and Diagnostics
                         •        Subcomponent 2.2 - Training and Capacity Building
                         •        Subcomponent 2.3 – Communication
                         17.      Component 3: Project Management (US$ 18.8 million of which US$ 10.3 million IBRD
                         financing). This Component will strengthen capacities of the main project implementing agency
                         CAR in both its central and regional offices to ensure effective Project management, monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E).
                         18.      Methodologies for the identification of Project beneficiaries, targeting of investments and
                         selection criteria for productive and infrastructure subprojects will be fully developed during Project
                         Preparation and outlined in the Project Operation Manual (POM). All subprojects will be required to
                         prepare ex ante feasibility analysis demonstrating economic, social and environmental sustainability
                         of proposed investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         19.      The Project will adopt a dual strategy to achieve its objectives by encouraging integration of
                         various public policies (including programs, projects and associated activities) that are operating in
                         the Project’s target areas; and by encouraging public-private partnerships (promoting productive
                         alliances and using consortiums) in order to leverage resources and services. Moreover, this Project
                         will be guided by the following considerations.
                         (a)      Regional/territorial approach: Planning and coordinating interventions at the territorial level
                         will aid in integration of various federal- and state-level programs to boost economic and social
                         inclusion. Priority will be given to territories within the Semi-Arido region, which spans 69 percent
                         of the territory, is the poorest and least developed region of the State, and accounts for the majority
                         of family farmers.
                         (b)      Linking agriculture with nutrition, food security and poverty reduction. The Project seeks to
                         harness the potential of the agriculture sector in Bahia, particularly small-scale family farming for
                         improving nutrition, food security and poverty outcomes.
                         (c)      Climate-smart responses: The proposed project would stimulate innovations that jointly
                         increase agricultural productivity, increase the efficient use of scarce water, and promote climate
                         change resilience while reducing carbon emissions.
                         (d)      Technology and innovation strategy: The Project will help rural producers adopt new
                         technologies and access greater commercial intelligence in order to thrive in dynamic markets. This
                         will require fresh learning approaches to stimulate a “rural innovation culture” conducive to
                         competitiveness and capable of connecting education to jobs.
                         (e)      Integrating producer organizations in value chains: Collective action among small-scale
                         producers can reduce asymmetric bargaining power in markets dominated by intermediaries and
                         reduce individual risk. Previous Bank-financed operations in Bahia have fostered community
                         associations and cooperatives, mostly composed of small-scale producers who would be targeted
                         under the proposed operation.
                         (f)      Shared risk and benefits: At present, small-scale producers assume the typical risks of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farming, as well as the risk of not selling their product, or selling it without recovering costs.
                         Productive alliances provide a way for the different actors of a value chain to share both the
                         production risks and associated revenues.
                         (g)      Promoting public-private partnerships: Productive alliances bring private and public sector
                         actors together to promote “win-win” market solutions. As well, economies of scale can be achieved
                         through the use of inter-municipal consortiums to contract services or deliver infrastructures.
                         (h)      Social inclusion: gender, youth and traditional communities: The project’s inclusive design
                         will also promote gender equity, women’s empowerment, youth participation and the inclusion of
                         indigenous, quilombola and other traditional communities. This will be achieved through a
                         combination of targeted capacity building activities and social inclusion requirements in the process
                         of subproject identification and selection.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (LCSSO)
                           Maria Bernadete Ribas Lange (LCSEN)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          Based on the assessment of potential impacts
                           BP 4.01                                     under the proposed project, a Category B
                                                                       designation is proposed. The proposed project
                                                                       interventions will be small-scale, demand-
                                                                       driven investments (i.e., subprojects). These
                                                                       subprojects would not cause significant adverse
                                                                       environmental impacts, related mainly to
                                                                       infrastructure development (i.e., water,
                                                                       sanitation and rural roads), new agricultural
                                                                       practices (i.e., product diversification,
                                                                       conservation agriculture, promotion of value
                                                                       added products, and product certification).
                                                                       As the exact type and nature of subprojects to
                                                                       finance business plans and small-scale
                                                                       community infrastructure would not be known
                                                                       ex ante (i.e., prior to project appraisal), the
                                                                       Borrower would prepare an Environmental and
                                                                       Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                                                                       The ESMF would draw on lessons from
                                                                       previous operations implemented by CAR,
                                                                       including the Rural Poverty Reduction Project
                                                                       (RPRP). The ESMF will focus on Project-
                                                                       specific aspects, such as institutional
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       arrangements and capacity, regulatory
                                                                       framework, environmental screening procedures
                                                                       and criteria and licensing.
                                                                       The ESMF will also provide guidance on: (i)
                                                                       identifying the potential social, environmental
                                                                       and distributive impacts associated with the
                                                                       typology of project investments; (ii) minimizing
                                                                       potential impacts for productive and
                                                                       infrastructure subprojects; (iii) specifying
                                                                       procedures to be used in assessing
                                                                       environmental and social impacts during the
                                                                       subproject design stage; and (iv) addressing
                                                                       identified impacts during subproject
                                                                       implementation. Additionally, the subprojects
                                                                       selection procedures will be consistent with (i)
                                                                       the national, state and local legislation
                                                                       concerning Brazilian Forest Code, natural
                                                                       habitats and protected areas (Law 4.771/65;
                                                                       SNUC - Law 9985/00, Decree 4340/02 and
                                                             Decree 5758/06); (ii) Law 12.334/2010; and (iii)
                                                             World Bank safeguards policies.
                                                             The ESMF would present a budget and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             implementation schedule, both of which would
                                                             be integrated into the overall project operating
                                                             plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   While activities are not planned for Protected
                                                             Areas (PA); Areas of Permanent Preservation
                                                             (APP), and Legal Reserves (LR), activities
                                                             under the project components should
                                                             nonetheless lead to positive impacts on natural
                                                             habitats, through the direct protection and
                                                             rehabilitation of these areas, following the
                                                             provisions of the Brazilian Forest Code.
                                                             Nevertheless, OP 4.04 is triggered and all
                                                             planning activities that may affect natural
                                                             habitats must follow World Bank policies,
                                                             identifying monitoring and management
                                                             activities to prevent or mitigate any possible
                                                             negative impact.
                                                             The Project has provisions to regenerate and
                                                             reforest water-producing systems (mainly
                                                             riparian vegetation), benefiting also local
                                                             biodiversity preservation and restoration.
                                                             Subprojects resulting in any significant
                                                             conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                             habitats will not be eligible.
                                                             Springs and river margin areas are classified as
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Permanent Preservation Areas (APP), and
                                                             legally protected by the Brazilian Legislation
                                                             (Federal Law 12.651/2012). APP use for water
                                                             systems development, intake and pipelines,
                                                             requires specific permitting, mitigation and
                                                             regeneration measures. Despite the expected
                                                             positive impacts, the ESMF should include clear
                                                             guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts
                                                             on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   It is not expected that Project implementation
                                                             will have negative impacts on forest resources.
                                                             Subprojects with the potential for conversion or
                                                             degradation of natural forests or other natural
                                                             habitats that are likely to have significant
                                                             adverse environmental impacts which are
                                                             sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented, are
                                                             ineligible. The Project also excludes activities
                                                             that require commercial forest harvesting, wood
                                                             extraction or firewood use in the production
                                                         chain.
                                                         Activities resulting in deforestation and loss of
                                                         native vegetation cover will not be allowed. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         project would contribute to conserve and restore
                                                         natural vegetation, generating positive impacts
                                                         through the maintenance and/or recovery of
                                                         natural vegetation on rural private land holdings
                                                         on steep slopes, along water courses (up to a
                                                         certain distance from the riparian margin) or in
                                                         the vicinity of springs. Additionally, the project
                                                         would contribute to conserve and/or restore a set
                                                         aside area called Legal Reserve (Reserva Legal
                                                         - RL) in these private holdings. As already
                                                         mentioned, the subproject selection procedures
                                                         would be consistent with the Brazilian Forest
                                                         Code. Typical activities should support mainly
                                                         conservation and restoration activities, and
                                                         should be planned and executed in such a way
                                                         to minimize or prevent negative impacts on
                                                         forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes   The project would not finance any pesticides or
                                                         other chemical amendments that would trigger
                                                         OP 4.09. Nevertheless, minor amounts of
                                                         pesticides would probably continue to be used
                                                         in the short term by a small portion of targeted
                                                         small-scale farms. The project would encourage
                                                         and support technical assistance for the adoption
                                                         of organic agriculture and of proven,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         economically- and environmentally-sustainable
                                                         Integrated Pest Management (IPM). This
                                                         approach would increase farmer productivity (i.
                                                         e., yields), reduce input costs and human health
                                                         risk, and minimize adverse environmental
                                                         impacts through the virtual elimination of
                                                         pesticide use. The IPM approach further
                                                         improves the sustainability of agro-ecosystems
                                                         by focusing on the knowledge and skills of
                                                         farmers to better enable natural resource
                                                         management.
                                                         The need to use pesticides or herbicides should
                                                         be indicated in each subproject, as well as the
                                                         IPM measures to be adopted. When the use of
                                                         pesticides or herbicides is justified, an analysis
                                                         of potential negative impacts resulting from the
                                                         use of these chemicals and the risks associated
                                                         with the inappropriate handling or storing of
                                                         their containers should be conducted. The
                                                                 subprojects should also include measures to
                                                                 reduce those risks, in compliance with Law No.
                                                                 7802/89.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be
                                                                 prepared and incorporated into the ESMF and
                                                                 the Project Operational Manual. The PMP
                                                                 would make use of the World Health
                                                                 Organization’s Recommended Classification of
                                                                 Pesticides by Hazard and Guidelines to
                                                                 Classification (Geneva:
                                                                 WHO 1994-95). The PMP would also exclude
                                                                 finance under the proposed project for
                                                                 formulated products that fall in WHO classes IA
                                                                 and IB, or formulations of products in Class II,
                                                                 if: (a) the country lacks restrictions on their
                                                                 distribution and use; or (b) they are likely to be
                                                                 used by, or be accessible to, lay personnel,
                                                                 farmers, or others without training, equipment,
                                                                 and facilities to handle, store, and apply these
                                                                 products properly.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Project implementation would not cause any
                         BP 4.11                                 negative impact on known physical cultural
                                                                 resources (PCR). Proposed subprojects with
                                                                 expected direct and negative impacts on known
                                                                 archeological, paleontological, historical or
                                                                 other culturally significant sites will not be
                                                                 eligible.
                                                                 The State of Pernambuco State has many
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 historical and archeological sites. Brazil has a
                                                                 well-developed legislative and normative
                                                                 framework, which is under Federal oversight by
                                                                 the National Institute for Protection of
                                                                 Historical and Archeological Sites (IPHAN).
                                                                 Pernambuco also has the State Agency,
                                                                 Fundação do Patrimônio Histórico e Artístico de
                                                                 Pernambuco (FUNDARPE), tasked with the
                                                                 identification, restoration and protection of PCR
                                                                 in the State.
                                                                 The "chance findings" procedures would be
                                                                 included in the Project Operational Manual for
                                                                 guidance during project implementation,
                                                                 particularly in regions with PCR sites already
                                                                 mapped by FUNDARPE. SEDAR may engage
                                                                 FUNDARPE or other entities with proven
                                                                 experience to implement "chance findings"
                                                                 procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes   Indigenous peoples are a priority target of this
                                                                project as they are overrepresented among the
                                                                poor rural population of the state of Bahia.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                According to FUNAI (the Brazilian Agency of
                                                                Indigenous Affairs) there are 16 Indigenous
                                                                Peoples in the state of Bahia (Arikosé, Atikum,
                                                                Botocudo, Kaimbé, Kantaruré, Kariri, Kiriri,
                                                                Kiriri-Barra, Pankararé, Pankararú, Pataxó,
                                                                Pataxó Hã-Hã-Hãe, Tupinambá, Tuxá e Xucuru-
                                                                Kariri). They count for 16,817 people, living in
                                                                31 indigenous lands, which comprise 113 local
                                                                communities. Nearly 56 percent of them live
                                                                with monthly per capita income up to ¼ of the
                                                                Brazilian minimum wage and 80% earn up to ½
                                                                of the minimum wage.
                                                                Poor soils in drought prone areas and low
                                                                technology productive practices compromise
                                                                their livelihood. Perennial water shortage
                                                                reduces quality of life in indigenous villages at
                                                                the North-Northwest portions of the state and
                                                                land conflicts prevail in some areas at the
                                                                southern coastal region.
                                                                As the exact type, nature and location of
                                                                subprojects to be financed would not be known
                                                                prior to project appraisal, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared by
                                                                the client in compliance with the Bank policy,
                                                                its principles and guidelines. The IPPF would
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                draw on lessons from previous operations
                                                                implemented by CAR, which have set
                                                                participatory processes of consultation and
                                                                planning and have benefited indigenous
                                                                communities (3,337 families from 23
                                                                indigenous lands). Prior, free and informed
                                                                consultations will be held with indigenous
                                                                peoples.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   OP 4.12 might apply because community
                         4.12                                   demand driven interventions may require
                                                                “voluntary asset donations”. Additionally,
                                                                during the early stages of project preparation,
                                                                the team will assess with the client if some
                                                                activities supported by the project to encourage
                                                                the basic infrastructure required to support the
                                                                production and marketing (energy, logistics,
                                                                water production, etc.) may require land
                                                                acquisition by the state and potentially promote
                                                                adverse impacts related with involuntary
                                                                                                                                 physical and/or economic displacement of
                                                                                                                                 populations.
                                                                                                                                 As the exact type, nature and location of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 subprojects to be financed would not be known
                                                                                                                                 prior to project appraisal, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared by the client.
                                                                                                                                 The RPF will include: (a) the proper guidance
                                                                                                                                 on how the implementing community
                                                                                                                                 association and the Project Implement Technical
                                                                                                                                 unit will ensure that donation is an act of
                                                                                                                                 informed consent; and, (b) guidelines on how to
                                                                                                                                 prepare involuntary resettlement plans in cases
                                                                                                                                 in which: (i) the community sub-project cannot
                                                                                                                                 technically be implemented in another location
                                                                                                                                 than where it is planned, (ii) if an affected
                                                                                                                                 household does not willingly agree to donate
                                                                                                                                 land/assets for a village sub-project without
                                                                                                                                 compensation, or (iii) if the criteria for
                                                                                                                                 voluntary asset donation are not met.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           The project would finance small dams (less than
                                                                                                                                 15 meters in height), including farm ponds,
                                                                                                                                 local silt retention dams, and low embankment
                                                                                                                                 tanks. The Project will exclude activities that
                                                                                                                                 require large dams, which are 15 meters or more
                                                                                                                                 in height. The ESMF will ensure that the
                                                                                                                                 Project is fully in compliance with Federal and
                                                                                                                                 State legislation and Bank safeguard, including:
                                                                                                                                 (a) identifying the potential social,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 environmental and distributive impacts
                                                                                                                                 associated with the small dams; (b) plans for
                                                                                                                                 construction supervision and quality assurance;
                                                                                                                                 and, (c) plans for operation and maintenance.
                                                                                                                                 Environmental evaluation of each subproject
                                                                                                                                 prior to its financing will be standard procedure
                                                                                                                                 designed to prevent, minimize or mitigate
                                                                                                                                 eventual adverse effects on the environment.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            This policy is not triggered since the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            not affect any international waterways as
                                                                                                                                 defined under the policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                 7.60                                                                                            not work in any disputed areas as defined under
                                                                                                                                 the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Mar-2014
                               B.



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                             The specific
                             CAR           studies
                                   has begun       and their
                                              preparation of: timing  1 should be specified
                                                              (i) the Environmental         in the Plan
                                                                                    Management     PAD-stage
                                                                                                        (EMP);ISDS:
                                                                                                                and (ii) the
                             Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF). Draft of each was submitted to the Bank for
Public Disclosure Copy




                             review and comments in November 2013. The finalized EMP and IPPF will be disclosed in the
                             Infoshop and in-country prior to project appraisal. The specific studies and their timing should be
                             specified in the PAD-stage.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:       Name: Maria de Fatima de Sousa

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (RSA)                      Date: 07-Apr-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Laurent Msellati (SM)                              Date: 14-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
