INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12125
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Zambia                      Project ID:  P151451
Project Name: Zambia Rural Women Empowerment Project (P151451)
Task Team       Cornelia M. Tesliuc
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Mar-2015                Estimated    29-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (35%), Other social
protection and risk management (35%), Gender (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      65.00             Total Bank Financing:    65.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  65.00
Total                                                                        65.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to support the Government of Zambia to increase access to
livelihood support for women and access to secondary education for disadvantaged adolescent girls
in extremely poor households in selected districts.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of4


﻿The Project proposes an integrated approach to support extremely poor women and adolescent girls
as key agents to undertake actions to reduce vulnerabilities and increase opportunities for the entire
family. The Project is based on a theory of change that hypothesizes that when women and
adolescent girls are empowered by acquiring social and economic skills and productive assets they
can draw on these to improve their family consumption, build savings, and invest in their children's
(especially daughters) education and well-being. At the same time, investments to expand the real
and perceived educational and livelihood opportunities available to poor adolescent girls can make
delays in early marriage more economically viable for their families. Given the country context, as
outlined above, the Project will be selective in targeting extremely poor women and adolescent girls
in rural areas where poverty and vulnerability are most acute.
The proposed design reflects Government's social protection vision for extremely poor households,
which emphasizes predictable cash transfers for labor-constrained households and economic
empowerment support for the extremely poor with the potential to engage in income generating
activities. Under Component 1, the Project would support design and roll-out of "Supporting
Women's Livelihoods" (SWL). The SWL would target extremely poor women from female-headed
households with the potential to engage in productive livelihoods as evidenced by the labor status of
their household. Although many such projects are under implementation, coverage remains limited,
delivery is affected by limited implementation capacity, and there is little coordination or
complementarity to promote synergies among these interventions. The proposed SWL would build
on the lessons from these ongoing interventions and begin to build operational tools that would
encourage greater coordination between them. Under Component 2, the Project would support
adolescent girls in extremely poor households to get access to secondary education (using the
targeting mechanism of the Government's existing Social Cash Transfer Scheme - SCTS).
Specifically, it would finance secondary school fees for approximately 14,000 targeted adolescent
girls between the ages of 14-19 years in extremely poor households in selected districts where the
SCTS is operating since 2014. Component 2 also would include activities designed to increase the
efficiency of the existing programs providing support to increase access to secondary education in
Zambia by promoting increased harmonization and consolidation. Under Component 3, the Project
O
U         would support the Government's aim to have a programmatic approach for women empowerment
initiatives and to consolidate support for secondary school fees. It would provide additional overall
institutional support for development and strengthening of key systems and tools to improve the
efficiency of the social protection sector.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will target women and adolescent girls in extremely poor households in rural areas. The
Project will identify these beneficiaries by building on the targeting mechanism developed for the
ongoing SCTS. The SCTS uses a three-stage targeting mechanism combining geographical
targeting, community-based targeting, and verification through a proxy means test. At the
geographical level, targeting would be conducted on the basis of a poverty map at sub-district level.
Using the 2010 Census and Household Survey Data, the Central Statistical Office, with support from
the World Bank, has prepared a national poverty map provides poverty estimates down to the lowest
administrative level (ward) allowing prioritization of areas with high incidence of extreme poverty.
At the beneficiary level, the Project will target both women from SCTS households (extremely poor,
labor-constrained households) with adolescent girls as well as women in households identified as
extremely poor (based on the SCTS methodology) but not eligible for the cash transfer benefit
because of their households' labor endowment. The SCTS defines labor-constrained households
based on chronic illness, physical disability or a labor-dependency ration greater than three.
Page 2 of 4


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Albab Akanda (GENDR)
Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
O
Environmental          No           The livelihoods that beneficiary women may undertake
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               are very small-scale household-level activities that will
not have any perceptible environmental impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will not affect or involve natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No           The project will not affect or involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural      No           The project will not affect or involve physical cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The project will not affect or involve indigenous peoples.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project does not involve land acquisition leading to
OP/BP 4.12                         involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
resources and livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No           N/A
4.37
Projects on International  No       N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No           N/A
U         Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The livelihoods envisaged under the Project range, among others, from household gardens to petty
trade, including selling produce, fish and small goods, to individual labor services. Hence, there
are no activities that would trigger environmental or social safeguards.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no long-term environmental impacts as a consequence of the Project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
No alternatives to the current set of household-based activities are envisaged or relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Page 3 of 4


﻿Safeguard policies are not triggered owing to the very small scale nature of household-based
activities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[  ]  No[    ]  NA[X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes     No        NA   X
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Cornelia M. Tesliuc
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)           Date: 13-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)                Date: 13-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


