                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR1039
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Guinea-Bissau                                Project ID:           P090712
                            Project Name:     Rural Community-Driven Development Project (P090712)
                            Task Team         Philippe Auffret
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         31-Mar-2009                                  Estimated   24-Sep-2009
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSPDR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           General education sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (30%), Other social services (25%), Water supply (1 5%)
                            Theme:            Other social development (25%), Social Inclusion (25%), Other social protection
                                              and risk management (25%), Conflict prevention and p ost-conflict
                                              reconstruction (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        25.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      20.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                           20.00
                              State and Peace Building Fund                                                                        5.00
                              Financing Gap                                                                                        0.00
                              Total                                                                                               25.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                                Page 1 of 9
                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The proposed project development objective would be to empower individuals, households and
                         communities in rural areas to plan, implement and manage priority soc
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ial and economic investments, through a transparent and participatory approach.
                         To achieve this objective the project would seek to:
                          ? build capacity of beneficiaries and local institutions to effectively identify and implement their
                         development priorities
                          ? finance beneficiary-identified priority investments such as basic social services (e.g.: primary
                         schools and community health posts) and small-scale infrastr                                     uctures
                         (e.g.: wells, latrines and secondary rural roads);
                          ? create economic and employment opportunities in targeted communities; and
                          ? establish a participatory and effective monitoring and evaluation system
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed project development objective would be to empower individuals, households and
                         communities in rural areas to plan, implement and manage priority soc
                         ial and economic investments, through a transparent and participatory approach.
                         To achieve this objective the project would seek to:
                          ? build capacity of beneficiaries and local institutions to effectively identify and implement their
                         development priorities
                          ? finance beneficiary-identified priority investments such as basic social services (e.g.: primary
                         schools and community health posts) and small-scale infrastr                                     uctures
                         (e.g.: wells, latrines and secondary rural roads);
                          ? create economic and employment opportunities in targeted communities; and
                          ? establish a participatory and effective monitoring and evaluation system
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Level II restructuring would maintain the PDO of the original Project to increase
Public Disclosure Copy




                         access to priority basic social and economic infrastructures and services in participating communities
                         in at least two regions of Guinea-Bissau. The proposed restructuring would maintain the four existing
                         components of the Project: Component 1 -Capacity-Building for Community Development - to build
                         the capacity of communities to prepare their development plans; Component 2 - Community-Based
                         Micro-Project – to finance community-based micro projects which are prioritized in the community-
                         development plans; Component 3 -Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation – to finance
                         project management and coordination costs, including consultant services, technical advisory
                         services such as technical studies and assessments, training and operating costs, including those
                         related to the implementation of activities included in component 4; and Component 4 - Delivery of
                         Education and Health Services – to finances the salary of teachers and health workers. The
                         restructuring will allocate additional resources to scale-up component 1 of the current project and
                         will introduce a new component (Component 5: prevention of Ebola epidemic). The scaled-up
                         Component 1 will be implemented by the existing Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and Component
                         5 will be implemented by WHO.

                         The proposed Level II restructuring seeks to prevent the spread of the Ebola epidemic as it would put
                         at risk the Project's capacity to reach its objectives. More specifically, the spread of Ebola to Guinea-
                         Bissau would prohibit working with communities to increase their access to basic priority social and
                         economic infrastructures and services thereby severely jeopardizing Project implementation. The
                         proposed restructuring would introduce the following changes to the Project:


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         (i) allocate additional resources to Component 1 (Capacity-Building for Community Development)
                         to finance an information campaign on Ebola in coordination with WHO;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) addition of a new component (Component 5: Prevention of the Ebola epidemic) to support WHO
                         for the implementation of a health contingency plan to prevent the spread of the Ebola epidemic to
                         Guinea-Bissau;

                         (iii) change the end-target value of some indicators to reflect the fact that $750k would be taken
                         away from Component 2 (Community-driven micro-projects) to finance the incremental activities
                         ($250k) included in Component 1 and the new component (Component 5) for $500k;

                         (iv) revise the institutional arrangement so that WHO would be responsible for the implementation of
                         Component 5 following its own procurement procedures;

                         (v) allow for the contracting of WHO on a single-source basis to implement Component 5;

                         (vi) create a new category of expenditures to finance the contract with WHO to finance Component
                         5;

                         (vii) change the disbursement arrangements to use the UN Advance Procedures for Component 5.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location will be nationwide and will include both rural and urban areas in all nine regions of
                         Guinea Bissau. Currently the project implements micro-projects in six regions in Guinea-Bissau. The
                         salary payments under Component 4 cover teacher and health worker salaries in all nine regions.
                         Similarly, the Ebola prevention efforts supported under components 1 and 5 will cover all nine
                         regions of Guinea-Bissau.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The safeguard arrangements for the activities scaled up under the restructuring (those which
                         correspond to component 1) would remain identical to those used by the PCU for the implementation
                         of the current Project: the Rural Community-Driven Development Project (P090712) and Rural
                         Community-Driven Development Project – Additional Financing (P146746), and will comply with
                         the measures outlined in the Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prepared, cleared and disclosed in-country and at the WB
                         InfoShop on 03-Mar-2009 and updated and re-disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop for the AF on
                         13-Mar-2014.

                         The new Component 5: Prevention of Ebola Epidemic, will be implemented by the World Health
                         Organization (WHO).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Liba C. Strengerowski-Feldblyum (GENDR)
                         Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)




                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes           An ESMF was prepared and disclosed for
                         BP 4.01                                         component 2 (micro-projects – supporting small
                                                                         scale basic social and economic infrastructures)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         of the original project and updated for the
                                                                         additional financing; the ESMF details the
                                                                         screening criteria and mechanisms to be used
                                                                         during micro-project appraisal and to ensure that
                                                                         appropriate management plans are prepared as
                                                                         needed. In addition there is a list of non-eligible
                                                                         micro-projects. Risk are typical for a rural CDD
                                                                         project and include soil degradation and erosion;
                                                                         decline in water quality; cutting of trees; use of
                                                                         pesticides and improper disposal of waste. The
                                                                         new component 5 which is added to the project as
                                                                         part of this restructuring is expected to generate
                                                                         medical waste, and the government has adopted
                                                                         WHO standards to address these impacts. No
                                                                         large scale irreversible negative impacts are
                                                                         expected.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Environmental risks are the typical ones for a
                                                                         rural CDD project supporting small scale basic
                                                                         infrastructure and might include localized
                                                                         degradation of habitats; the ESMF includes a
                                                                         negative list, and micro-projects that would be
                                                                         in natural habitats or parks are ineligible.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes           Micro-projects using non-eligible pesticides are
                                                                         on the negative list; the ESMF includes a
                                                                         screening tool and steps to ensure EMPs and
                                                                         appropriate mitigating measures are taken.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           For the event that micro-projects would trigger
                         4.12                                            OP 4.12 a Resettlement Policy Framework has
                                                                         been prepared for the original project and was
                                                                         updated at the occasion of the Additional
                                                                         Financing.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50




                                                                 Page 4 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               This restructuring would maintain the Project Development Objectives of the original Project
                              (P090712 and the additional financing (P146746).

                             It would scale up its activities under Components 1, and introduce a new component 5 to respond
                             to the Ebola epidemic prevention efforts in Guinea-Bissau. With the exception of the new
                             component 5, the environmental and social impacts of the activities under the proposed
                             restructuring would be identical to those under the original Project and will be governed by the
                             projects existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the
                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that was prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-
                             country and at the Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal of the original project. The ESMF and RPF
                             were updated for the project’s additional financing (P146746) in 2013 and were re-disclosed in-
                             country and at the Bank InfoShop in March 2014.

                             The new component (Component 5: Prevention of the Ebola epidemic) in the amount of $500k
                             would support WHO in the implementation of a health contingency plan to deal with the epidemic.
                             The component would support:

                             (a) communication activities to promote the adoption of good hygiene practices including hand
                             washing by families to reduce the risk of spread of infectious diseases (Ebola, cholera, and others).
                             This would target both (i) capacity building of key actors (health workers, media professionals,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             religious and traditional leaders, and community volunteers (ASC)); and (ii) awareness-raising for
                             the population to adopt best practices of individual and collective health and disease prevention.
                             The activities would complement those financed under Component 1. They would include
                             orientation sessions for key actors, dissemination of messages by radio, production and
                             dissemination of audiovisual material, visual communications (posters and brochures), and
                             supervision and accompaniment of social mobilization and communication activities;

                             (b) activities aiming to strengthen the capacity of health staff to respond effectively to a potential
                             outbreak of EVD and to reduce mortality and morbidity attributed to this disease. As such, it
                             would seek to equip health staff with sound knowledge for the clinical detection and early
                             reporting of cases. Activities would include training of doctors, nurses, technicians in the National
                             Hospital Simão Mendes (HNSM), training of technicians from CTEs (Centro de Tratamento da
                             Ébola), training of health teams at 45 points of entry, and training of 2000 ASC, among others;

                             (c) provision of tools for monitoring and management of clinical cases to health facilities. This
                             would entail improving facilities and supplying equipment and other inputs for the detection and
                             management of suspected cases at possible entry points.

                             The new component (Component 5: Prevention of the Ebola epidemic) would be implemented by
                             WHO and triggers OP 4.01 in that it would increase the production of Medical Wastes which


                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                           would be eliminated following WHO's Medical Waste Management Protocols which the
                           Government has adopted as the standard applicable to this component.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                            No long term or indirect negative environmental or social impacts are anticipated to arise due to
                           the scaling-up of activities under component 1. The environmental and social screening procedures
                           that are in place to identify and ensure appropriate mitigation for the current project will apply to
                           the proposed new activities (i.e. Ebola information campaign) under Component 1.

                           The proposed new Component 5: Prevention of the Ebola epidemic will be implemented by the
                           WHO following WHO protocols for handling of medical waste [see the 2014 WHO: Safe
                           Management of Wastes from Health-Care Activities / edited by Y. Chartier et al. – 2nd ed.]

                           Implementation will be closely monitored to ensure that these are effective.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             During preparation of the original Project (P090712), the Government prepared an
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF) to govern the parent project. These instruments were updated for the additional
                           financing (P146746) in 2013 and were re-disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank
                           InfoShop in March 2014. The processes and procedures defined within the ESMF and the RPF are
                           an integral part of the Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The PIM developed under the Rural
                           Community-Driven Development Project ensures that micro-projects are fully compliant with
                           safeguard policies and that mitigation measures are implemented during the micro-projects cycle.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           These measures include: (i) a checklist of possible environmental and social impacts; (ii) detailed
                           Safeguards Procedures for inclusion in the technical specifications of contracts; and (iii) specific
                           environmental and social mitigation measures. The specific environmental mitigation measures for
                           each sub-project would be systematically integrated in all bidding documents, including the
                           preparation of ESMPs and RAPs.

                           The parent project’s compliance with environmental and social safeguards policies has
                           consistently been rated as Satisfactory. The PCU also has a fully dedicated safeguards specialist.
                           In addition, recognizing the weaknesses of public institutions to ensure Project compliance with
                           the environmental and social safeguards, PCU staff as well as central and local government
                           representatives will continue to be sensitized and trained on safeguard policies. Furthermore,
                           general sensitization of beneficiaries forms part of the formal project communication strategy.

                           With regards to the proposed new Component 5: Prevention of the Ebola epidemic, WHO would
                           be responsible for the implementation of this component. WHO is in a unique position to
                           implement the activities proposed under this component. It is the agency responsible for the
                           implementation of the health contingency plan to deal with the epidemic and it has the unique
                           capacity to implement the necessary measures under emergencies. Consequently, WHO would be
                           contracted on a sole source basis to implement the set of measures included in Component 5
                           aiming at preventing the spread of the epidemic to Guinea-Bissau.


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include: (i) beneficiary communities, which would continue to identify, prepare
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and implement the micro-projects; (ii) local authorities (regional and sectoral government,
                           traditional authorities and civil society organizations), which would be participating in the
                           identification and definition of the LDP; (iii) technical sectoral ministries implicated in the
                           implementation and ongoing operation of the selected micro-projects, as appropriate, (iv) teachers
                           and health workers , and (v) Hospitals, clinics, patients, care givers and health staff affected by the
                           Ebola epidemic. Development partners (donors, NGOs, religious organizations, etc.) active at the
                           local level are also considered important stakeholders. Preparation of the ESMF and RPF included
                           consultation with representatives of each of these stakeholder groups and discussion of the
                           safeguard processes and procedures. Particular attention was paid to identifying vulnerable groups
                           and potentially affected people (based upon the expected micro-project types).

                           As part of the preparation of the Additional Financing for the project in 2013, both the ESMF and
                           the RPF prepared for the parent project were updated (following comprehensive public
                           consultations) and disclosed in-country and in the World Bank InfoShop in March 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Mar-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Mar-2009
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea-Bissau                                                      13-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The ESMF was updated (to accommodate changes made to the project by an
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         additional financing in 2013) and re-disclosed in-country and at the WB InfoShop in
                                         March 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Mar-2009
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Mar-2009
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea-Bissau                                                      13-Mar-2014
                           Comments: The RPF for the parent project was updated (to accommodate an AF in 2013) and re-
                                         disclosed in-country and at the WB InfoShop in March 2014.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Philippe Auffret
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 04-Sep-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Practice Manager/   Name:                                                Date:
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
