                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6696
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Mar-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Armenia                            Project ID:    P146994
                            Project Name:      Trade Promotion and Quality Infrastructure (P146994)
                            Task Team          Feyi Boroffice
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          31-Mar-2014                        Estimated   10-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other domestic and international trade (40%), General industry and trade sector
                                              (40%), SME Finance (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Export development and competitiveness (50%), Micro, Small and Medium
                                              Enterprise support (25%), Other Private Sector Development (25 %)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      62.50           Total Bank Financing:                    50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     12.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        50.00
                              Total                                                                                        62.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project’s objective is to strengthen the enabling environment and firm capacity to increase
                           private investments and exports. The Project’s direct beneficiaries include both existing and potential
                           exporters, who will benefit from an improved quality of programs and services provided under a
                           more efficient trade promotion and quality system.

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will consist of four components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 will promote reforms aimed at improving the Trade Promotion and Quality
                         Infrastructure system, which will play an important role in developing a foundation for providing
                         effective services to increase the competitiveness of firms. This component will include three sets of
                         activities: (i) Investment Policy Development; (ii) Institutional Restructuring of the Enterprise
                         Support Agencies; (iii) Strengthening the capacity of the National Quality Infrastructure system.
                         This component is results-based and will therefore reimburse loan funds to the government for
                         agreed-upon actions, outputs and outcomes (“Disbursement-Linked Indicators” or DLIs) that result
                         in improvements to the trade promotion and quality system.

                         Component 2 will strengthen government’s capacity to actively increase the export competitiveness
                         of local firms and attract efficiency seeking FDI. This component will finance the creation of new
                         investment and export promotion programs that will build the foundation to promote both inward
                         FDI and export through three sub-components:
                         •        Sub-component 2.1: Services to Investors and Exporters (US$6.3 million) which will support
                         the development of world-class services and programs that will encourage new investment from
                         existing and potential FDI and improve the capacity of local exporters to compete in global markets.
                         •        Sub-component 2.2: Exporter Development Grants ($3.65 million) which will fund the
                         development and implementation of comprehensive export development plans which address a range
                         of quality improvement and marketing needs of firms.
                         •        Sub-component 2.3: Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) for Increasing Investment and Export
                         (US$19.41 million) which will accelerate the upgrading of industries with export potential and
                         strengthen relationships with existing and potential new FDI through two sub-components: (i)
                         Cluster development PPPs to strengthen industry clusters by financing the development of industry-
                         wide facilities that benefit from economies of scale such as design centers, quality and testing
                         laboratories, training centers and common logistics infrastructure; and (ii) R&D PPPs, which will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         encourage efficiency-seeking FDI (primarily in high tech) by funding joint projects between
                         multinationals and academia to develop enabling infrastructure, such as joint laboratories, Innovation
                         centers and R&D centers. This sub-component will fund civil works including renovation of existing
                         infrastructure and could potentially include new construction.

                         Component 3 will modernize metrological, accreditation and standards services in order to provide
                         relevant quality assurance services to industry. This component will have three main sets of
                         activities: (i) Renovation of the industrial metrology building and laboratories, purchase of
                         equipment and capacity building for National Institute of Metrology (NIM) staff; (ii) Refurbishment
                         of National Accreditation Body (NAB) offices and capacity building of NAB staff; and (iii)
                         Development of a database for the catalogue of standards for the National Institute of Standards
                         (SARM).

                         Component 4 will finance the operations and monitoring of the project, including PIU consultants
                         and operations, fiduciary functions, M&E and audits. This component will also finance incremental
                         operating costs for the Ministry of Economy's (MoE) Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and
                         stakeholders including the new Investment Agency (from the merger of ADA and IDF), Enterprise
                         Incubator Foundation (EIF), NIM, NAB and SARM.




                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The NIM and NAB buildings are located in the capital city of Yerevan. Civil works for their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         refurbishment are expected to be located within the existing footprint of these buildings. The exact
                         location and types of construction and/or reconstruction works that may be undertaken as part of the
                         PPPs under Component 2 of the Project are not known upfront and sites may be located anywhere in
                         the country.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (ECSEN)
                         Sarah G. Michael (ECSSO)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The project will support rehabilitation of premises
                          BP 4.01                                            for the NAB and the NIM, including its
                                                                             laboratory facilities. Small new construction and
                                                                             possibly rehabilitation of other existing buildings
                                                                             is expected as part of the PPPs aimed at attracting
                                                                             DFI into high-tech businesses supported by the
                                                                             Government through the provision of public
                                                                             premises and infrastructure. Based on the
                                                                             information available, the NIM laboratories will
                                                                             not handle explosive, radioactive, and toxic
                                                                             substances. PPPs will not be established in
                                                                             support of businesses that are related to the
                                                                             production of arms, spirits, tobacco, and
                                                                             hazardous substances. The negative list of
                                                                             activities ineligible for financing as PPP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             initiatives will be included into the Project
                                                                             Operations Manual.

                                                                             Overall, environmental risks associated with the
                                                                             Project are modest, because construction and
                                                                             rehabilitation works are expected to be of a
                                                                             modest scale and to be undertaken in highly
                                                                             transformed urban areas. Therefore, the Project is
                                                                             classified as environmental Category B. Because
                                                                             the designs of the majority of site-specific
                                                                             investments are not available at this stage, an
                                                                             Environmental and Social Management
                                                                             Framework (ESMF) is prepared to guide
                                                                             environmental and social screening,
                                                                             classification, review, management planning, and
                                                                             monitoring of civil works under the Project.
                                                                             These works are already known to be pretty
                                                                             similar and to carry a common set of
                                                                             environmental and social risks. The site-specific



                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                                                                            Environmental Management Plan for works in the
                                                                            NIM building is prepared and disclosed. It will be
                                                                            included into the tender package and will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            attached to the civil works contract, so that
                                                                            implementation of EMP is made mandatory for
                                                                            the works provider. The same procedures will be
                                                                            applied to all EMPs to arrive at later stages of the
                                                                            project cycle.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           PPP sub-projects under Component 2 could
                            4.12                                            include civil works. The nature of the specific
                                                                            grants (including grant recipients, grant activities
                                                                            and grant locations) is not yet known. The
                                                                            possibility of land use, acquisition or resettlement
                                                                            cannot therefore be excluded. As such, this policy
                                                                            has been triggered and a Resettlement Policy
                                                                            Framework (RPF) has been prepared. The RPF
                                                                            provides detailed guidance and criteria for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            development of investment-specific Resettlement
                                                                            Action Plans (RAPs), which would be prepared
                                                                            and implemented prior to commencement of any
                                                                            civil works under the PPP grants at any site where
                                                                            resettlement or land use or acquisition was
                                                                            required. The RPF will be included as an annex to
                                                                            the Project Operations Manual. However, PPP
                                                                            activities with significant potential social risks or
                                                                            which require physical resettlement will be
                                                                            excluded.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management



                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The Project will finance rehabilitation of buildings allocated as office space for the NIM and
                           NAB. These buildings are located within a residential district of the city of Yerevan. No schools,
                           kindergartens, hospitals, or other facilities of high sensitivity to the construction noise and dust are
                           located in the vicinity of these buildings. Traffic around the building sites is not intense.
                           Connections to water, power, and to the waste water collection systems operated by the
                           municipality are in place.

                           The construction of new buildings and/or reconstruction of existing facilities are expected to be
                           financed for PPPs under component 2 of the Project. Approximately seven such PPPs are expected
                           to be financed.

                           Other social and environmental impacts of the anticipated works are expected to be modest,
                           confined to the construction sites, and easy to mitigate by ensuring that works providers adhere to
                           the conventional good construction and environmental practices.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Operation of the constructed/rehabilitated small to medium size buildings within the highly
                           transformed urban areas will not cause measurable long term impacts on the urban environment
                           and social strata.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Several existing public buildings were considered for rehabilitation to house NIM and NAB. The
                           selection was made based on these institutions' real needs for office and laboratory space, technical
                           condition of the suggested buildings, and costs of their rehabilitation and maintenance. Site
Public Disclosure Copy




                           selection for new construction under the Component 2 of the Project will be made with
                           consideration of the associated environmental and social impacts, and will aspire to minimize
                           them. Moreover, the project will not finance any PPP activities with significant potential social or
                           environmental risks or those that require physical resettlement. Specific criteria and procedures for
                           PPP sub-projects will be finalized in the Project Operations Manual.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Given the uncertainty of the scale, scope and location of construction activities under the project,
                           OP/BP 4.12 were triggered. A Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared during project
                           preparation to provide guidance on the process of consultations with affected communities, the
                           establishment of grievance and redress mechanisms, and the process of preparing RAPs, should
                           any impact on formal or informal assets occur during the project.

                           The Borrower developed a site-specific Environmental Management Plan for rehabilitation works
                           in the building of the NIM. It carries a set of mitigation measures that are sufficient to avoid
                           pollution from the works site and nuisance to the residents and to a small private business located
                           in the vicinity of the NIM building.

                           No civil works will be allowed to commence under Component 2 on PPPs until the respective


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           EMP (and RAP, if required) is disclosed and consulted with local stakeholders. Site-specific
                           Resettlement Action Plans will be prepared for any cases where restriction of access to productive
                           resources will take place, including temporary land acquisition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The MoE is an implementing entity for TPQI project. The Ministry will create a PIU comprised of
                           the Ministry's core staff and hired consultants, which will be responsible for all the day-to-day
                           management of the project activities including safeguards oversight, while financial management
                           will be provided by the Foreign Financing Projects Management Center (FFPMC), which is
                           customary for the projects implemented with the World Bank support in Armenia. FFPMC is well
                           experienced handling fiduciary aspects, while the MoE had no previous exposure to the Word
                           Bank safeguard policies. Therefore, the PIU will supplement its in-house capacity with a
                           consultant with adequate background and skills for safeguards management. Also, the PIU will
                           hire a consultant company for the provision of general technical supervision of works, and will
                           include environmental and social monitoring functions into the terms of reference of the
                           supervision company.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Administration and staff of the NIM and NAB, as well as the businesses participating in the PPP
                           initiatives are the direct beneficiaries of the Project, while the MoE is the key stakeholder.
                           Residents of the city districts within which the NIM and NAB buildings are located are the people
                           potentially affected by the Project. So will be the residents and small businesses that may be
                           located in the vicinity of construction/rehabilitation sites of PPP investments.

                           Draft ESMF and the EMP prepared for works in the NIM building were disclosed in Armenian
                           and English languages through the web sites of the Ministry of Economy and the NIM. The
                           documents were discussed with relevant stakeholders in a public consultation meeting held on X
                           in the city of Yerevan. They were finalized and re-disclosed afterwards. Once the works provider
                           is mobilized to the NIM building site, he/she will be required to post brief information on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           designed works and his/her contact information on the board, so that the project affected people
                           can put through their inquiries and grievances. All other site-specific investments will be handled
                           in a way similar to the safeguard procedures applied to the preparation of the pilot sub-project for
                           the rehabilitation of NIM premises.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Mar-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                             25-Mar-2014
                           Comments: To be conducted by Appraisal
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         11-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      31-Mar-2014



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:         Name: Feyi Boroffice



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Approved By
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Aurora Ferrari (SM)     Date: 25-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 8 of 8
