INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO42
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Comoros                    Project ID:   P150754
Project Name:    Comoros Social Safety Net Project (P150754)
Task Team        Andrea Vermehren
Leader:
Estimated        01-Dec-2014                Estimated      17-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSPDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other social services (80%), Health (20%)
Theme(s):        Natural disaster management (20%), Social safety nets (50%), Nutrition and
food security (20%), Other rural development (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       6.00             Total Bank Financing:     6.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
IDA Grant                                                         6.00
Total                                                             6.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to establish the building blocks of a safety net to reach selected
extreme poor and disaster-affected households through the provision of additional sources of income
and nutrition services
C. Project Description
The proposed project would build on the successful implementation and lessons learned from the


﻿Comoros Emergency Crisis Response Project implemented by the FADC (Fonds d'Appui au
D6velopment Communautaire) , as well as global experiences, in particular from other countries in
Africa, Latin-America, South and East Asia. It provides an opportunity to further develop the
conceptual framework and institutional capacity to offer safety net, disaster response and nutrition
services to strengthen poor families ' and communities' resilience to poverty and natural disasters. It
would: (i) support the establishment of a productive safety net and systems that would provide cash-
for-work opportunities for selected poor families with a view to strengthen their productive capacity,
(ii) provide support to communities and households affected by disasters, by providing emergency
cash-for-work, supporting immediate cleaning and removal of debris after disasters, and
rehabilitating damaged community infrastructure, (iii) improve nutrition of children under five years
of age, and (iv) strengthen the institutional capacity for safety net management, coordination,
monitoring and evaluation.
The project would be governed by the country's Social Protection (SP) and Nutrition policies. The SP
policy is presently being developed by the Ministry of Health & Solidarity, in collaboration with the
Ministry of Labor. The Nutrition policy has already been developed by the Ministry of Health &
Solidarity but lacks implementation. In addition, the project would establish an explicit link between
social protection instruments (such as cash for work activities and community development/
infrastructure) and use these linkages as a response mechanism in the context of the country's disaster
risk management (DRM) framework. Sub-projects will be guided by revised local development plans
with the objective to enhance the economic and environmental resilience of communities (e.g.
through reforestation, rehabilitation of mangroves, terracing, and small water catchment). This shift
towards an integrated social protection and DRM system marks an important step towards better
coordination and more effective service delivery - a significant deficiency in the country as outlined
in the CPS.
An important innovation under this operation is the provision of cash for work opportunities
to selected families over a longer period of time (3 years) accompanied by orientation, training and
practical support in developing the household's productive capacity (1 day per week). This safety net
plus" approach will need to be coordinated with local agencies such as micro-finance institutions
and local Non-Governmental Organizations (NGO) that offer complementary services. Finally, the
project intends to address malnutrition through simultaneous demand and supply side interventions:
The cash for work activities will provide the poorest families with cash income, and the community
a       nutrition activities will enhance the knowledge and practices needed to address malnutrition of
children.
Project components
Component 1. Establishment of a safety net (US$3.8 million). The component would include two
key elements of an effective safety net. It would build the institutional and operational foundations to
provide a longer term safety net for the poorest households in selected communities through
productive cash for work activities over a three year period for the selected households. After this
period, the households would be expected to continue to benefit from the productive activities. In
addition, the component includes a short term safety net for disaster affected households and
communities that would provide quick recovery support to selected households and communities.
Subcomponent 1.1: Establishment of a Productive Safety Net (US$3 million)
This component would provide cash to targeted poor families in exchange for their participation in


﻿community work activities. It would build on long-term FADC's proven experience in implementing
cash-for-work activities. The "productive" safety net modality would offer periodic cash for work
opportunities to the poorest families of selected communities over a three year period with the aim of
smoothing their consumption and supporting them in developing productive activities. Targeting of
O
poorest households would be done through a combination of geographical, community targeting and
verification of community lists with a Proxy Means test (PMT). The geographical targeting is based
on a distribution formula agreed between the island governments for the national budget. Thus,
Grande Comore would receive 45 percent, Anjouan 42 percent, and Moh6li 12 percent of the safety
net funds. The daily wage rate would be set at about KMF 1000 (approximately United States
Dollars (USD) 2.7) per day for 5 hours of work to enhance self-targeting. The program would offer
two work periods of 30 days each per year, one before school starts (to promote school enrollment
and attendance) and one six months later, aligned with the local "lean" season.
The Cash-for-work subprojects would fo cus on activities that have an impact on communities and
households' productive capacity and positive environmental and social impacts as well as resilience
to natural disaster and climatic events (e.g. reforestation, water management, terracing. etc.).
Subprojects costs will reflect the labor-intensive nature of the activities: 75 percent of the costs
would be cash benefits for the participating households, and the other 25 percent would be used for
supervision, purchase of small equipment and materials, as well as for beneficiary training activities.
Local NGO would be contracted by FADC to carry out these activities. They would, in particular,
ensure the quality of the works, monitor the attendance and effective participation of the workers,
carry out procurement of small equipment and materials, ensure compliance with work safety rules
and environmental and social safeguards, and deliver/coordinate the training sessions to the selected
households..
The productive safety net program will introduce training sessions for participants over the period of
three years. Training and capacity building activities would focus on families' productive capacity
and means, and range from financial literacy to guidance on the development of productive activities.
These activities will be locally coordinated with existing organizations (e.g. micro-finance).
o
Subcomponent 1.2. Protecting vulnerable households and communities from devastating effects of
disasters (US$800,000)
o       This component would finance activities to support communities and households in the immediate
aftermath of natural disasters. Over the past several years, FADC has supported many of the poorest
communities in preparing their local development plans (Plan de D6veloppement Local or PDL). The
component would support communities in updating their PDL to reflect DRM and social protection
activities through cash for work.
The component would finance the repair and rehabilitation of small village infrastructure damaged
by natural disasters, or proposed in their PDL for those communities which have not yet benefited
from community subproject. FADC would sub-contract private construction companies to carry out
the works. Based on the results of a recent Technical Audit of all infrastructure projects implemented
under the Emergency Crisis Response Project, FADC is presently reviewing its procedures and
standards to improve the technical quality of the community infrastructure subprojects, their
resilience to disasters, and their maintenance by the communities. The improvements will be
reflected in a revised operational manual which will be submitted for no objection to the Bank prior
to project effectiveness.


﻿The component would also finance emergency cash-for-works activities in the immediate aftermath
of natural disasters. FADC would collaborate with the Direction G6n6rale de la S6curit6 Civile
(DGSC), the government agency in charge of Disaster Risk management in cases where a national
emergency is declared. To ensure smooth collaboration and clarity of roles and responsibilities,
O
FADC would sign a Memorandum of Understanding with the DGSC prior to effectiveness.
37.    Beneficiary households would be selected from the poor households that have been impacted
by the natural disaster. Targeting would be managed by the DGSC and would therefore vary from
that used by the productive safety net. The list of localities and of affected households will be
compiled by the DGSC and forwarded to FADC. FADC will contract local NGOs to carry out the
cash for work activities. Post-disaster public works activities may vary according to the impact of the
disaster but would mostly focus on restoring village services and productive capacity, and would
include clearing of debris, removal of sand, clearing of roads etc. Benefits paid to participants under
this component would be different from that offered through the seasonal Safety Net. While the daily
wage rate would be the same, the number of working days would be limited to 25. Selected
households would participate only once per disaster in the program
Component 2. Improving the nutrition of young children from poor families (US$1 million). The
project would establish community nutrition activities to promote better nutrition for young children
and their mothers. The proposed design is modeled after the successful and cost-effective community
nutrition program in Madagascar, at the heart of which lies nutritional counseling to change behavior.
This component will include nutrition interventions focused on children from 0-5 years of age in the
same communities where the social safety net activities take place, and will establish community run
nutrition sites.. It would focus on ensuring the delivery of a minimum package of nutrition-specific
interventions to children under-five years of age, with particular focus on the "first thousand days"
window of opportunity (from pregnancy to two years of age). This component would include support
at the community level to establish nutrition sites (and related supervisory and monitoring structures
at district level) to deliver a defined set of priority nutrition interventions focused on children 0-2
years of age (see Table 1). The community nutrition sites will use growth monitoring as an entry
point for nutritional counseling and targeted supplementary feeding for children under 24 months.
More specifically, activities will include: (i) training of Community Nutrition Promoters (CNPs), (ii)
support for children up to 24 months through monthly weight and bimonthly height monitoring of
young children, culinary demonstrations, counseling in Infant and Young Child feeding practice,
a       health and hygiene information, and (ii) support to children ages 2-5 by tracking their height, weight
and arm perimeter measurements quarterly, and referrals of severely malnourished children to health
facilities. The CPNs would make home visits (mother-to-mother support) to create an environment
that would enable mothers and caregivers to implement optimal nutritional practices for infants and
young children, and to facilitate the translation of the income supplement from the cash for work into
improved nutritional status.
Component 3: Strengthening Safety Net Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
(M&E). This component would strengthen institutional capacity to build key elements of a safety net
system. It would support the establishment of an effective Management Information System (MIS)
including a beneficiary registry. Furthermore, the component would support the establishment of a
solid targeting system. This would include the design and testing of a Proxy Means Test that could be
used in combination with geographical and community targeting. While the community
representatives would prepare a long list of potential beneficiaries comprising the poorest
households, the PMT would validate the pre-selection and ensure that all preselected households are
indeed among the poorest. The component would also establish more efficient payment systems to


﻿transfer cash to the safety net beneficiaries. This would include the contracting of a payment agency
(or various payment agencies depending of service availability), and a system that would minimize
paper-based transactions, as well as fraud and errors.
O
)       The project would also finance the operational costs associated with project administration, M&E
and capacity building of FADC and implementing partners (NGOs, local firms), financial and
technical audits and the evaluation of the project. Strong monitoring and evaluation arrangements
would be introduced including ownership, social accountability and grievance redress mechanisms
that would enable communities and other stakeholders to adequately report on program performance,
particularly related to targeting, implementation of the cash for work activities, and payments. A
process evaluation of the productive safety net activities would be included as well as an ex-post
evaluation for components 1 and 2. Finally, this component would include the necessary technical
assistance and administrative arrangements for implementing the community nutrition program.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Nationwide involving all three Islands of Comoros.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
FADC has a good track record of complying with social and environmental safeguards. More than 50
percent of beneficiaries are female, youth groups are extremely dynamic in project activities, and this
is also reflected in FADC staff. Overtime, the institution has been trained in social and environmental
safeguards and has had no major issues so far, rather, it has grounded a strong social and
environmental know-how that is a clear usage of the social and environmental clauses included in
contractors contracts. Communities awareness on HIV/AIDS and STI has also gained a strong
success. The regional directorates had been leading the awareness raising campaign through the
involvement of district health/sanitary services. Building upon such experience, the project aims at
further supporting this endeavor by streamlining the sensitization efforts (and possibly the screening)
for the project selected communities also part of the National HIV/AIDS Program. Furthermore,
FADC is implementing less infrastructure projects, and more cash transfers which tend to have less
negative social and environmental impacts. To the contrary, the project is expected to foster a
blooming positive social impact on the beneficiary communities, especially women, youth, the poor
and most vulnerable groups since the cash for work activities are meant to rather safeguard both the
natural and physical environment and prevent or minimize the effects of climate change on
communities.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The Environmental Assessment policy is been
BP 4.01                                     triggered due to the fact that the proposed
project will finance key civil works activities,
namely repair and/or rehabilitation of small
scale village infrastructure damaged by natural


﻿disasters. These civil work activities will be
undertaken through a consultative and
participatory process meant to foster ownership
and social accountability. Overall, the proposed
sub-projects are expected to be small in scale
and site specific, typical of category B projects.
Consequently their potential adverse
environmental and social impacts will be very
limited due to their localized, small scale and
site specific nature, albeit minor. In addition, the
cash for works activities meant to provide cash
to targeted poor families in exchange for their
participation in small group community work
activities may not expose them to significant
risks of HIV/AIDS, nor damage to existing
physical social environment. However, if
adequate mitigation measures are not considered
on time to ensure these risks are contained and/
or minimized to the maximum possible, the
ultimate impacts would be serious.
Since the physical locations of the proposed
project activities to be repaired and/or
rehabilitated are unknown at this stage, the
environmental assessment policy (OP/BP 4.01)
suggests that the Borrower prepares an
Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). This framework sets forth
the basic principles and procedures/directives to
be followed by both the Borrower and the
World Bank once the physical locations of the
proposed activities are known. Since this project
builds pretty much on its parent project, it will
therefore build upon the ESMF prepared by the
ongoing World Bank funded operations in the
current FADC. The ESMF would provide an
Environmental and Social Screening Form
(ESSF) to be applied for each proposed
subproject and likewise provide simple
guidelines to adequately mitigate (avoid,
minimize or reduce) any environmental and
social impacts from financed subprojects. The
ESMF will provide a basic description of the
natural and physical environment of the targeted
project intervention zones, and include an
institutional arrangement that clarifies the
specific role and responsibilities of government
agencies and the implementation unit team,


﻿including the World Bank; an environmental
and social management Plan (ESMP) that
includes a detailed capacity building action
plan; a public consultation and participation that
details ways stakeholders, including women,
youth and vulnerable groups have been
consulted upon and their concerned captured in
the project design; a grievance redress
mechanism that provides clearer guidance on
how possible grievances will be handled
throughout the project life cycle; a monitoring
and evaluation mechanism; and, an estimated
budget. Once completed, the ESMF will be
reviewed by the project social and
environmental safeguards team and ultimately
cleared by the World Bank and disclosed both
in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No             The project does not involve or affect natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No             The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09        No             The project does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No           The project does not involve or affect physical
BP 4.11                                       cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No             There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No            The project does not involve land acquisition
4.12                                          leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No             N/A
Projects on International      No             N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           N/A
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Oct-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
As per World Bank safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) guidance, the
proposed project is been classified as a Category B project due to the site specific nature of its
foreseen potential social and environmental impacts, which are easily manageable. As stated
above, since the location of the sub-projects to be financed is not yet known at this very juncture,
the borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) from the
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿existing one of the FADC. Once cleared, the ESMF will be publicly disclosed both in-country and
at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Andrea Vermehren
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)             Date: 07-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/    Name: Manuel Salazar (PMGR)                  Date: 08-Dec-2014
Manager:


