                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC3760

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                        Project ID:      P143417
                            Project Name:      Agriculture Investment and Market Development Project (P143417)
                            Task Team          Manievel Sene
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Mar-2014                     Estimated        29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA2                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Crops (60%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), General agriculture,
                                               fishing and forestry sector (10%), Animal production (5 %), Irrigation and
                                               drainage (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural markets (35%), Rural policies
                                               and institutions (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    110.00                     Total Bank Financing:       100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           10.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                       110.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) proposed for the operation is to increase productivity and
                           competitiveness of cassava, maize, and sorghum value chains in order to meet the market demand,
                           especially of the agribusiness led by target beneficiaries, i.e. cooperatives/Common Interest Group
                           Unions. This will be achieved by (i) establishing a ''Productive Partnership'' mechanism between the
                         beneficiary POs (eligible cooperatives, and Interest Common Groups) and the agribusiness to
                         improve access to markets; (ii) financing sub-projects for POs to increase access to improved
                         agricultural technologies, inputs and basic infrastructures; and (iii) supporting access of POs to rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finance. To this end, the Project will expand investments in production, processing, and marketing of
                         the above targeted commodities and in parallel improve delivery of services.
                         C. Project Description
                         The PDO indicators for the proposed Project include: (i) functioning partnerships established
                         between POs and agro-industries; (ii) increased yield of targeted crops in the targeted production
                         basins (tons/ha) of which cassava (percentage), maize (percentage), sorghum (percentage); (iii)
                         amounts of products of targeted crops processed by COOP-CIGUs (tons) of which cassava
                         (percentage), maize (percentage), sorghum (percentage); (iv) amounts of value added products
                         marketed by COOP-CIGUs (tons) of which cassava (percentage), maize (percentage), sorghum
                         (percentage); (v) amount of co-investments leveraged by the Project’s investment; (vi) competitive
                         price of products (value); and (vii) increased value of target crops (value) of which cassava
                         (percentage), maize (percentage), sorghum (percentage).

                         The intermediate outcome indicators for the proposed Project include: (i) productive investments
                         delivered to beneficiary POs (number); (ii) post-harvest or processing facilities constructed or
                         rehabilitated for Farms (number); (iii) rural roads constructed or rehabilitated; (iv) market
                         infrastructures/units created or rehabilitated accessible for Farms; (v) integrated management
                         landscape practices in the targeted production basins (ha); (vi) Farms that have adopted improved
                         inputs (e.g: seeds, fertilizers, etc.) or technologies promoted by the project (percentage); (vii) direct
                         Project beneficiaries satisfied with the Project (number) of which female (percentage) and youth
                         (percentage).

                         The Project will comprise three components:
                         Component 1. Support to production, processing and marketing (US$65.00 million IDA).
                         Component 1 will finance activities in the focal areas listed above: increasing crop productivity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adding post-harvest value, and improving performance of agricultural markets. Funding will target
                         either basic infrastructure and equipment investments of eligible cooperatives/Common Interest
                         Group Unions (COOP-CIGUs) (sub-projects). COOP-CIGUs' sub-projects supported under this
                         component will constitute assets owned by the beneficiary COOP-CIGUs as part of their operation,
                         management and maintenance responsibility. Support to market access, nutrition and climate
                         resilience under this component will complement the aforementioned investments; to this end, sub-
                         projects will also include activities related to nutrition and climate smart agriculture. The project will
                         also specifically identify how female members’ business plans can be supported under the
                         component. IDA resources (public resources) will finance collective investments of business plans
                         from Sub-projects (SPs). COOP-CIGUs are eligible to public resources as they account about several
                         hundreds of Farm members also structured into groups. SPs will consist of (i) Basic collective
                         infrastructures to benefit rural COOP-CIGUs for processing and value-added and (ii) Productive
                         assets to support production, productivity and quality.

                         Component 2. Capacity building and institutional support to public services (US$10.00 million IDA)
                         will support implementation of Component 1 by (i) enhancing capacity of core public services; and
                         (ii) building a framework of consultation/partnership between government, COOP-CIGUs, agro-
                         industry companies and specialized institutions. Roles of the public services will be limited to
                         advising beneficiary COOP-CIGUs. Implementation arrangements will be decided during Project
                         preparation and described in detail in the PIM. Component 2 will consist of the two sub-components:
                         (i) Enhancing capacity of core public services and (ii) Building the public-private consultation and
                         partnership framework.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Coordination and Management (US$5.00 million IDA). The Project will establish a new
                         Project Coordination Unit (PCU). A coordination mechanism between relevant ministries will be
                         established. The Project will support implementation of activities, including manuals, selection of
                         additional staff and equipment, the start-up and related operating costs of the PCU. The PCU will be
                         responsible for the day-to-day management, implementation, fiduciary management, and overall
                         monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The Project will establish an M&E unit that will carry out
                         baseline and impact studies, and communicate information on agricultural technology, financial
                         services and markets. The operational costs of the Project Steering Committee will be supported by
                         the Project.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will focus on main production basins including Center, East, Littoral, South and
                         Adamaoua for cassava and maize, Far North region and North for sorghum.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The country has progressively built its capacity on safeguards management during the
                         implementation of previous projects. The key institutional stakeholders are those entities, which are
                         involved in the project steering committee, notably ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Public Works,
                         Trade and Environment, Lands, Employment and others. The Ministry of Environment, Nature
                         Protection and Sustainable Development for environmental assessment issues, the Ministry of
                         Property and Land Affairs for the resettlement issues will also be involved.

                         The Project triggered the same safeguard policies as the ongoing Agricultural Competitiveness
                         Project-P112635 (PACA). The Project will adopt and adapt the safeguards instruments being used
                         for the PACA. A thorough capacity assessment exercise will be carried out during the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation. The Government will update the instruments prepared under PACA project to reflect the
                         new Project design and geographical coverage: Pest Management Plan (PMP), Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF) and an Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF). A new Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared prior Project appraisal and disclose in
                         country and at Infoshop.

                         A positive list of activities to be financed by the project will be part of the ESMF with potential
                         impacts and relevant mitigation measures. The proposed list will include (subject to revision by
                         appraisal) the following activities:
                         - rehabilitation of some section rural roads
                         - rehabilitation of small bridges related to the rural road rehabilitation section
                         - small market infrastructures ( small building
                         - solar panel and battery
                         - small Bio-digester
                         - small processing units
                         - threshing, milling machines
                         - integrated land and water management and adaptation to climate change infrastructures: (i)
                         management practices (agro-forestry, integrated pest management, re-vegetation and rangelands,
                         etc.), (ii) water management (watershed management, water harvesting, etc.), (iii) physical
                           structures (terraces, stone bunds, etc.), (iv) land use regime (conservation zones, protected area
                           management, etc.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (AFTCS)
                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (AFTN1)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This policy is triggered as the project activities
                           BP 4.01                                               and mainly those related to component1
                                                                                 (construction/rehabilitation of processing
                                                                                 facilities; rural roads construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation; and market infrastructures) may
                                                                                 have environmental and social impacts. The
                                                                                 scope, nature and scale of these potential
                                                                                 impacts are not known at this project
                                                                                 preparation stage. The exact nature and location
                                                                                 of activities could not be identified during the
                                                                                 project preparation. An ESMF will be prepared
                                                                                 and disclosed prior appraisal to guide the way
                                                                                 that potential negative environmental and social
                                                                                 impacts of future sub-projects (following the
                                                                                 positive list) will be identified and mitigated
                                                                                 during the project implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will avoid financing any activity
                                                                                 that should have any negative impact in the
                                                                                 natural habitats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes              The policy is triggered as the project expects to
                                                                                 finance agro-forestry and re afforestation
                                                                                 activities. The project activities will avoid any
                                                                                 impacts on the health and quality of forests or
                                                                                 the rights and welfare of people and their level
                                                                                 of dependence upon or interaction with forests.
                                                                                 The project will avoid financing any activity
                                                                                 that should have any negative impact in the
                                                                                 natural forests. The ESMF will include a
                                                                                 positive list of areas where the agro-forestry and
                                                                                 reforestation activities will be undertaken.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              Yes              The project activities will likely increase the use
                                                                                 of chemical pesticides which could have
                                                                                 negative environmental and health impacts. The
                                                                                 Project beneficiaries are likely to adopt
                                                                                 integrated pest management practices, which
                                                                                 will be included in the ESMF.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   Yes                           The proposed operation will involve
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         excavations and movement of earth for the
                                                                                                                                 building facilities. During the development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 the ESMF physical cultural resources will be
                                                                                                                                 taken into consideration and baselines defined.
                                                                                                                                 The ESMF will include clear procedures that
                                                                                                                                 will be required for identification, protection of
                                                                                                                                 cultural property from theft, and treatment of
                                                                                                                                 discovered artifacts, and will be included in
                                                                                                                                 standard bidding documents. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 also provide procedures for handling with
                                                                                                                                 “chance finds? during implementation project
                                                                                                                                 activities.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     Yes                           The Policy is triggered because there indigenous
                                                                                                                                 people present in the project areas and mainly in
                                                                                                                                 the Eastern and Southern regions of the country.
                                                                                                                                 They are also present in the center region.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    Yes                           Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the
                                 4.12                                                                                            event that sub-projects should involve
                                                                                                                                 involuntary resettlement as the Project will
                                                                                                                                 finance construction/rehabilitation of processing
                                                                                                                                 facilities; rural roads construction or
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation; and market infrastructures that
                                                                                                                                 may imply land acquisition in the covered areas.
                                                                                                                                 A RPF is being prepared that will guide the
                                                                                                                                 management of such situations should they arise
                                                                                                                                 during project implementation. RAPs will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 prepared as and when necessary during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project is not financing any dam, nor does it
                                                                                                                                 depend on dams for its activities.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project is not anticipating any irrigation
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            schemes that will involve international water
                                                                                                                                 bodies or riparian areas.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project is not being implemented in a
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Terms of reference for consultants in charge of safeguard-related studies have been completed in
                                      May 31, 2013 and consultants have been hired.

                                      Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Pest Management Plan (PMP),



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF) will
                             be delivered by end October 30th, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Manievel Sene

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 24-Oct-2013
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Severin L. Kodderitzsch (SM)                 Date: 13-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy
