INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 106
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                       Project ID:  P149340
Project Name: Nagaland Health Project (P 149340)
Task Team       Patrick M. Mullen
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Dec-2014                Estimated    16-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (55%), Water supply (10%), Sanitation (10%), Other Renewable Energy
(15%), General information and communications sector (10% )
Theme(s):       Decentralization (10%), Participation and civic engagement (10%), Indigenous
peoples (10%), Health system performance (50%), Nutriti on and food security
(20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00             Total Bank Financing:    48.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           12.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  48.00
Total                                                                        60.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To improve health services and increase their utilization by communities in targeted locations in
Nagaland.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
Component 1. Community action for health and nutrition. This component is designed to empower
communities to oversee, manage and improve HNP services and their utilization. A results-based
financing strategy will be used whereby funding will be provided to communities on the basis of
progress on defined indicators of improved health and nutrition-related services and practices. In
turn, communities will use the grants for activities and investments that are important to them and
which have potential impacts on health and nutrition. The component will have a major focus on
a        knowledge and skill building of Village Health Committees and other stakeholders at the community
level, including women's groups and Village Councils..
Component 2. Health system development. This component will support improvements in the
management and delivery of health services, including both targeted and system-wide investments.
The project will finance investments to improve conditions for staff and patients in targeted health
facilities, with the intention of contributing to improved staff motivation, better quality services and
greater demand for services. For example, reliable lighting and functional and clean toilets in health
facilities can help reduce barriers to access to health services, in particular for women and girls. The
project will invest in off-grid electrical power solutions that will be adapted to the needs of each
targeted health facility to assure a basic level of functioning (i.e. for lighting and high priority
equipment), acting as back-up when grid power is not available. The project will invest in improved
water supply in targeted health facilities which will entail repair and upgrading of piping and storage
facilities linked to existing water supplies, as well as installation of roof-water harvesting facilities.
The project will also support development of key components of the health system intended to
improve the management and effectiveness of government health services in Nagaland. This will
include investments in the areas of supply chain management, information and communications
technology, health human resources and monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project activities at the community and health facility levels will be targeted in a coordinated manner
0
to specific locations across Nagaland. This is one of the smallest Indian states with an area of just
16,579 square kilometers and a population of about two million. The state is predominantly
O
mountainous with a rich floristic diversity. Nagaland is a "Special Category" state, with Article 371
(A) of the Constitution of India provding Naga customary law and procedure a special status.
Scheduled Tribes form an overwhelming majority of the state's population (86.5% of the total and
93% of the rural population) spread over 11 districts and geographically difficult-to-reach areas with
high dependence on public health care services. Geographic inaccessibility, added to poor
infrastructure and weak institutional capacity, affect the quality of health care services in the state.
Nagaland has a unique land tenure system with 93% of the land being privately owned and
community organization having a say in land governance at the village level.
The project will support improvements in water supply and sanitation in targeted health facilities, as
well as improvements in medical waste management. Limited civil works are proposed under this
project, mostly upgrading of existing facilities, which will be carried out mostly within the premises
of the existing health facilities or on government land adjacent to such facilities, which are mostly
free from encumbrances in the rural areas. Any private land required shall be purchased and any
squatters affected shall be relocated. The terrain and rocky substrata may pose some challenges in
laying pipelines and building deep burial pits. About 20% of the state has wooded forests and the
proposed project activities are unlikely to pose any significant harm to these, especially when
Page 2 of 8


﻿renewable sources of energy would be used. The majority of the population of the state is from tribal
communities (16 major tribes) and consultation, as well as project support to community-level
interventions, will ensure community engagement. An Environment and Social Assessment (ESA)
has been completed to assess the social and environmental footprint of the project activities and an
O
U         Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to plan and implement the required
mitigation measures have been reviewed and cleared by Bank.
O
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Anupam Joshi (GENDR)
Mehul Jain (GENDR)
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment Yes          The project may have limited and localized adverse
OP/BP 4.01                            impacts due to construction activities and investments
made by community groups. This policy is triggered to
ensure that an environmental and social assessment
identifies any potential adverse impacts and propose
appropriate mitigation measures.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           The project does not pose any harm to critical and other
4.04                                  natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           Proposed investments will not result in any adverse
forest management practices.
Pest Management OP 4.09  No           The project will not support procurement of pesticides
and related equipment.
Physical Cultural Resources No        Civil works would be largely restricted to existing
OP/BP 4.11                           facilities. Only limited works may be taken up on
common lands. No deep excavation is envisaged.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP  Yes         As the majority of the population in Nagaland is from
4.10                                  tribal communities, the project will be implemented in
areas that are mainly inhabited by tribal communities.
OP 4.10 has been therefore triggered and a Tribal
Development Plan (TDP) has been prepared as a part of
the Social Management Framework, requiring the
project to take pro-active steps to ensure that its benefits
accrue to members of tribal groups in a transparent,
participative and culturally sensitive manner.
Involuntary Resettlement  Yes         The Project will involve limited civil works, mostly in
OP/BP 4.12                           the form of upgrading of existing facilities. Any private
lands required will be purchased and any affected
squatters will be relocated as per the Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) prepared as a part of the Social
Management Framework for the Project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No         No dams are involved.
Page 3 of 8


﻿Projects on International  No           The project does not involve works on any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas  No          The project is not in disputed areas.
U          OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment: There are no potential large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts associated with
the proposed project. The project does entail a range of minor civil works for infrastructure repair
and rehabilitation, but the risks and impacts associated with these activities will be localized and
short-term. Based on the findings of the environmental assessment, it is clear that the management
of biomedical waste is an issue in the state. The Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
acknowledges this issue. However, Nagaland has a unique geographic accessibility, coupled with
low population density. Owing to these reasons the quantum of biomedical waste generated at
various facility types, differs greatly from the national average, thus, the regular interventions in
collection and disposal may not work. Recognizing this, the client and task team have agreed to
conduct a study to identify specific interventions for treatment and disposal that meet the needs of
the state. In the interim, until the study is completed and its measures are adopted, the project will
provide training and equipment to mitigate for the associated risks and to improve the existing
collection, treatment and disposal systems.
In terms of the investments on improvement of water and sanitation services, the client
acknowledges that there is an issue with dependence on fresh water springs. The project will
bridge the resource availability gap by investing in water conservation and harvesting measures.
Social: The Social Assessment (SA) carried out for the Project underlines that Nagaland has a
unique socio-cultural tradition marked by majority presence of indigenous (tribal) people, a legal-
institutional system favorable to community participation, social heterogeneity marked by gender
and social inequalities, and varying socio-economic status of tribal groups. The SA indicated that
there are limited involuntary resettlement risks. The Social Assessment shows that the project
carries no risk of major adverse social impacts. The project will largely benefit the tribal
population and will be aligned with the World Bank's Operational Policy on Indigenous People
(OP 4.10). Likely benefits include better health care services across different parts of the state and
across different tiers of health care facilities. This will in turn help reduce the burden of illness and
the risk of impoverishment due to out-of-pocket payments for health services.
Limited civil works are proposed under this project, mostly upgrading of existing facilities, which
will be carried out mostly within the premises of the existing health facilities or on government
land adjacent to such facilities, which are mostly free from encumbrances in the rural areas. Any
private land required shall be purchased and any squatters affected shall be relocated. Therefore,
OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) has been triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Environment: There are no potential indirect and/or long term impacts anticipated due to the
project. In fact, the investments will help in improving access to health facilities for the
Page 4 of 8


﻿community and in the long run would improve the health outcomes of the state.
Social: The project will have no indirect or long term impacts that are negative. On the other hand,
strengthening communitized health service management systems ensuring participation of women
O
could contribute in improving gender parity, child nutrition and education, social capital, etc.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
O
impacts.
Environment: Interventions in infrastructure are limited to having localized adverse impacts within
the premises of the existing facilities. These investments are primarily for upgrading and
rehabilitating existing infrastructure and may not require an option analysis. However, the
investments into water supply and sanitation infrastructure and/or infrastructure for energy will be
made after assessing the available technology options available for the existing site conditions.
Social: The Project design has taken into consideration options that will generate minimum
adverse social impacts and has proposed basic improvements in the existing health facilities. All
the civil works will be carried out mostly within existing health facility premises or on adjacent
lands ensuring "zero or minimum resettlement impacts". Social screening will be carried out for
each sub-project considering least impact alternatives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
At the state PMU one nodal officer each will be designated to oversee the effective
implementation of the investments in bio-medical waste management and in water and sanitation.
These officers will facilitate dialogue between the PMU and the district officials. Additionally a
State level working group on bio-medical waste management will be instituted under the
chairmanship of an officer of at least Joint Director rank. The working group will be responsible
for the planning, capacity building, implementation, monitoring and assessment of all
interventions related to bio-medical waste management.
Social: Based on the Social Assessment carried out through stakeholder consultations, a Social
Management Framework has been prepared which includes: (i) a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) compliant with OP 4.12, (ii) a Tribal Development Plan (TDP) compliant with OP 4.10, and
(iii) Gender and Social Inclusion (GSI) Guidelines.
The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) provides for (i) purchase of private land required for
the project through transparent and community-based process on willing buyer-willing seller basis,
and (ii) extending rehabilitation assistance to the displaced squatters. The RPF provides for
preparation and execution of site specific resettlement action plans (RAP) by the Department of
Health and Family Welfare through the concerned Deputy Commissioners (Revenue Department).
The Tribal Development Plan (TDP) emphasizes (a) free, prior informed consultation with
beneficiaries, (b) sensitivity to socio-cultural traditions of the tribal communities of Nagaland, (c)
community-based implementation architecture, (d) special information, education and
communication strategies, and (d) special attention to the needs of the backward tribal
communities in specific regions.
Gender and Social Inclusion Guidelines in the SMF emphasis special attention to ensuring
participation of women and socially vulnerable people in the project.
The Social Management Framework will be implemented by the Department of Health and Family
Page 5 of 8


﻿Welfare. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be implemented by the DHFW through
the Revenue Department, which will carry out the land purchase where private land is required.
Social screening will be carried out by the Chief Medical Officers (CMO) at the District level and
RAPs will be prepared based on land survey carried out through the revenue department. The
O
CMO will prepare and implement RAPs to relocate the affected squatters as necessary. At the
health facility level, there shall be Village Health Committees (VHC) which will include
representatives from village councils, health facilities, women organization, and the church. The
PMU will have a social specialist responsible for planning and monitoring the SMF
implementation. At the village level, women community facilitators will be hired to ensure
community participation. The DHFW has limited exposure to management of social and
environment safeguards and will be supported with capacity building and sustained
implementation support by the Bank.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with various stakeholder groups (such as members of the community including
members of women's societies; members of village councils; officials from the municipal
corporation, Nagaland Pollution Control Board; officials from various types of healthfacilities)
was done during the assessments. Additionally a stakeholder consultation workshop was organized
with the various stakeholders to share the findings and get feedback on the draft environmental
and social assessment and management plan. Several consultation and dissemination workshops
organized by the Department of Health and Family Welfare. Different cadres of health staff and
officials, staff of other state government departments and institutions, and representatives of non-
governmental organizations (NGOs), faith-based groups, women's groups and Village Councils
and Village Health Committees were consulted. The final drafts of Environment Management
Framework and Social Management Framework were prepared with incorporating suggestions and
feedback received from various stakeholders. The EMF and SMF (which includes Resettlement
Policy Framework, Tribal Development Plan and Gender and Social Inclusion Guidelines) have
been disclosed on the Nagaland Health and Family Welfare Department's website on www.
nrhmnagaland.in.
The SMF includes a consultation framework providing for continuous consultations with and
participation of primary stakeholders through active involvement of Village Health Committees,
including capacity-building and results-based grants under Component 1.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                    22-Nov-2014
Comments: As suggested by Bank, The government of Nagaland has posted the EMF and SMF
documents on the department website: www.nrhmnagaland.in
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Nov-2014
Page 6 of 8


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                    22-Nov-2014
Comments: As suggested by Bank, The government of Nagaland has posted the EMF and SMF
documents on the department website: www.nrhmnagaland.in. This is part of SMF.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                    22-Nov-2014
Comments: As suggested by Bank, The government of Nagaland has posted the EMF and SMF
documents on the department website: www.nrhmnagaland.in
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes[X]  No[     NA
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Patrick M. Mullen
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Albertus Voetberg (PMGR)             Date: 26-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


