                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR10412
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2014, 05-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Russian Federation                           Project ID:           P089733
                            Project Name:       Judicial Reform Support Project (P089733)
                            Task Team           Amitabha Mukherjee
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           15-Jun-2006                                  Estimated   15-Feb-2007
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GGODR                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Law and justice (100%)
                            Theme:              Access to law and justice (40%), Judicial and other dispute resolution
                                                mechanisms (40%), Legal institutions for a market economy (20 %)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       172.41           Total Bank Financing:                                        50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             122.41
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 50.00
                              Total                                                                                                172.41
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project aims to strengthen judicial transparency and competence as a means to a more efficient
                           and accountable judiciary worthy of public trust and confiden                                ce.



                                                                                  Page 1 of 4
                         Appropriate results indicators will be developed during project
                         preparation                                  .
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project aims to strengthen judicial transparency and competence as a means to a more efficient
                         and accountable judiciary worthy of public trust and confiden                                ce.
                         Appropriate results indicators will be developed during project
                         preparation                                  .
                          3. Project Description
                         The JRSP includes the following components:

                          A. Institutionalizing Judicial Transparency and Accountability. This component finances: (i)
                         periodic surveys of users of judicial services on access, quality and satisfaction with judicial services
                         and enforcement of judicial decisions; (ii) the creation, implementation and dissemination of a legal
                         framework for transparency, publication, openness and accessibility of judicial decisions, processes
                         and practices, including obligatory publication of judicial decisions; (iii) the creation,
                         implementation and dissemination of common case management standards, guidelines and processes;
                         and (iv) the development and piloting of criteria, indicators and a policy to assess and periodically
                         report on the effectiveness of the judicial system, and related capacity-building.

                          B. Harnessing ICT for Judicial Transparency and Effectiveness. The objective is to harness the
                         enabling power of ICT to leapfrog transparency and effectiveness constraints. This component
                         mainly finances (i) ICT systems support for the consolidated Supreme Court, the arbitration court
                         system, the Constitutional Court, the Moscow City Courts and the Court of Intellectual Rights with a
                         view to facilitate an eventual move to a unified judicial ICT system and (ii) judicial electronic
                         archive systems.

                          C. Strengthening Human Capital. This component finances IT-related training for judges and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         judicial officials.

                          D. Project Governance, Change Management, Communications and M&E. This component
                         finances: (i) logistical and secretarial support for the Inter Agency Management Council, sub-project
                         management teams, and a designated Project Implementation Unit; (ii) change management and
                         communications and (iii) development and implementation of a project results framework and M&E
                         indicators.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         As of August 2014, the Project is being implemented in the consolidated Supreme Court, the
                         Constitutional Court and other selected courts within the territory of the Russian Federation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Svetlana G. Golubeva (GTCDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                          BP 4.01



                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                None. There are no civil works financed by the project. Nevertheless, an Environmental
                              Assessment (EA) was undertaken as part of project preparation and was included as Annex 10 to
                              the PAD. The EA prepared at that time was reviewed and approved by the Regional Safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                              team.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                                None.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                                Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                                Not applicable.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                                Not applicable.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 3 of 4
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not applicable
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Amitabha Mukherjee
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 03-Sep-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Adrian Fozzard (SM)                            Date: 05-Sep-2014




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
