                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7905
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Guinea-Bissau                      Project ID:    P148797
                            Project Name:      Emergency Water and Electricity Services Upgrading Project (P148797)
                            Task Team          Madio Fall
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          21-Mar-2014                        Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTU2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (60%), Thermal Power Generation (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (60%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      22.50           Total Bank Financing:                   22.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  17.20
                              IDA Grant                                                                                     5.30
                              Total                                                                                        22.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall objective of the proposed project is: (i) to restore and increase the access of the
                           population of Bissau to safe water and to improve the quality of water services; and (ii) to improve
                           the reliability of electricity supply to the population of Bissau.


                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project consists of three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Water Supply (US$11.85 million). This component aims at improving water services
                         and expanding access through the following sub-components:

                         1.1      Increasing the availability of water and improve the quality of water services throughout
                         Bissau by: (i) expanding the water production capacity through the drilling, pumping equipment, and
                         replacement of discharge lines of selected boreholes; (ii) securing the continuity of water production
                         through the installation of generators at selected boreholes; (iii) expanding water storage
                         infrastructure through the installation of one elevated storage tank, and the repair and the
                         rehabilitation of three elevated storage tanks.
                         This sub-component will: (i) improve the quantity of water available to existing customers and
                         provide the additional capacity required to increase access; (ii) improve the reliability of water
                         production; and (iii) improve water pressure in the distribution pipes and at service connections.
                         1.2      Increasing access to water services in peri-urban districts of Bissau by: (i) expanding the
                         water distribution networks; (ii) installing approximately 6,600 social household connections; (iii)
                         constructing approximately 80 standposts.
                         This sub-component will: (i) enable the water services to reach currently unserved peri-urban
                         neighborhoods; (ii) help connect mostly poor households at affordable conditions; and (iii) help serve
                         areas where population density cannot justify the construction of tertiary water distribution networks.
                         1.3      Technical assistance to EAGB to develop and implement social connections programs.
                         This sub-component will help to ensure that the social connections program is adequately targeted,
                         planned and executed.
                         1.4      Reducing technical and commercial losses throughout Bissau by: (i) replacing approximately
                         33 km of asbestos cement pipes; and (ii) installing approximately 3,000 meters on existing
                         connections.
                         This sub-component will help reduce: (i) technical losses; and (ii) commercial losses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.5      Provide design and supervision services for the above parts 1.1 to 1.3, as well as parts 2.2 to
                         2.4 below.

                         Component 2. Electricity Supply (US$8.09 million). This component aims at improving the
                         reliability of electricity services through the following sub-components:

                         2.1      Increasing the availability of electricity supply by financing the provision of: (i) heavy fuel
                         oil in order to help build a sustainable supply chain for the power plant; and (ii) distillate diesel oil to
                         secure the energy supply for water production.
                         This sub-component will help build a sustainable supply chain for HFO and secure the energy supply
                         to water production.
                         2.2      Improving the reliability and efficiency of overloaded medium and low voltage networks by:
                         (i) rehabilitating the output substation of the power station; (ii) replacing about 12 km of distribution
                         cables; (iii) supplying and installing about 16 Medium Voltage (MV)/Low Voltage (LV)
                         transformers; and (iv) creating about 10 MV/LV additional substations.
                         This sub-component will help improve voltage quality, reduce outages, and improve the reliability of
                         distribution, and also aims at reducing the technical losses in MV and LV voltage distribution
                         networks.
                         2.3      Securing the electricity supply of water production by: (i) connecting four boreholes to the
                         MV grid; and (ii) installing four MV/LV substations.


                                                                        Page 2 of 7
                         This sub-component will help improve voltage quality and reduce outages affecting pumping
                         equipment.
                         2.4     Improving customer management and revenue collection by: (i) installing approximately
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3,360 pre-payment meters on unmetered service connections; and (ii) replacing approximately 7,670
                         old-type analogue meters by pre-payment meters.
                         This sub-component will help complete the pre-payment meters program initiated under the EEWRP
                         to reduce commercial losses and secure and protect revenues.

                         Component 3. Support to Project Implementation and EAGB (US$2.56 million). This component
                         aims at enabling the PIU to deliver its responsibilities and improving EAGB’s accountability and
                         management through the following sub-components:

                         3.1     Supporting Project implementation, coordination, monitoring and evaluation by: (i)
                         financing of Operating Costs and consultants for the PIU; (ii) financing beneficiaries feedback
                         surveys; and (iii) carrying out audits of project financial statements.
                         3.2     Strengthening the PIU implementation capacity through the provision of: (i) one vehicle and
                         equipment for the PIU; and (ii) Training; and consulting services to carry out institutional and
                         technical studies.
                         3.3     Strengthening EAGB’s capacity through the provision of: (i) technical audits on EAGB’s
                         performances, (ii) audits of EAGB’s financial statements; and (iii) technical assistance for enhanced
                         operational management of EAGB staff.
                         3.4     Supporting a sound environmental and social management of the Project as well as capacity
                         building for the requirements under the Safeguard Documents.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Bissau city, in locations where no particular threatened
                         environmental resources were identified.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)
                         Fatou Fall (MNSSU)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                          BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes              The project may affect or involve physical
                          BP 4.11                                             cultural resources. The ESMF will include chance
                                                                              find procedures and measures to mitigate impacts
                                                                              on cultural assets.




                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is classified category B. The investments supported through the components 1 and 2 of
                              the project may induce minor to moderate but manageable adverse impacts, including the
                              generation of e-waste, temporary nuisances to people living in the vicinity of civil works sites, few
                              vegetation clearing, and potential destruction of covered cultural artifacts. The project design
                              integrated a hazardous waste disposal mechanism to deal with the aged cement fiber water
                              network and electrical appliance to be replaced. Therefore, three safeguard policies were triggered
                              to ensure the appropriate mitigation of the aforementioned issues: OP 4.01 on Environmental
                              Assessment; OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural resources; and OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.
                              The WBG Environment Health and Safety Guidelines (section 1.6) will also apply to ensure the
                              safe disposal of the e-waste and potential asbestos materials. As the project is processed through
                              OP 10.00 Para 11 (Emergency recovery operation), the preparation of the environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              social assessment documents (ESMF, RPF) has been deferred. However, an Environmental and
                              Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) were developed and approved prior the
                              appraisal; it will be used for the identification and mitigation of the environmental and social
                              impacts and risks at the early stage of the project implementation.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The aged water distribution network, to replace in Bairro Bra at downtown, was made of mixed
                              cement and asbestos; also some meters and electric transformers will be replaced thereby
                              generating hazardous which must be disposed safely though the quantity may not beimportant.
                              Failure to do so will induce health safety risk for surrounding populations. At the early stage of
                              project implementation, a specific disposal option will be finalized and executed in accordance of
                              standards and good practices.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              An Environmental and Social Assessment and Screening Framework (ESSAF) have been prepared
                              and approved. It will serve as the tool for the identification and mitigation of the environmental

                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           and social impacts and risks at the early stage of the project implementation. The Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), of a
                           similar project in implementation, will be updated and adapted to this project, consulted upon and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           re-disclosed in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop by three months following project
                           effectiveness. Further, to prevent expected risks from potential hazardous waste generated by the
                           decommissioning of the aged water network (mixed cement-asbestos material), and the
                           replacement electrical materials, a waste management plan/mechanism will approved prior the
                           implementation of the specific activities. A safeguard action plan providing the timeline of the due
                           diligence was agreed on, and reflected in the annex 3 of the Project Appraisal Document.

                           Notwithstanding, when necessary and as soon as activity sites are selected and designs of civil
                           work completed, Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) or Environmental and Social
                           Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior the
                           commencement of works. In the specific case where a RAP is needed it will be prepared, approved
                           and executed prior the commencement of works.

                           The assessment of borrower’s capacity reveals a need of support. The EIA enforcement entity
                           (Célula de Avaliação de Impacte Ambiental – CAIA) is very weak in supporting project
                           developers to comply with regulation and best practices. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                           will appoint a Safeguards Specialist to ensure proper implementation, documentation, follow up
                           and reporting of the mitigation measures (screening, execution of specific ESMPs, RAPs)
                           recommended through the instruments (ESSAF, ESMF, RPF). A provision of a total amount
                           about US$ 100,000 is earmarked in the project budget for the execution of the above-mentioned
                           measures. Further, the project bidding documents will include a clause for the disposal of the e-
                           waste and asbestos materials generated from the replacement of aged networks; the enterprise will
                           therefore propose a comprehensive mechanism for safe collection, storage, pretreatment/treatment
                           and disposal, under the oversight of PIU and the national entity competent in pollution control.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholders to be consulted in the preparation of the safeguard documents will include the
                           direct beneficiaries (local communities, local governments, etc.) and potentially affected people
                           during the determination of activities’ sites. The PIU will ensure that any safeguard document is
                           processed in compliance with the national EIA procedure and the environmental permit issued by
                           the Minister in charge of environment, prior commencement of any eligible works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Feb-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      03-Apr-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea-Bissau                                                         03-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The project is processed under OP 10.00 Paragraph 11 (Projects in Situations of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints), and the preparation of the
                                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement
                                         Policy Framework (RPF) is deferred to the implementation phase. An ESSAF has
                                         been prepared and was disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop on
                                         April 3, 2014; it will be used for the identification and mitigation of the
                                         environmental and social impacts and risks at the early stage of the project
                                         implementation. The ESMF and the RPF of the ongoing Emergency Electricity and
                                         Water Rehabilitation Project (similar project in the same area) will be updated,
                                         consulted upon and re-disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop no
                                         later than three months after the Effective Date.
                           Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           25-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        03-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea-Bissau                                                         03-Apr-2014
                           Comments: The project is processed under OP 10.00 Paragraph 11 (Projects in Situations of
                                         Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints), and the preparation of the
                                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement
                                         Policy Framework (RPF) is deferred to the implementation phase. An ESSAF has
                                         been prepared and was disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop on
                                         April 3, 2014; it will be used for the identification and mitigation of the
                                         environmental and social impacts and risks at the early stage of the project
                                         implementation. The ESMF and the RPF of the ongoing Emergency Electricity and
                                         Water Rehabilitation Project (similar project in the same area) will be updated,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         consulted upon and re-disclosed both in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop no
                                         later than three months after the Effective Date.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Due to the emergency nature of this project, and in compliance with Bank's Operational Policy for
                         Emergency operations, the completion and disclosure of the environmental and social instruments
                         were not required as a condition for project appraisal. An Environmental and Social Screening and
                         Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared by the project team. The ESSAF was disclosed
                         in country and at the Bank's Infoshop on April 3, 2014 . Safeguards instruments such as the site
                         specific ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs/ARAPs will be prepared at the subproject level depending on the
                         findings of the preliminary technical studies and the screening checklist of the ESSAF. All
                         documents will need to be disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop during implementation and
                         prior to the ground-breaking of any civil works.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Madio Fall
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 03-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ventura Bengoechea (SM)                           Date: 04-Apr-2014



                                                                        Page 7 of 7
