                                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5793
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:    P144336
                            Project Name:     NATIONAL WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT PROJECT (P144336)
                            Task Team         Pieter David Meerbach
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         08-Jan-2014                       Estimated   15-Apr-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    ECSAR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                              sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (80%), Rural policies and institutions (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         7.75           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Free-standing TFs for ECA CU8 Country Unit                                                7.75
                              Total                                                                                     7.75
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective of the NWRMP-1 is to improve water resources management
                           capability and irrigation service delivery for the benefit of water users.
                            3. Project Description
                           The NWRMP-1 has four components: (i) Strengthening national water management capacity; (ii)

                                                                      Page 1 of 4
                           Improving irrigation service delivery to Water Users Associations (WUAs); (iii) Improving irrigation
                           management by Water Users Associations; and (iv) Project management. Te project will be
                           implemented nationwide, covering all river basins, government-run off-farm irrigation systems, off-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           farm systems managed by Federations of WUAs and on-farm systems managed by WUAs, with
                           localized initiatives to test and develop specific processes and procedures. The project is financed by
                           the Swiss Agency for Development Cooperation through a Recipient-Executed Trust Fund
                           administered by the World Bank.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project includes technical assistance activities which will be implemented nationwide, covering
                           all river basins, government-run off-farm irrigation systems and WUAs, with localized initiatives to
                           test and develop specific processes and procedures.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Alexei Slenzak (ECSEN)
                           Aly Zulficar Rahim (ECSSO)

                            6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The NWRMP-1 is classified as Category “B”,
                            BP 4.01                                             triggering the WB safeguard policy for
                                                                                environmental assessment. The Environmental
                                                                                Management Framework (EMF) has been
                                                                                prepared, disclosed on September 13, 2013 and
                                                                                comments solicited from interested stakeholders.
                                                                                No comments from stakeholders have been
                                                                                received.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management

                                                                        Page 2 of 4
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The potential environmental impacts resulting from the technical assistance activities (e.g. for the
                           preparation of the National Water Strategy, institutional strengthening, basin planning, update of
                           the procedures for management, operation and maintenance and irrigation service delivery, etc.) in
                           the NWRMP-1 trigger Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). Potential impacts are anticipated to
                           be positive rather than negative in nature and any potential adverse impacts will be prevented or
                           reduced through appropriate screening procedures and technical assistance.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           N/A
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been prepared for the NWRMP-1. The
                           project would support implementation of the key principles of water resource management –
                           including environmental and social sustainability - enunciated in the Water Code of the Kyrgyz
                           Republic. The EMF is intended to ensure that the proposed project incorporates sound
                           environmental management principles and practices and thus complies with the environmental
                           policies and laws of the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic (GOKR), as well as with WB
                           environmental safeguard policies. The EMF aims to establish a process to implement key
                           principles of environmental sustainability in water resource management, identify and assess
                           potential environmental and social impacts and incorporate measures that ensure compliance with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           both GOKR and IDA safeguards and maximize environmental benefits. Specifically, under the
                           NWRMP-1 financed preliminary basin plans, protection of aquatic ecosystems will be an
                           objective.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders of this project are the Government of Kyrgyz Republic, the Department of Water
                           Resources and Land Improvement (future State Water Administration), the State Agency for
                           Environmental Protection and Forestry, Water Users Associations and other water users in the
                           river basins. The EMF was disclosed on September 13, 2013 and no comments from stakeholders
                           have been received.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         30-Jul-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      13-Sep-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 3 of 4
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Kyrgyz Republic                                                  13-Sep-2013
                              Comments: No comments from stakeholders were received.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Pieter David Meerbach
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                            Date: 20-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Suzy H. Yoon-Yildiz (SM)                       Date: 28-Jan-2014




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
