                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA2724
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Brazil                             Project ID:    P128968
                            Project Name:      BR Marine Protected Areas Project (P128968)
                            Task Team          Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                        Estimated   19-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                               Biodiversity
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Biodiversity (60%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                              (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     117.86           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   99.66
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                          18.20
                              Total                                                                                     117.86
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The Project's Global Environmental Objective (GEO) is the same as the Project's Development
                           Objective (PDO), namely, (a) to support the expansion of globally significant, representative and


                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         effective Marine and Coastal Protected Area System in Brazil, and (b) to identify mechanisms for its
                         financial sustainability.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The marine and coastal area in Brazil covers 3.5 million km2, an area equivalent to 41 percent of the
                         Brazilian terrestrial territory (8.5 million km2) and comparable in size to the Brazilian Amazon (4.1
                         million km2). Despite its vastness, only 1.57% of this area is currently officially protected.

                         Brazil has one of the most extensive coastlines in the world, measuring over 9,000 km including bays
                         and promontories. Along this coastline there is an immense variety of environments and wildlife. The
                         Brazilian marine and coastal zones shelter the greatest continuous stretch of mangrove ecosystems,
                         which are important as nursery sites and biological filters and include the only coral reefs in the
                         South Atlantic, ecosystems with high biodiversity and ecological relevance. They also shelter many
                         endemic species and distinct ecosystems, such as dune fields, lagoon complexes, islands, restingas
                         (sandy-coastal plain vegetation), flood plains, estuaries, etc. Also, five out of seven marine turtle
                         species found around the world nest along the Brazilian coast and many migratory birds and
                         mammals come to this region for rest stops, feeding and reproduction. Furthermore, 15 seabird
                         species use Brazilian oceanic islands as nesting sites. Unfortunately, these environments have been
                         subjected to intense human pressure.

                         In Brazil, 43 million inhabitants live on the coastal zone, which concentrates 18% of the national
                         population and 16 of the 28 larger metropolitan regions (MMA, 2008). Economic activities in coastal
                         areas account for roughly 70% of the Brazilian GDP (MMA, 2007). Coastal zones can be considered
                         one of the most environmentally threatened regions in the country and are the main geographic area
                         for economic growth for many industries, including the oil and gas industry which engages in
                         significant off-shore drilling. Additionally, the waters off the Brazilian coast have traditionally been
                         rich with fisheries, but significant fish populations have been overexploited and in some cases have
                         become extinct. The creation of protected areas is considered an important measure to protect and
                         maintain the productivity of fish stocks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Marine and coastal protected areas (MCPAs) include protected areas which are adjacent to the ocean,
                         but which may or may not include intertidal or subtidal areas. The definition of MCPAs for this
                         project includes: protected areas, governed by the SNUC act; permanent preservation areas, set forth
                         in the Forestry Code; no-take zones, established under the National Strategic Plan for Protected
                         Areas (PNAP, according to Decree 5758/2006), where fishing is completely prohibited; and other
                         fishing management instruments such as limited access rights and establishment of refugia to protect
                         breeding or nursery areas which provide for the sustainable use of coastal and marine areas in a
                         permanent or seasonal manner.

                         Consistent with the Ecosystem-Based Management principles, sites will be selected where
                         compatibility and integration with other coastal activities and their management is feasible or where
                         supporting measures such as fish access limits can be effectively implemented. Potential to offset
                         climate change and generate revenues through the carbon market (Blue Carbon), establishment of
                         community or individual access privileges (such as fish quotas) within MCPA and surrounding areas,
                         or payment for ecosystem services mechanisms could also be considered. This project will help
                         mainstream biodiversity concerns in coastal zone planning, in particular for the fishing, tourism and
                         petro-chemical industries. The partnership with Petrobras is especially encouraging in this regard.

                         The specific areas to be created under this project will be all 100% marine, and more precisely


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         defined during project preparation. Consolidation activities will target both new marine areas and
                         existing coastal and marine protected areas. Initial exercises have been carried out by the National
                         Wetlands Committee (CNZU) to define additional criteria and refine the priority classification of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coastal and marine areas listed among the Priority Areas for the Conservation and Sustainable Use of
                         Brazilian Biodiversity. Further studies and analysis will be carried out, and the additional specialized
                         and categorized information gathered will contribute to the planning and designing of the network.

                         The ecological criteria for the MCPA network creation proposed for this project will include the
                         entire range of biodiversity present within the bio-geographical region and also consider the
                         principles of representativeness, inter-connectivity, replicability, feasibility, and precaution. In
                         addition, specific studies on the existence of conflicts, level of available information about
                         biodiversity, and opportunities for each area may be necessary, as well as the identification of
                         relevant actors, and the status of the existing legal instruments affecting the area (such as closed
                         fishing seasons for species, determination of minimum sizes for capture, etc.).

                         This project will be funded by a $US 18.2 million GEF grant and $US 98.4 million in co-financing.
                         The partnership among the GEF, the Government of Brazil, Petrobras and potentially other private
                         sector players is an innovative and exciting approach to coastal zone management and mainstreaming
                         of biodiversity in Brazil. The proposed project design includes four components:

                         Component 1 - Creation and Implementation of Marine and Coastal Protected Areas: Protected areas
                         creation activities under this component will focus mainly on marine areas, as the marine zone has
                         the greatest deficit of protection among all Brazilian biomes. This component will also support the
                         implementation of different categories of new and existing MCPAs in the Brazilian marine and
                         coastal zones, establishing and strengthening an effective MCPA system. These areas will be divided
                         between strict protection and sustainable use MCPAs. The selection of new protected areas to be
                         created will be based on the document “Priority Areas for the Conservation, Sustainable Use and
                         Benefit Sharing of Brazilian Biodiversity” (SBF/MMA, official list revised in 2007), which lists
                         priority areas in all Brazilian biomes, including the coastal and marine zones. An enormous amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of analytical work at the regional and biome-level is available in Brazil, undertaken over the past 15
                         years by research and government agencies, universities and NGOs. This project will use this
                         regional and macro-level information - not only biodiversity data but socio-economic information as
                         well - and refine it at the local level to define PA creation and implementation actions to be
                         supported by the project, which could include among others the following: decree for protected area
                         creation, demarcation and installation of physical signs indicating the area to be protected, the
                         provision of basic equipment for enforcement, and staffing in protected areas.

                         The procedures for establishing protected areas are determined by the National System of Protected
                         Areas (SNUC- federal law No. 9.985, of June 18, 2000, and Decree No. 4.340, of August 22, 2002).
                         The SNUC Law provides a sound legal basis for the establishment and consolidation of protected
                         areas. This project will contribute to improve institutional capacity for implementing this legislation
                         for coastal and marine areas. Public consultations will be carried out for each new protected area to
                         be created, with studies on the environment and socioeconomic indicators informing the final
                         decisions about the location of new protected areas. Additionally, the implementing agencies will
                         undertake public consultations and circulation of the draft decrees for protected area creation. The
                         partnership with Petrobras is especially important here in that the recommendations made regarding
                         which areas are particularly vulnerable or have high biodiversity value will help inform Petrobras’
                         investment decisions.



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         Component 2 - Design of financial mechanisms to support the MCPAs system: The main activities
                         under this component will be an assessment of the financing needs of coastal and marine protected
                         areas and the identification of potential funding sources. The successful experience of the GEF-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supported Amazon Region Protected Areas project will be considered, but alternatives other than an
                         endowment fund will also be explored to complement existing governmental mechanisms aiming at
                         ensuring the necessary financial sustainability of the protected areas system. As part of this work,
                         studies on potential returns of income generating activities will be carried out and financial
                         sustainability plans will be generated, taking into account different costs for different types of
                         protected areas. GEF resources will specifically finance studies for potential revenue generating
                         mechanisms for protected areas focusing especially on climate change related mechanisms (Blue
                         Carbon) for payment for environmental services, the initial testing of the most promising options
                         identified, and support to the Brazilian Government in the development of fundraising strategies.

                         Component 3 - Monitoring and Evaluation - Project monitoring and evaluation will be carried out in
                         three broad areas: (i) financial monitoring, (ii) monitoring of implementation and management of the
                         protected areas, and (iii) environmental/biodiversity monitoring. Financial monitoring will be carried
                         out by FUNBIO, who is responsible for approving and tracking the distribution of funds. The
                         monitoring of project progress in the protected areas will also be carried out by FUNBIO in close
                         coordination with the Project Coordination Unit (UCP) and the Ministry of Environment. The UCP
                         will be responsible for overall project management, and at the strategic level, for evaluating and
                         updating, as needed, project objectives and targets in the project results matrix; and at the
                         management level, to further develop and implement the GEF Management Effectiveness Tracking
                         Tool for project management, and to monitor performance against project goals, supervising
                         FUNBIO. MMA and ICMBio will be responsible for the institutional and legal actions for PA
                         creation, and for the implementation of biodiversity and environmental monitoring. Partnerships with
                         research institutions will be critical for this latter activity, given the lack of capacity within these
                         institutions.

                         Component 4 - Project Coordination and Management: Coordination among and between the two
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investment components and among the various actors involved in all aspects of project
                         implementation will require an efficient and well-trained coordination unit. Funds under this
                         component will be used for the improved operation of the Project Coordination Unit (UCP) within
                         the Ministry of Environment (MMA) and the Project Implementation Unit at FUNBIO. Also
                         included in this component is the strengthening and coordination of the project’s Technical
                         Commission, which will be responsible for defining action strategies and providing technical
                         guidance, identifying and prioritizing relevant actors, and approving operative plans. It will be
                         composed of representatives from governmental, academic and non-governmental sectors.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The area for the proposed project will encompass the entire Brazilian Coastal and Marine Area,
                         which comprises the most deficient biome in terms of protected areas. Within the target area, the
                         marine zone is even less protected that the coastal zone. Therefore, project actions related to the
                         creation of new protected areas will be directed towards the marine zone, while both new and
                         existing marine and coastal protected areas will be targeted by PA implementation actions and for the
                         establishment and management of the Marine and Coastal Protected Area System.

                         Potential project impacts related to the implementation and consolidation of new and existing
                         protected areas will be minimal and localized, such as demarcation and installation of physical signs


                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         indicating the area to be protected, and improvements to visiting/vigilance trails and field bases.
                         Positive impacts should result from the preparation or updating and implementation of protected area
                         management plans, particularly for the existing sustainable use protected areas, ensuring adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         use and conservation of marine, mangrove and possibly non-timber forest resources.

                         The project intends to positively affect the following types of ecosystem, through enhanced
                         protection: marine environments, small coastal and oceanic islands, coral reefs, beaches, estuaries,
                         restingas, mangrove systems, coastal lagoons, and possibly coastal Atlantic Forest.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GURDR)
                         Agnes Velloso (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             Given the essentially environmental conservation
                         BP 4.01                                              characteristic of the project, a category B is
                                                                              proposed. The project is expected to have a
                                                                              significantly positive environmental outcome as it
                                                                              will improve the conservation and management of
                                                                              ecologically important areas through the creation
                                                                              and implementation of marine and coastal
                                                                              protected areas, and the establishment of the
                                                                              Marine and Coastal Protected Areas (MCPA)
                                                                              System, to be comprised of new and existing PAs.
                                                                              The project may support small-scale investments
                                                                              in the protected areas to be created or existing
                                                                              PAs that will integrate the MCPA system, such as
                                                                              demarcation, possibly interpretative centers,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              trails, preparation of management plans, etc.
                                                                              Possible negative impacts from these small-scale
                                                                              investments are expected to be small, localized
                                                                              and reversible. As such, project preparation
                                                                              included the preparation of an Environmental and
                                                                              Social Management Framework by the Grant
                                                                              Recipient, which assesses potential impacts and
                                                                              proposes a framework for preventing or
                                                                              mitigating them. This framework will also be
                                                                              integrated into the operating rules of the financing
                                                                              mechanisms envisaged as part of component 2.
                                                                              Furthermore, principles of OP4.01 regarding
                                                                              proper consultation will be applied as part of
                                                                              project financed studies for the creation of new
                                                                              protected areas envisaged as part of component 1.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes             This policy is triggered as the project is expected
                                                                              to have positive impacts on the quality of critical
                                                                              natural habitats. The Environmental and Social
                                                                              Management Framework ensures the policy is



                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                                                                         addressed appropriately by identifying the criteria
                                                                         for prioritizing the most biologically valuable
                                                                         and/or threatened areas to be protected and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         through the application of a precautionary
                                                                         approach to natural resource management in
                                                                         sustainable use protected areas, among other
                                                                         measures and guidance.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           This safeguard policy is triggered as project
                                                                         actions for strengthening protected areas may
                                                                         include existing coastal protected areas that can
                                                                         contain mangroves, restinga or portions of
                                                                         Atlantic Forest and the sustainable use of non-
                                                                         timber forest resources can be allowed in
                                                                         sustainable use protected areas. All impacts on
                                                                         forest systems are expected to be positive. The
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework ensures the policy is addressed
                                                                         appropriately through the application of a
                                                                         precautionary approach to the management of
                                                                         non-timber resources in forested areas in
                                                                         sustainable use protected areas, and by complying
                                                                         with strict protection guidance when
                                                                         recommended by the existing studies on Priority
                                                                         Areas for Conservation. The project will not
                                                                         involve the conversion or degradation of forested
                                                                         areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            As the project will not involve agricultural
                                                                         activities, seedlings production, reforestation, or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         any other activity that may involve the
                                                                         management of pests that affect plant or public
                                                                         health, OP 4.09 is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The marine areas to be supported under the
                         BP 4.11                                         project are as yet unknown. However, some of the
                                                                         existing protected areas include historical sites
                                                                         and, although project actions as planned should
                                                                         not interfere with those sites, eventual additional
                                                                         historical and/or archeological findings may occur
                                                                         during project implementation. As such, the
                                                                         Environmental and Social Management
                                                                         Framework includes relevant provisions to
                                                                         mitigate impacts and procedures for "chance
                                                                         findings" from specific investments under
                                                                         Component 1 (if applicable). Such provisions
                                                                         include compliance with the guidelines defined
                                                                         by the National Institute for Historical and
                                                                         Cultural Heritage (IPHAN) regarding historical
                                                                         sites and/or archaeological findings.


                                                                 Page 6 of 10
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             During Project preparation it was determined that
                                                                              Indigenous Peoples with the four characteristics
                                                                              called for in OP 4.10 are present within one of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              Protected Areas to be supported by the Project. A
                                                                              Social Assessment and Indigenous Peoples Plan
                                                                              (IPP) was prepared, consulted and disclosed, per
                                                                              the requirements of OP 4.10 prior to appraisal.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             As the project will support only the creation of
                            4.12                                              marine protected areas, it will not promote
                                                                              involuntary physical resettlement. Additionally,
                                                                              the project will abide to a non-physical
                                                                              displacement rule and its activities will be
                                                                              previously assessed to screen out the
                                                                              implementation of any intervention/area which
                                                                              might require physical displacement.
                                                                              The creation and consolidation of protected areas
                                                                              could potentially lead to restrictions in access
                                                                              leading to impacts on peoples’ livelihoods. A
                                                                              Process Framework was prepared, consulted and
                                                                              disclosed prior to appraisal, and ensures that
                                                                              affected people and communities will have an
                                                                              opportunity to participate in the definition and
                                                                              design of alternative livelihood activities or other
                                                                              compensation/mitigation measures.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              No dams exist in the project area and none of the
                                                                              project activities will involve dam works or
                                                                              operation. Therefore, OP 4.37 is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International         No              No project activities will occur in international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              waters, or in areas which border Uruguay or the
                                                                              French Guiana. Therefore, OP 7.50 is not
                                                                              triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               There are no disputed areas within the project
                            7.60                                              target area (Brazilian coastal zone and marine
                                                                              zone under Brazilian jurisdiction). Therefore, OP
                                                                              7.60 is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project as planned should cause no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impact. The
                              project was not restructured to-date.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              All potential and long term impacts from project activities as planned should be positive,
                              improving and ensuring the long term conservation of nationally and globally important

                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           ecosystems and biodiversity in coastal and marine zones.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project is the best selected alternative to improve the conservation of coastal and marine
                           biodiversity in Brazilian coastal and marine areas and should not result in adverse impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The main measures identified in the project’s Environmental and Social Management Framework
                           to prevent or mitigate potential negative impacts from project actions do not differ from the usual
                           procedures applied by the implementing agencies MMA and ICMBio for the creation and
                           consolidation of protected areas. A few additional measures to deal with economic displacement,
                           if it becomes necessary, were preventively identified in the project’s Process Framework. These
                           two agencies have demonstrated capacity to comply with Bank safeguards instruments, as verified
                           under the similar Amazon Region Protected Areas Program, currently in its second phase.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In addition to the face-to-face consultation of safeguard documents held at the protected area
                           where indigenous peoples are present and described in the project’s IPP Funbio published a Public
                           Consulting call in its website, inviting public society to download and comment on the socio-
                           environmental safeguards document from February 15 to March 15, 2013. The comments/
                           suggestions were made through an on-line form. Interested people could identify themselves or
                           remain anonymous to ensure no-restraints to participation.
                           Following publication in their website, Funbio used social network tools to spread the word that
                           the public consultation was occurring. For this, Funbio addressed its 5,297 followers in twitter and
                           1,359 in Facebook. The public consultation invitation was posted in these networks 4 times during
                           the period the consultation was open. In previous experiences, Funbio received a substantial
                           amount of attention using these tools.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The compiled results of this on-line consultation indicated that 18 different people made 23
                           suggestions, the most important ones relating to how the non-commercial fisherman would get a
                           living with protected areas being created. This vision is understandable but the project approach is
                           to create multiple categories of protected areas, including some where artisanal fishery is not
                           prohibited but restraints are put in place for commercial mass fisheries.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                             15-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Mar-2013


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           15-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Mar-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Brazil                                                           15-Feb-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Adriana Goncalves Moreira
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:         Name: Emilia Battaglini (SM)                        Date: 04-Aug-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
