                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC6578

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Guinea                           Project ID:      P146474
                            Project Name:       Stepping Up Skills Project (P146474)
                            Task Team           Nathalie Lahire
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           26-Jun-2014                      Estimated        30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEDDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Tertiary education (50%), Vocational training (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Education for the knowledge
                                                economy (80%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     20.00                      Total Bank Financing:          20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                      20.00
                              Total                                                                          20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective(s) (PDO) is to improve the employability of education
                           graduates and strengthen governance systems.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Guinean tertiary education and TVET systems are dominated by programs that do not meet the
                           needs of the labor market. Inappropriate orientation of training is one of the causes of programs’ lack
                         of relevance to business requirements. The system lacks scientific technical and professional training
                         opportunities. Tertiary education graduates rarely develop entrepreneurial skills, as most of them
                         aspire to enter the public service. Challenges include overstaffing, poor linkages between universities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and businesses, an overabundance of theoretical courses, dilapidated laboratories and lack of
                         practical activities. These factors result in a very high unemployment rate among young graduates,
                         despite many years of study.

                         Component 1: Set up of a Competitive Innovation Fund to support short term professional programs
                         linked to growth sectors (US$10 million)

                         The project will establish a competitive Innovation Fund contributing to reforms by incentivizing and
                         supporting innovative approaches to improve skills, employability, and self-employment. The fund
                         will create opportunities to design and test new training program models with a view to improving
                         quality and relevance. Public tertiary education institutions may submit proposals for short-term
                         professional programs developing key skills meeting labor market needs, with an emphasis on
                         practical training. The Fund will be established between the central Ministry and institutions through
                         performance agreements with defined measurable outcome indicators. Initially, the fund will be set
                         up for tertiary education institutions, and in year 3, TVET institutions will be invited to participate in
                         the Fund, using the lessons learnt for tertiary intuitions and ensuring adequacy with the proposed
                         tertiary programs linked to economic sectors.

                         Each institution will be encouraged to identify key areas in which to develop new professional
                         training programs. The relevant department will prepare a project proposal to be endorsed by the
                         institution’s decision-makers before being submitted to the Ministry for consideration. Selected
                         project proposals will be reviewed closely and adjusted jointly by the submitting institution and
                         Ministry experts if necessary, before the two parties sign a three-year contract. To be eligible for a
                         grant from the competitive fund, institutions must propose short-term (2-3 years) professional
                         programs with a strong focus on practical training and learning modules developed in close
                         collaboration with the private sector. At least 40 percent of training hours must be delivered by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         professionals, and the program must require and facilitate an internship for credit. Cooperation
                         between training and businesses will thus be ensured and responding to their immediate skills needs.

                         The Fund will follow best-practice principles critical for long-term success and sustainability. These
                         include (a) security of income: ensure sustainable and adequate volume of fund’s income (b)
                         autonomy and control: secure autonomy for fund’s management and its control over budget
                         allocations (c) stakeholder ownership: foster ownership through substantial representation of major
                         stakeholders of labor market (d) activities will be aligned to national training needs only, and (e)
                         decision-making transparency to ensure allocation is open, consistent, and competitive.

                         For sustainability and vibrancy, the Fund will use a public private partnership (PPP) approach that
                         leverages external and non-donor financing to create a well-diversified capital structure and augment
                         limited IDA/donor funds. The Fund aims to exploit three methods of non-donor external and internal
                         funding: (a) public resources: government's budgetary as well as non-budgetary means to augment
                         the fund (i.e public investment program ; (b) private resources, through grants or equity based
                         investments made by corporations, subsidiaries, or parent holding companies that have active or
                         potential business interests in Guinea. For instance, several mining corporations active in Guinea
                         have stated interest in contributing to education and skills growth (c) revenue generation is another
                         potential source of income for the fund. Revenue generation activities can include but not be limited
                         to splitting of earnings generated at the level of financial institutions (for e.g. through fees to recover
                         unit costs which could be an option down the road).

                         The Fund’s governance will be through a Steering Committee, composed of 10 members, 5 of whom
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be professionals (areas to be determined) will be responsible for reviewing and selecting
                         proposals to finance. The IDA project, technical and financial partners, and private sector partners
                         will support the fund in Year 1. Beginning in Year 2, the Government will contribute 25 percent
                         from public budget or non-budgetary resources (such as levies), and gradually increase its share to
                         reach 100 percent in Year 4. The Fund will be set up as an autonomous not-for-profit entity under the
                         Ministry of Higher Education. A professional Fund Manager will manage the fund, reporting directly
                         to the Steering Committee. The Fund Manager will be have a core staff team (procurement experts,
                         financial analysts) supporting daily functions.

                         The Fund will also support self-employment/business start-up activities with IFC as the leading
                         implementation partner. The project is exploring the idea of conducting an access to finance
                         diagnostic for self-entrepreneurs, to determine need and feasibility to set up a small seed grant
                         facility for educational institutions who wish to encourage graduates to set up their own business.

                         The project would finance:
                         •       TA for the set-up of the competitive innovation fund and the accompanying procedures
                         manual.
                         •       Training for teachers and technical personnel.
                         •       Re-engineering, equipment, and light rehabilitation.


                         Component 2: Education-to-employment intervention (US$4.6 million)

                         The E2E program’s central approach is based on development of skills for job roles identified by
                         industry, based on standardized occupational standards that ensure minimum employability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Objectives and corresponding indicators are:

                         Objectives of e2e         - Indicator
                         Building a critical mass of skills - Number of candidates trained
                         Make skills training relevant to industry - Training content linked to job roles and occupational
                         standards
                         Increase employability - Assessment shows increase in Employability Index
                         Feedback into education system reform - Curriculum incorporates e2e training modules
                         Reduce cost of talent recruitment and training - Firms indicate benefits from e2e labor matching
                         Increase in placements with industry - Number of jobs and internships

                         The education-to-employment intervention (E2E) would provide training and certification to
                         unemployed graduates to increase their employability and quickly connect them to jobs. The E2E
                         intervention, to be piloted in select high-potential sectors (mining, tourism, telecommunications),
                         would bridge the education-employment gap using industry-based standards for skills training. E2E
                         program will scan best practices observed in similar programs in other countries, including Egypt,
                         India, Nigeria, USA, and Australia, and incorporate elements suitable for Guinea’s context.
                         Moreover, the employers survey suggests that significant synergies exist between skills demanded in
                         mining, and in related sectors (construction, infrastructure). E2E will build on these synergies and
                         develop core and foundational skills that are fungible across industries and sectors.
                         Core elements of the E2E program would include:
                         1.      development of industry-led competency/occupational standards in two key sectors;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.      an industry-based assessment, training, and certification instrument;
                         3.      partnership with leading private sector companies in a particular sector to create jointly
                         endorsed, industry wide certification frameworks
                         4.      a network of accredited training providers with a corps of certified trainers recruited from
                         industry; and
                         5.      an integrated job information management portal.

                         The intervention would involve:
                         a.       Requirement gathering from industry sectors building on Employers Survey, identification of
                         prevalent training programs/mechanisms in firms in Guinea, selection of industry champions for
                         anchoring E2E, and development of a ‘live’ database of companies willing to commit as future
                         potential employers,
                         b.       Selection of a competency framework for (a) foundational skills certification (cognitive,
                         computer, communications, entrepreneurship training (Business Edge) in partnership with IFC to
                         promote self - employment) and (b) identification of domains for advanced skills certification (e.g. in
                         mining, tourism, telecom, other trades),
                         c.       Development of industry-endorsed assessment and certification tool, linked to the
                         competency framework. Certification will follow a flexible vocational model. Certification will
                         signal a minimum expected level of skills gained. Certification will indicate completion of training
                         and attainment of minimum standards (pass/fail). Certification will have the following
                         characteristics: (a) it will be consistent nationwide, (b) it will be accepted and recognized by
                         industry, (c) the underlying standards will be subject to periodic review (alternate years) to reflect
                         changing demand structure for skills.
                         d.       Devel opment of m odular curriculum and content derived from private sector’s existing
                         training initiatives.
                         e.       Set up of a robust Labor Market Information System. The LMIS (upgrade version of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         l’AGUIPE) will contain a live, continuously updated database of trained candidates and potential
                         employers (SMEs, large firms). Each candidate will have an individual profile page. Candidates will
                         be matched with employers based on their skills profile. The LMIS will contain information on
                         certifications that the candidate has obtained.


                         This component will be governed by a committee and sectoral councils including private sector
                         partners, professional associations, sector-specific labor unions, and line ministries. The committee
                         will be supported by an executive secretariat comprising a coordinator and a communications
                         specialist. This program may be integrated as a separate window of the competitive fund in
                         component 1.

                         Only accredited training providers would be considered for funding. Criteria for accreditation would
                         include capacity to provide training delivered by professionals meeting occupational standards in an
                         environment facilitating practical training. Funding to institutions would be provided on a contract
                         agreement with payments made based on enrollment.

                         The project would thus finance technical assistance for
                         a.       the development of professional standards in the priority sectors covered, the development of
                         training modules and assessment/certification tools. and
                         b.     the establishment of an information system/database to provide the AGUIPE (agency for the
                         promotion of employment) and employers have to give priority to these certified graduates, including
                            1. employers who participated in the development of occupational standards,
Public Disclosure Copy




                            2. certified graduates.

                         The project would also finance the costs associated with the training as per the contract agreements.
                         The E2E component is a targeted, fixed-term intervention specifically for unemployed graduates.
                         Once the target number of trainees is reached in the selected sectors and xx graduates find
                         employment, the training and certification model will be broadly incorporated into professional
                         training curriculum throughout the country.

                         Using a randomized control approach, an impact evaluation will be introduced to assess the
                         effectiveness of the training program improving employment. Following an expression of interest,
                         the sample of eligible eligibility criteria (i.e. years since graduated < 5 years, applied within the
                         timeframe trainees will be drawn randomly from a pool of applicants, possibly stratified by sector,
                         and assigned by cohort. Given the policy relevance of recruitment strategy and its interaction effect
                         with skills training, two types of recruitment approaches will be evaluated in conjunction with the
                         training program. Therefore, four groups will be defined:

                         1.       Control: trainees not receiving any treatment and assigned to cohort 3 or thereafter.
                         2.       Training only
                         3.       Training and recruitment approach through AGUIPE
                         4.       Training and recruitment approach 2 (tailored information system database with additional
                         efforts to match with certified employers)

                         To inform the evaluation, extensive data will be collected including pre and post-test to assess
                         knowledge gained through training, employment outcomes, salaries, and duration in employment.

                         Component 3: System Strengthening and Support for Reforms (US$2 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Improving management and governance is a critical prerequisite to achieve the main goals of
                         developing high-quality and relevant programs, establishing closer links with enterprises, and
                         strengthening the efficiency of the sector. To this end, the project would aim to improve the
                         management of the tertiary education system in alignment with the current reforms for increased
                         autonomy of tertiary education institutions.

                         The TVET ministry (MEETFP) benefits from substantial financial support from development
                         partners but does not yet have a strategic plan laying out its vision and objectives. To this end, the
                         proposed project would provide technical support to develop a strategy in alignment with tertiary
                         vocational training.

                         The TVET student body has increased, though less than that of higher education, due to insufficient
                         training availability. The surplus of learners in higher education is partly attributable to the shortage
                         in this branch. The Government intends to develop and diversify supply by creating ERAM and other
                         institutions, but the hiring freeze during the past x years, aging teaching staff, and slowdown of
                         trainer-of-trainer schools has impeded its efforts. Without the necessary human resources, a training
                         development and diversification strategy has little promise. Although the new database developed
                         with IDA additional financing offers a starting point for a better analysis of available human
                         resources, it is not enough. A training development and diversification strategy must be accompanied
                         by capacity-building in the following areas:

                         i)       What training programs, in which (high-growth) sectors, with what expected staffing level/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participation level?
                         ii)      What human resources are needed to develop these programs, and under what conditions?
                         iii)     What are recruitment and training needs in the short and medium terms? Can recruitment and
                         training be implemented by existing structures or do they require capacity-building?

                         The project could support the Government in refining its sub-sector policy through:
                         i)       technical support to perform a diagnostic to establish a realistic strategy and operationalize it
                         in a recruitment plan (number of teaching staff, proportion, discipline), and training plan that is
                         realistic in the short and medium term;
                         ii)      logistical and technical capacity-building in sector planning and management
                         iii)     technical support to develop a recruitment and training plan for ETFP teaching staff
                         following the decisions made above (i and ii)

                         The MESRS has made important strides in laying out its strategy with the support of the President
                         for the advanced of the agenda on providing autonomy to institutions in accordance with
                         international practices. Decrees 62 and 63/PRG/SGG, approved by the President on April 3, 2013,
                         stipulating the governance of public tertiary education and scientific research and private institutions,
                         have clearly endorsed the autonomous status of training institutions in the administrative, financial,
                         educational, and scientific realms, allowing institutions to define their own vision, goals, strategies,
                         and activities based on accountability mechanism to their leaders. These decrees involve a radical
                         change in practices and in the Ministry’s functional relationship with institutions. This implies a need
                         to rebalance the Ministry’s powers with the new responsibilities of institutions under their new
                         mandates.

                         The project would support:
                         •        Recruitment of a consultant to carry out the organizational diagnostic;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Technical support for the review of the major management functions in MHESR, as well as
                         standard profiles, based on the recommendations of the organizational diagnostic and training;
                         •        If necessary, logistical support for the new national evaluation and accreditation bureau for
                         tertiary education and research, and technical support in the development of its standards and
                         procedures.

                         The Decree states that the institutions are directed by a Board of Directors, an Establishment Board
                         and a Rector. The powers of the Board, a majority of whose members are from the business world
                         are considerable. The present framework could constitute an obstacle to the immediate
                         implementation of certain provisions of the decrees, namely recruitment and payroll management. A
                         transitional phase focusing on the delegation of these powers could accompany the first milestone of
                         autonomy. In this regard, a draft transitional procedures manual is being developed by an MESRS-
                         led team.

                         The project would support:
                         •       Investment in the preparatory phase for the preparation and analysis and alignment of texts
                         by an inter-ministerial commission (Finance, Budget, Public Service, Unions etc)
                         •       Technical and financial support for the development and implementation of a training plan
                         for senior and middle level staff from institutions whose mandates are particularly affected by the
                         new regulatory framework for the autonomy.
                         With regard to improving tertiary education management, the project would support:
                         •        Purchase of compatible software to enhance the transmission of data and information from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutions to MESRS.
                         •        Capacity-building for education services to strengthen management of the License Master
                         Doctorat (LMD) system offering more choices for students, different academic paths, etc., and
                         student monitoring which could require creating a financial aid and scholarships agency.
                         •        Set up of a fiduciary team (FM and procurement) well-versed in Bank procedures to fulfill
                         the fiduciary responsibilities of the project.
                         •        Support for monitoring and evaluation to monitor the strategy and project.

                         Improving tertiary education faculty performance: Given current capacity and conditions of Guinean
                         graduate schools, will require partnerships with foreign universities, preferably in the sub-region,
                         would be a necessity. Under these agreements, the student would alternate between the Guinean and
                         partner institution, culminating in a joint degree. To encourage graduates to return to Guinea and
                         quickly enter the CAMES (Conseil africain et malgache pour l’enseignement supérieur) system, a
                         start-up fund would be provided to initiate research and develop a scientific product.

                         The project would finance:
                         •        Technical support for the definition of university partnership frameworks (technical
                         assistance and study tour);
                         •        Financial support for training and costs incurred by post graduate students during training
                         (travel, research costs, etc).;
                         •        A small start-up fund for graduates upon completion of training; and
                         •        Technical support to conduct an analysis for a medium-term strategy to improve motivation
                         of teachers and researchers.

                         Financing reforms, with a focus on scholarships: Following the survey of higher education students’
                         living conditions supported by the World Bank, 92.3 percent of students would welcome financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aid/scholarship reform (see summary of results in Annex 3). There is a general consensus on the need
                         to review the grant allocation system. The Government has worked on a number of proposals for
                         allocation reforms to be considered at the policy level. Technical support has been requested for the
                         establishment of the Agency of scholarships. This support could be envisaged in the project only if
                         the government has a clear timetable for reform.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location will be nationwide

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The borrower capacity for safeguards is limited. Institutions in charge of environment (Ministry of
                         Energy and Environment) and social affairs (Ministry of Social Affairs and of Women and Children
                         Promotion) are few, often understaffed and with little equipment. As of now, they cannot be
                         considered as familiar with the Bank and Bank-funded projects and procedures. To counteract this, a
                         safeguards specialist is included in the Bank team and will provide guidance to the PIU and the TTL
                         as the project evolves.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF1)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                                 Safeguard Policies                                                Triggered?                    Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Environmental Assessment OP/                                      Yes                           OP 4.01 is triggered because of the potential
                                 BP 4.01                                                                                         environmental impacts resulting from project
                                                                                                                                 activities. However, those impacts are expected
                                                                                                                                 to be minimal, site-specific and manageable to
                                                                                                                                 an accepted level. Due to the difficulty inherent
                                                                                                                                 in defining what the real environmental impacts
                                                                                                                                 of envisioned project activities related to re-
                                                                                                                                 engineering, equipment, and rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                                 facilities, a simplified Environmental and Social
                                                                                                                                 Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                                                                                 developed. The ESMF will formulate standard
                                                                                                                                 methods and procedures, along with
                                                                                                                                 institutional arrangements for screening, review,
                                                                                                                                 approval and implementation and monitoring of
                                                                                                                                 specific EMPs, including the preparation of
                                                                                                                                 environmental clauses to be inserted in
                                                                                                                                 contractors’ bidding documents. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                                 be disclosed in-country and at the Bank
                                                                                                                                 InfoShop, upon review and clearance by
                                                                                                                                 AFTSG, prior to appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project does not affect or involve natural
                                                                                                                                 habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project does not affect or involve forests or
                                                                                                                                 forestry.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project does not involve pest management.

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project does not affect or involve physical
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         cultural resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            This policy is not triggered as the potential
                                 4.12                                                                                            rehabilitation supported by the project will take
                                                                                                                                 place in existing training institutions. There are
                                                                                                                                 no encroachers or squatters in or near the
                                                                                                                                 stations. Therefore, the project will not require
                                                                                                                                 the preparation of a resettlement framework.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Feb-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             ESMF completed and cleared for public disclosure by March-2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:     Name: Nathalie Lahire

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 05-Aug-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Practice Manager/   Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (PMGR)                  Date: 25-Aug-2014
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
