INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR12510
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Haiti                      Project ID:  P126744
Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services II Project
(GAFSP - IDA) (P126744)
Task Team       Pierre Olivier Colleye
Leader(s):
Estimated       08-Aug-2011                Estimated    01-Dec-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Agricultural extension and research (90%), Public administration- Agriculture,
fishing and forestry (7%), Animal production (3%)
Theme:          Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Nutrition and food security (10%),
Rural policies and institutions (5%), Gender (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
ci Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      50.00            Total Bank Financing:   40.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
IDA Grant                                                       40.00
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                    10.00
Total                                                           50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 11


﻿3. Project Description
The "Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services II Project" has been
underway since April, 2012. Activities have been initiated under Component 1, strengthening the
role of the Ministry of Agriculture in providing agricultural support services. These activities
include the elaboration of studies for the renovation of agricultural middle schools; the creation/
strengthening of various technical units including environment, nutrition and gender; and the
collection and dissemination of consumer prices of agricultural goods through the National Food
Security Committee.
Progress has also been made under the project's larger Component 2 (Market Support Facility). As
of November, 2014 an operator had been contracted by the Government to execute this Component
and the first call for proposals in the North and Northeast received 410 proposals from producer
organizations. From this call, the Operator has selected 68 and an initial 22 were signed in February,
2015.
Following on the MARNDR's commitment in December 2013, the Ministry's team in charge of
implementation has recently been strengthened, including the establishment of an unified
procurement unit and the strengthening of its financial management capacity. There are no
outstanding audit reports at this time and audits presented in the last year did not reveal significant
issues. An agreement has been reached with the Ministry on a plan to further strengthen the staffing
under this project, which should considerably enhance its capacity to implement it. Under this plan,
13 staff, mostly local, are expected to be hired during 2015 (9 staff during the first quarter of
calendar 2015 and the remaining staff upon the launch of the Market Support Facility and Farmer
Subsidy Scheme).
The complex nature of the Project, composed of a multitude of small activities implemented by 22
different technical departments (or "units"), together with the limited capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture to manage a large project, has caused the Project to disburse slowly and to show only
limited results. Despite progress under Project components, the many small and separate activities
detract from the major emphasis of each component. A number of mitigation measures identified in
the Project's ORAF have been put in place, including the recruitment of "Operators" to manage some
a         of the project's components, but capacity remains insufficient, and further streamlining will help
diminish pressure on the limited capacity, while enhancing accountability and enabling faster
disbursements.
A project restructuring is necessary to ensure that the Project: (i) remains aligned with the Ministry's
overall strategy and coordinated with the various bilateral and multilateral donors, eliminating
activities already being financed by other donors or projects, and reorganizing institutional
arrangements to be consistent with the on-going reform in the Ministry; (ii) takes advantage of
synergies with other projects in the World Bank portfolio in Haiti; (iii) takes into consideration the
Ministry's low implementation capacity, which is particularly challenging without a PIU; and (iv)
includes lessons learned from the first RESEPAG Project (P113623) (closed September 30th, 2015).
The proposed restructuring, per the Ministry of Finance's request on April 8, 2015, would change the
current PDO, revise the Results Framework, and reduce activities to streamline the Components,
extend the loan's closing date, reallocate funding, and update the Integrated Safeguard Data Sheet
(ISDS). Therefore, none of the activities under the project restructuring will affect the environmental
Page 2 of 11


﻿impacts and requirements.
The proposed restructuring aims at reconfiguring the project into three main components, reducing
the number of activities to be financed and simplifying its implementation with the following
objectives: (i) Strengthening the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural
Development (MARNDR) in its utility function to provide or facilitate access to agricultural support
services (including sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) issues) for which the provision of basic services
is essential from the point of view of food security, public health and competitiveness; (ii) Increase
the productivity of producers and association and strengthen value chains in the North, northeast,
South and the Artibonite loop in the Centre; and (iii) Emergency response contingency Reserve. A
fourth component is the Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Project
Management.
4. Project Components:
Component 1: Agricultural support services (US$11 million, including US$10 million from GAFSP
and US$1 million from IDA)
The objective of this component is to develop and strengthen agricultural support services throughout
Haiti. This will be done by strengthening MARNDR's capacity to provide and facilitate: (i)
agricultural training and extension services; (ii) agricultural market information to producers and
decision makers; and (iii) animal and plant health control and protection services.
Sub-component 1.1: Training and Extension (US$1.4 million)
This subcomponent will increase the MARNDR's capacity to provide and facilitate agricultural
training and extension services. It will finance a combination of consulting services, non-consulting
services, training, workshops, basic equipment and supplies in two particular areas:
a)     Training: In order to prepare young agronomists and technicians to deliver higher quality
agricultural extension services and technical assistance to producers in rural Haiti, the Project will
finance the design, renovation and construction of new installations for an Agricultural Middle
School and its initial equipment. This activity is undertaken in partnership with USAID/USDA,
a        which is financing the conceptualization of the curriculum and the training of the teachers through
the University of California at Davis. Initially, the school will have a capacity for 30 adolescents,
who will follow a two year education program (plus an internship). The MARNDR will finance the
operation of the school.
b)     Extension: To strengthen the role of the MARNDR in agricultural extension services, the
Project will finance; (i) the strengthening of the agriculture extension steering committee, (ii) the
preparation of an executive summary of the national extension strategy and its dissemination; (ii) the
elaboration and dissemination (including workshop and training) of a series of outreach materials,
such as datasheets on good agricultural practice and innovations and videos, that can be used by the
Ministry and all other stakeholders active in extension services in Haiti.
Sub-component 1.2: Market Information (US$1.16 million)
To improve the availability and quality of market information and keep farmers and policy makers
better informed in order to make better decisions, this component will continue to support the
Page 3 of 11


﻿National Food Security Coordination (Coordination Nationale de S6curit6 Alimentaire - CNSA). The
project will finance CNSA's work of collecting, analyzing and disseminating sectoral information in
the areas of project interventions, including producer and consumer prices (i.e. North, East, Plateau
Central, Artibonite, South and Southeast). It will also finance the broadcasting of market prices for
O
food products through SMS and community radios and the display of prices in urban and rural
markets, Directions Departementales Agricoles (decentralized offices of the Ministry of Agriculture)
and the Bureau Agricoles Communaux (local agricultural support offices).
Sub-component 1.3: Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary (SPS) Services (US$8.45 million)
Within the context of the global institutional reform, the MARNDR has developed a program and
investment plan for the modernization of the SPS program that will take place over a period of 5
years (2014-2018) and be co-funded by the World Bank and the IaDB for a total of US$25 million.
This component aims to improve the sanitary and phytosanitary conditions around the country,
contributing to the increase of the production of quality food, to the improvement of the public
health, to environmental protection and to the competitiveness of the agriculture sector.
The RESEPAG project will finance consulting services, infrastructure, equipment, training, minor
operational expenses, and other non-consulting services in a number of areas, including:
a)     The rehabilitation and construction of infrastructure. The project will support the
construction and initial equipment and supplies for the central administrative building and of four
decentralized administrative/technical centers in the North, Northeast, Southeast and Grand'Anse.
The IADB will complement this work with an additional five decentralized technical/administrative
centers in the West, Artibonite, Center, South and the Northwest. This subcomponent will also
strengthen quarantine infrastructure and services to ensure the sanitary control of the animal and
vegetal products for imports and exports. This will be done specifically through the construction,
initial equipment and supplies of three new centers in Port-au-Prince, Malpasse and Anse-d-Pitres
and the rehabilitation of two supplementary centers in Beladere and Ouanaminthe. In addition, the
project will provide support to develop new regulations and the revision and distribution of SPS
standards, training, workshops and communication campaigns.
b)     The strengthening of the veterinary laboratory system and quality control of food through
a        new infrastructure, equipment and staff training. The RESEPAG project has already financed the
rehabilitation of 3 laboratories and will finance the equipment and basic supplies of 6 laboratories
and the central laboratory located in Port-au-Prince. It will continue to finance the training of 40
young laboratory technicians who will integrate the Ministry's service.
c)     The strengthening of the animal health through strengthening of veterinary services,
vaccination and livestock traceability. This sub-component will primarily finance three activities.
First, the design and delivery of training to private veterinary professionals and of volunteers in
charge of epidemiological surveillance. Second, the strengthening of vaccination and
epidemiological surveillance, under which the Project will contribute to the strengthening of the
epidemiological monitoring system around four main: black rust Anthrax; Newcastle; avian flu; and
rabies, including the establishment of databases, training and communication campaigns. In
addition, the Project will finance two vaccination campaigns against rabies for dogs and anthrax for
cattle to improve public health and decrease cattle losses, respectively. It will also finance the
epidemiological prevalence studies before and after these campaigns to measure their impact.
Second, the identification of the livestock under which the Project will contribute to the
Page 4 of 11


﻿strengthening of a national system for the identification of the livestock with the objective of
increasing the income of the farmers and to contribute to improved public health. The Project will
finance design of the database, expenses related to the tagging of about 300,000 cattle and training of
agents in charge of tagging and controls at slaughterhouses.
The strengthening of the plant health. The program will finance consultants, equipment, supplies and
training to support the control and the fight against two diseases (mango fruit fly and cochineal) via
an integrated pest management program with the intent to increase the production and the volumes of
export. This activity will also finance the construction of several greenhouses to test biological tools
to fight the diseases.
Component 2: Direct support to producers and associations (US$27.15 million)
The objective of this component is to increase access to services to producers and producer groups to
increase their prod uctivity and sales and strengthen the value chains in which they operate.
Activities under this component will accompany the farmer-level agriculture technologies and inputs
promoted by the MARNDR by increasing the capacity of public, private and civil society (NGO)
local service providers to deliver and serve the needs of their clients.
Sub-component 2.1: Farmers Subsidy Scheme (US$11.5 million)
In order to increase overall agricultural productivity, this component will finance two things
necessary to drive increased production: inputs and technical assistance. Specifically the component
will finance (i) A Farmer Subsidy Scheme to provide vouchers towards improved, environmentally
friendly and climate smart inputs and technical assistance for the production of crops under selected
value-chains; and (ii) the set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for producers to improve production
techniques.
This sub-component will be implemented in two geographical zones: the South and the Centre/
Artibonite. The sub-Component will be implemented by two operators (one per region) who will, in
addition to the overall responsibility for the sub-component, sub-contract a separate firm/NGO for
the implementation of the FFS. The Farmer Subsidy Scheme, initially piloted under the previous
World Bank RESEPAG Project (P113623) and currently being scaled up in various parts of the
a        country with support from a number of bilateral and multilateral donors, creates a national registry of
producers and services providers in the targeted areas. Eligible producers will be provided with
vouchers to access input or technical assistance from eligible suppliers who in turn will obtain
payment for the services/products rendered, from a commercial bank. The Ministry of Agriculture, in
consultation with its donor partners, will be in charge of regularly defining the campaigns it will
finance (region, type of production and type of support) and will be in charge of monitoring the result
of these campaigns so as to help it formulate the subsequent campaigns. This sub-component is
expected to reach 10,000 direct beneficiaries. For this activity, the Project will finance the costs
related to the design and the delivery of the voucher scheme and the farmer field schools, including
the cost of the operators, the vouchers themselves, impact evaluation, the work related to the
populating the national registry and other technical assistance, training and workshops.
Sub-Component 2.2: Market Support Facility ($15.65 million)
In order to stimulate innovation in applied agricultural research, strengthen producer groups in their
post-harvest activities, and increase overall sales, the Project will continue to finance a "Market
Page 5 of 11


﻿Support Facility," which will provide matching grants to producer organizations to: (i) conduct
applied research, primarily on agricultural supply chains with export potential, food security potential
or environmental/nutritional impact; (ii) strengthen producer-based organizations, primarily their
administration, management, leadership or capacity of groups to increase sales and profits and (iii)
provide technical assistance and investment support for production, post-harvest and agri-business
development, focused on improving productivity, quality, value added, and/or reducing production
and post-harvest losses. It will also provide support to services providers in the agriculture sector to
have access to better technology and inputs. The assistance will continue to take the form of
matching grants (not to exceed 80% of the total investment) which will finance the purchase of
equipment, works, goods, consultants, services, training and minor operational expenses as agreed to
in a sub-grant agreement with the MARNDR. The Project will also finance the strengthening of the
"Tables de Concertations" (committees at the department level representing the public and private
sectors on agricultural matters who will be taking a leadership role in the promotion, selection and
monitoring of the matching grant facility). The Project is also expected to finance trainings and
capacity building workshops for the component's participants.
This sub-component will cover two geographic area: (i) the North and Northeast departments; and
(ii) the South - and function through contracted Operators who will manage the process of promoting
the application window, help producer groups complete applications, run the financial disbursement
process, and monitor the use of funds.
A rigorous impact evaluation will be financed for this sub-component in the departments of the
North and North-East. This exercise will measure the impact of the financing and also the importance
of technical assistance and training in financial literacy of women groups receiving investments. It
will try to measure the multiplier effect that training and TA has on these investments.
Component 3: Emergency Response Contingency Reserve (US$1.5 million)
The objective of this component is to provide flexible, contingency funding in the case of a natural
disaster or food crisis that adversely affects the agriculture sector during the period of execution of
the project.
In the case of a national emergency, this component covers the costs of early recovery and
a        rehabilitation costs related to the Agriculture sector and in addition will allow the GoH to request that
the World Bank re-categorize funding undisbursed from other components to cover emergency costs.
Component 4: Institutional strengthening, monitoring and evaluation, project management and
studies (US$7.34 million)
The objective of this component is to facilitate project implementation and finance the incremental
costs associated with project implementation. Specifically, this component will fund consultant
services, goods and services, training, works and operational expenses related to project
coordination, compliance with safeguard, gender and nutrition, monitoring and evaluation. In
addition, it will strengthen key Ministry units such as (i) the Planning and Evaluation Unit, (ii) the IT
Department of the Ministry, (iii) the newly created unified procurement unit for all donor-funded
projects, and (iv) a similar unified financial management unit currently being planned for all donor-
funded projects.
Page 6 of 11


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The current restructuring is primarily aiming at streamlining the project component design, while
ensuring that it (i) remains aligned with the Ministry's overall strategy and coordinated with the
Q        various bilateral and multilateral donors, eliminating activities already being financed by other
donors or projects, and reorganizing institutional arrangements to be consistent with the on-going
reform in the Ministry; (ii) takes advantage of the synergies with other projects of the World Bank
Group portfolio; (iii) takes into consideration the Ministry's low implementation capacity which is
particularly challenging without a PIU; and (iv) includes lessons learned from the first RESEPAG
Project (P113623), closed on September 30, 2014. It updates the PDO and adjusts both the main
indicators and intermediate indicators. Other changes related to the Result Framework, the Closing
date, the Fiduciary (Financial Management and Procurement), Implementation schedule, and Risk
Assessment. Since there were no significant changes in the project activities that warrant new
potential environmental or social impacts, the project environmental category (B) will remain the
same, no new policies need to be triggered, and the current project's EA instruments (ESMF, IPMP,
etc.) remain valid and require no updating. The restructuring will not result in new activities, only
expanding existing ones that are already addressed in the existing project ESMF/PMP.
Despite progress under Project components, the many small and separate activities detract from the
major emphasis of each component. Streamlining these activities into a few technical units will help
diminish the need for a strong capacity, and enable faster disbursements. However, the activities
under Component 3 (Emergency Response Contingency Reserve) have attracted specific and
targeted interventions pertaining to High Intensity Manual Labor in drought stricken areas and
pesticides treatment interventions in areas infested by Mealybug (cochineal) outbreaks in local farms
with agricultural commodities (groundnuts, cowpea, cassava, Congo pea, etc.). The RESEPAG
Country Team, the MARNDR Directorate of Plant Health and Protection and the Environmental Cell
successfully carried out both operations, using the guidelines contained in the current project's
ESMF and IPMP, leading to a Satisfactory Environmental Safeguards Rating of the project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Emmanuel Ngollo (GENDR)
O
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Page 7 of 11


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
O
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This project, after restructuring will focus on reinforcing the capacity of the MARNDR to
provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector, strengthening targeted value
chains and food security in selected areas, and providing financial assistance in the case of an
agriculture sector emergency, while promoting environmentally friendly investment, resource use
and surrounding landscape. The project will not support any activities that have large-scale,
significant or irreversible adverse impacts on the environment. For this reason the project is
proposed as a category B because its suite of potential adverse impacts on the environment are
easily identified, mitigated and managed. The restructured project triggers the following safeguard
policies: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (Op/BP 4.04), Forests (4.36)
and Pest Management (OP/BP 4.09).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There is no potential for indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area. Conversely, the ESMF and the capacity building provided to the Environmental
Cell in MARNDR will boost the ability and the toolkit of the ministry to steer future activities in
the project area to optimize environmental outcomes.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In addition to the elements of the ESMF, which address the above-mentioned impact, the ESMF
will also identify when additional Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) are
necessary and will include a screening procedure to screen out projects that will (i) negatively
impact critical natural habitats; (ii) adversely affect the management of natural forests, or (iii) an
IPMP that will deal with an increase in the use of, or the storage of, application or handling of,
pesticides in categories I and II of the WHO Recommended Classification of Pesticides by Hazard
(2005). In terms of biosafety measures, once investments are determined, the ESMP will be
following OIE standards for biosafety and WHO performance standards for workplace health
practices. An integrated pest management plan (IPMP) with supporting guidelines in the ESMF, is
also designed to manage potential adverse impacts arising from the extension and applied research
services. As a result, and coupled with a project design that emphasizes the adoption of
environmentally-friendly new technologies and others that favor increased productivity over
simple land expansion, the project will have a positive impact on natural habitats and management
Page 8 of 11


﻿of forests in the project's area of influence.
The MARNDR is experienced in implementing donor-funded projects (including World Bank, the
IDB and IFAD) and managing the requisite safeguard actions. To strengthen their capacity, the
O
MARNDR with the support of the RESEPAG project has created an Environmental Cell within
the Ministry to manage environmental risks within the agricultural sector more broadly. The
project is supporting the development and operationalization of this Cell. As the result, the
preparation, implementation and oversight of safeguard actions will continue to be provided by
this Environmental Cell during the project implementation.
To assist the Environmental Cell, the ESMF includes indicators to monitor compliance as well as a
training and dissemination program to build capacity within the Cell and to build a constituency
for environmental awareness in the agricultural sector more broadly. The Bank (external
consultant) will perform an environmental compliance audit during the mid-term review to
identify opportunities to enhance environmental outcomes and better manage adverse impacts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The rural population depending on the Agricultural sector for their livelihood in Haiti is
estimated at around 5 million. This population, and particularly those who live and work in the
regions supported by this project, is primarily affected by the project. Withini this population, the
project will pay special attention to women. Studies from RESEPAG I show that while women
undertake a large part of agricultural activities and participate in many productive organizations,
they are disadvantaged compared with the men in terms of decision making, control over
resources, and access to economic benefits. The illiteracy and the lack of formal legal documents
to identify women, among others, are therefore important elements for the RESEPAG II project,
requiring a mainstreaming rather than a safeguarding approach.
Other stakeholders include the extension service providers, both public and private, as well as the
general public who will benefit from improved agricultural output (in quantity and quality), as
well as from the reduced risk of disease transmission through improved plant and animal health
safety.
o
The ESMF and Operational Manual documents developed are available through the MARNDR's
website at (www.agriculture.gouv.ht) and through the World Bank website at (www.infoshop.org).
The MARNDR and its deconcentrated institutions (DDAs, BACs) continue to hold consultations
with stakeholders in the eligible project areas, and the project's ESMF continually addresses the
comments and unforeseen issues raised. Prior to implementing the activities under component 2,
the MARNDR (through the DDAs and BACs) after the project restructuring will conduct further
consultations with project-affected people within the project's sphere of influence to inform them
of the project restructuring, opportunities to engage with it through sub-projects, potential adverse
short-term impacts and how they will be mitigated, and the grievance redress mechanism available
to them, should they need it during the implementation of this project (subproject selected in their
areas).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              26-Jul-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Aug-2011
Page 9 of 11I


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Haiti                                                     03-Aug-2011
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                               26-Jul-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                            03-Aug-2011
"In country" Disclosure
Haiti                                                     03-Aug-2011
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 10 of I1


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  No        NA
*          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ No      NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pierre Olivier Colleye
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                 Date: 10-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


