                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC12091

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Togo                             Project ID:      P149942
                            Project Name:       REDD+ Readiness preparation - Togo (P149942)
                            Task Team           Koffi Hounkpe
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEN01

                            Sector(s):          Forestry (60%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (20%),
                                                General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %)
                            Theme(s):           Climate change (70%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Other
                                                rural development (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      3.80                      Total Bank Financing:           0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                    0.00
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                       3.80
                              Total                                                                          3.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project objective is to reinforce the Republic of Togo’s capacity to design a socially and
                           environmentally sound national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest
                           degradation
                           C. Project Description
                           REDD+ Readiness Preparation activities in Togo including: REDD+ related organizational structures
                           and consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           processes; national REDD+ strategy development; deforestation and forest degradation baseline
                           scenario
                           development; measurement, reporting and verification systems development, including co-benefits
                           and; capacity
                           building.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project management unit (the REDD+ National Coordination) will be at the Ministry of
                           Environment and Forest Resources (MERF) in Lomé but the project is of a national scope and will
                           take place throughout the country.
                           This project does not entail activities on the ground. Rather, it is focused on providing technical
                           assistance to the government for the development of technical and institutional capacities to
                           participate in a future international REDD+ mechanism.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Recipient's capacity is at moderate. An existing project on integrated disaster and land
                           management is being well managed as concerns safeguards and is managed by an entity under the
                           same minister, allowing for sharing of experience and lessons learned. World Bank agricultural
                           project is also ongoing in the country and have involved developing safeguards expertise in areas
                           related to this project. It is likely however that the REDD+ National coordination (NC) will need
                           training and support to become sufficiently proficient in managing key safeguard issues.

                           The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) for the national REDD+ Readiness
                           process will be led by the REDD+ NC and carried out through inclusive consultations, and in close
Public Disclosure Copy




                           coordination with other analytical studies / processes. The exercise will be directly supervised by a
                           National SESA Overseeing Committee, made up of representatives from government, civil society,
                           and the private sector. This Committee will be in charge of overseeing the preparation of the SESA
                           and of ensuring it feeds into the preparation of the National REDD+ Strategy.

                           The SESA exercise itself will assess the national capacity needs required for the country to be
                           capable of monitoring and implementing the safeguards related to a national REDD+ mechanism and
                           will make recommendations for institutional strengthening.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GENDR)
                           Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      (SESA) to be carried out under the project will serve
                                                                           to identify, avoid, mitigate and compensate the
                                                                           potential negative environmental and social impacts
                                                             associated with future activities to be supported by
                                                             the final REDD+ strategy by providing guidance and
                                                             key elements for the preparation of an Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The
                                                             SESA will also influence the final national REDD+
                                                             strategy, by ensuring that social and environmental
                                                             risks are factors in the preparation of the strategy.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
                                                             options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
                                                             take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as
                                                             well as the numerous environmental services and
                                                             products that natural habitats provide to human
                                                             society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
                                                             have significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
                                                             as the country puts in place an effective strategy to
                                                             reduce loss of natural forests. The SESA will address
                                                             issues related to natural habitats and potential
                                                             impacts of the National REDD+ Strategy, which will
                                                             later be included in the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                             significant positive impacts on forest, in that the
                                                             main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
                                                             and forest degradation, while contributing to the
                                                             well-being of forest-dependent communities.
                                                             Potential impact of the National REDD+ Strategy on
                                                             natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
                                                             and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated
                                                             ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Operational Policy regarding forest management, in
                                                             particular as these relate to the establishment of
                                                             plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   Agricultural intensification and reforestation
                                                             activities, among others are REDD+ activities that
                                                             could require pest management in the course of
                                                             project implementation. The SESA will address
                                                             critical issues related to pest management if
                                                             necessary, and these will also be included in the key
                                                             elements of the ESMF, as well as in a specific plan
                                                             related to pests and pesticides management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   REDD+ activities are likely to be implemented in
                         OP/BP 4.11                          areas containing sites deemed physical cultural
                                                             resources by rural communities living there (e.g.
                                                             holy/secret sites such as sacred groves, sacred
                                                             forests, etc.). Though it is not anticipated that the
                                                             project will have negative impacts on any such sites,
                                                             the SESA will address issues related to physical
                                                                                                                        cultural resources and potential impacts of the
                                                                                                                        National REDD+ Strategy, which will later be
                                                                                                                        included in the ESMF and a specific dedicated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        framework.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
                                                                                                                        restrictions of access to legally designated parks,
                                                                                                                        protected areas, or forest management / reforestation
                                                                                                                        areas. The policy aims to avoid involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement to the extent feasible, or to minimize
                                                                                                                        and mitigate its adverse social and economic impacts
                                                                                                                        in cases where resettlement or other involuntary
                                                                                                                        restrictions cannot be avoided. Through the SESA
                                                                                                                        process, any issues related to land acquisition or
                                                                                                                        involuntary resettlement will be identified, and a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared. In
                                                                                                                        terms of restriction to natural resources, a Process
                                                                                                                        Framework will be prepared as well.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      N/A
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Koffi Hounkpe
                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                                                                                               Date: 26-Dec-2015
                                 Advisor:
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 30-Dec-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
