                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                   Report No.: ISDSA3856
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                                Project ID:    P133780
                            Project Name:      Uganda GPE Teacher and School Effectiveness Project (P133780)
                            Task Team          Andreas Blom
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Jul-2013                           Estimated   15-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                          Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEE                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                     Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                                 100.00
                              Total                                                                                     100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to support the Government in improving critical
                           aspects of teacher and school effectiveness in the public primary education system.

                           The critical aspects of effectiveness to be improved are:
                           •       For teachers: presence in school, pedagogical approach for early reading and numeracy, and


                                                                          Page 1 of 10
                         availability of instructional material for teaching.
                         •       For schools: improved school governance, accountability, and facilities.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This project is centered on improving education service delivery at the classroom level to realize
                         meaningful gains in student achievement in primary grades and is based on consultations undertaken
                         with the Local Education Group (LEG) in national workshops held in Kampala in November 2012
                         and May 2013. The discussions yielded consensus around the following 3 components: (1): A
                         results-based component focused on ‘Effective Teachers’, aimed at improving teacher quality and
                         performance, because these are dimensions which are highly predictive of student achievement and
                         where considerable margins for improvement exist; (2): A results-based component focused on
                         ‘Effective Schools’, with the aim of improving the overall school environment – in the form of
                         enhanced school management, accountability, and learning conditions. The complementary focus on
                         schools is aimed at enabling improved teacher competencies to most effectively translate into
                         improved education service delivery. This component will involve civil works in primary schools as
                         further described below; and (3): ‘Technical Assistance’, which will finance advisory, technical, and
                         capacity-building support.

                         Taken as a whole, activities are formulated to yield returns in the short term in terms of perceptible
                         improvements in education service delivery. However, they are also expected to promote well-
                         performing, robust, sustainable institutions and administrative systems that would generate returns
                         over the medium to long term.

                         Component 1: Effective Teacher
                         Initiatives under this component include:

                         Teacher competency
                         (a)      Enhancing effectiveness of early grade literacy instruction through provision of training to
                         in-service teachers and ECE instructors. The early grade instruction will support local language
Public Disclosure Copy




                         instruction in primary grade 1-3. It will be implement in 30 districts selected based upon language
                         readiness for use as media of instruction. The result linked to disbursement is the numbers of
                         teachers trained (DLI 1).
                         Teacher resources
                         (b)      Provision of instructional materials, including teacher reference materials, on the new
                         primary curriculum. The result linked to disbursement is the numbers of schools with the standard kit
                         of instructional material (DLI 2).
                         Teacher motivation and accountability
                         (c)      Strengthening the design and implementation of an ongoing merit-based promotion scheme
                         for teachers (DLI 3). The result linked to disbursement is number of promotions according to the
                         improved scheme.
                         (d)      Strengthening the system of teacher and school supervision through scaling up inspections
                         and establishing a system for real-time filling of inspection reports and dissemination to key
                         stakeholders. This will be implemented in the targeted 69 districts where less than half of the
                         students meet the expected learning outcomes. The result linked to disbursement is numbers of
                         schools inspected at least twice during a year filed in the system (DLI 4).

                         Component 2: Effective Schools
                         Initiative under this component include:
                         (a)      Increasing the capacity of School leadership and accountability to the community. Head-


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         teachers and school management committe es (SMCs) will be offered training for enhancing
                         monitoring of teacher and student performance. This will be implemented in the targeted 69 districts
                         where less than half of the students meet the expected learning outcomes. The result linked to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         disbursement is the number of schools with trained head-teachers and SMCs (year 1) and the
                         numbers of schools where school report cards are made publically available (year 2 and 3) (DLI 5).
                         (b)      Improve basic school facilities (class-rooms, functioning girls and boys toilets, and access to
                         water) in schools without such facilities. The water facilities entail installation of rain gutters and
                         plastic tanks for rain water harvesting. This support is implemented as part of the existing School
                         Facility Grant program, which is a national program. The results linked to disbursements are number
                         of schools where procurement is concluded (year 1), construction is completed (year 2), and finished
                         construction meets pre-defined quality standards (year 3). (DLI 6).

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance
                         This component will finance advisory, technical, and capacity-building, including:
                         (a)      Evaluation, review and dissemination of the education sector Early Childhood Development
                         policy and operational standards (including associated capacity building and awareness raising
                         activities).
                         (b)      Technical assistance and Capacity building, including for project implementation,
                         monitoring and evaluation, communication, and for preparing the ESSP for the next cycle.

                         Project implementation will be mainstreamed in the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) using
                         existing institutional establishments. Local governments will implement the school grants, teacher
                         motivation, and the scaled-up inspections in line with the decentralized education service delivery.
                         Adherence to the existing implementation guidelines by the local governments will be strictly
                         monitored. These include the School Facility Grant (SFG) guidelines and the procedures for the
                         implementation of the Scheme of Service. Assessments undertaken in the course of project design
                         indicate a need to strengthen the capacity of key units of the MoES. These include among others the
                         Construction Management Unit (CMU) that will be responsible for implementation of Safeguard
                         requirements. In addition, the Ministry has been advised to either recruit safeguard specialists or hire
Public Disclosure Copy




                         services of Safeguard Consultants on a retainer basis. Further, effort to strengthen capacity of
                         respective local governments to execute their tasks will be undertaken, especially the District
                         Environment Officers and the Community Development Officers.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is to be implemented across Uganda, with civil works targeted at already existing public
                         primary schools. The sites drawn from the 450 national public list of schools will be selected using
                         agreed scientific criteria informed by infrastructure needs assessments that have been undertaken by
                         the Ministry of Education and Sports; but also cautious of regional balance for equity. The following
                         civil works of basic school facilities are envisaged: (i): construction of 3 – 7 classrooms, with an
                         average of 1 – 2 classroom blocks; (ii): construction of two 5-stance pit latrines in each selected
                         school, one for girls and the other for boys; and (iii): installation of rain water harvesting facilities –
                         rain gutters and 1 plastic tank for each selected school. Therefore, the project’s physical activities
                         will be limited to site specific civil works here listed.

                         All civil works will be undertaken on public land and associated with the existing schools. There will
                         be no acquisition of land. Any displacement of land-uses/ or livelihoods will be assessed and
                         compensated before start of any construction activities. Further, construction will follow standard
                         norms and be gender sensitive. There will be provision of ramps to facilitate easy access to the


                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         buildings by disabled persons. The girls’ pit latrines will have the 5th stance being a changing room
                         to cater for their exceptional needs. All the schools to be supported are in rural areas and will use pit
                         latrines which do not require use of water. Such pit latrines are emptied when full using cesspools
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the waste taken to the nearest urban sewage treatment plant/s for further degradation and
                         disposal. The civil works will have safety-related issues.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Yasmin Tayyab (AFTCS)
                         Martin Fodor (AFTN3)
                         Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project will
                         BP 4.01                                               support civil works activities.

                                                                               For selected public primary schools, construction
                                                                               of classrooms, pit latrines, and installation of rain
                                                                               water harvesting facilities (gutters & plastic
                                                                               tanks) is planned. The schools to be selected are
                                                                               in rural areas and the sanitation facilities to be
                                                                               constructed are pit latrines which will not require
                                                                               use of water. The waste (faeces) generated will be
                                                                               confined in lined pits which can be emptied when
                                                                               full. Management measures of the waste
                                                                               generated is guided in the ESMF and ESMPs. All
                                                                               the structures to be constructed shall follow
                                                                               standard construction norms, including gender
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               and disability requirements.

                                                                               The UPPET project ESMF has been adopted,
                                                                               revised by the Borrower and applied to this
                                                                               project to guide implementation of environmental
                                                                               and social aspects of the project. Upon
                                                                               confirmation of the project locations, the sub
                                                                               projects will be subjected to environmental and
                                                                               social screening and ESMPs will be developed
                                                                               where necessary. Mechanisms for implementation
                                                                               of the safeguard instruments shall be included in
                                                                               the PIM and project financing agreements. The
                                                                               ESMF was disclosed in-country and at Bank’s
                                                                               Infoshop in September 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No              The project has no adverse impact on natural
                                                                               habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No              The project is not expected to affect the
                                                                               management of forests and neither will it support
                                                                               forest nor logging operations.


                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve use of pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This is triggered because project investments
                         BP 4.11                                         involve civil works and may affect physical
                                                                         cultural resources. In order to address PCRs, a
                                                                         chance finds procedure has been included in the
                                                                         project ESMF.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           OP 4.10 is triggered because the priority schools
                                                                         identified fall within the IP inhabited areas of Ik
                                                                         in Karamoja region (Kaabong District) and Batwa
                                                                         in South Western region of Uganda (Kisoro,
                                                                         Kasese, Bundibugyo and Kanungu). A screening
                                                                         and social assessment confirmed the existence of
                                                                         IPs in the 5 districts mentioned, with a total of
                                                                         pre-selected 20 priority schools. An IPPF has
                                                                         been prepared to guide the subsequent
                                                                         development and implementation of Indigenous
                                                                         Peoples Development Plans (IPDPs) upon
                                                                         specific school selection and screening during
                                                                         project implementation. The IPPF was disclosed
                                                                         in-country and at Bank’s Infoshop in September
                                                                         2013.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           OP 4.12 is triggered because the project has
                         4.12                                            potential to cause displacement of land uses and
                                                                         minimal land acquisition without resulting to
                                                                         physical relocation due to limited civil works for
                                                                         construction of classrooms and pit latrines in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         already existing public primary schools.

                                                                         The PAD sets out that final selection of the
                                                                         schools to benefit will be based on agreed
                                                                         scientific criteria informed by infrastructure needs
                                                                         assessments that have been undertaken by the
                                                                         Ministry of Education and Sports. Compliance
                                                                         will be ensured through the Resettlement Policy
                                                                         framework (RPF) and site specific Resettlement
                                                                         Action Plans (RAPs). A Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF) used under UPPET project was
                                                                         adopted, revised and applied to this project. The
                                                                         RPF specifies the process of preparing,
                                                                         reviewing, approving and implementing the
                                                                         subsequent RAPs before relevant civil works are
                                                                         initiated. The RPF prepared was disclosed in-
                                                                         country and at Bank’s InfoShop in September
                                                                         2013.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            The project will not support or depend on dams.



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                            Projects on International        No                  No impact on international waters is envisaged.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The project will not support schools in disputed
                            7.60                                                 areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will involve the construction of school classrooms, pit latrines and installation of rain
                              water harvesting gutters and plastic tanks. No storeyed structures are envisaged. Therefore, by
                              their nature, size, location, the planned civil works will not have large scale, significant or
                              irreversible adverse impacts. Instead, the impacts shall be site specific, small scale/minimal,
                              readily predictable, and manageable. Based on its low impact nature as described above, the
                              project was assigned EA category B.

                              The likely environmental impacts of the project include loss of vegetation where site clearance is
                              involved, air pollution due to dust emission arising from site clearance and transportation of
                              construction materials, noise nuisance during construction, generation of sewage from the pit
                              latrines, generation of construction debris/waste and site safety issues for both the workers and the
                              school occupants (school pupils, staff/teachers and their families).

                              These impacts will be mitigated by, limiting vegetation clearance to construction sites, re-
                              vegetating cleared/degraded areas as a result of construction activities, planting trees in the school
                              compound, sprinkling water to suppress dust emissions, use of protective gear such as nose masks,
                              earmuffs, safety boots and gloves, emptying full pit latrines using cesspool emptier, disposal of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              construction debris and general solid waste with guidance from the Local Authorities and in
                              accordance with the national environmental requirements, condoning off the construction sites and
                              limiting access by non-construction personnel. A first aid kit shall be provided onsite.

                              The social impacts of the project may include displacement of land uses. During construction, a
                              limited number of workers are likely to be hoarded on sites in selected benefiting schools which
                              may lead to illicit behavior and spread of HIV/AIDs affecting school and adjacent communities.

                              There will be no land acquisition because schools without proof of land ownership will not be
                              supported by the project. In the event of land-use displacement, the RPF will guide the preparation
                              and implementation of RAPs including appropriate compensation. The spread and infection of
                              HIV/AIDs will be managed through training of school management committees to carry out
                              community awareness on HIV/AIDs and incorporate training on gender issues in the school
                              settings.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project has no potential indirect and/ or long term social and environmental impacts due to
                              anticipated future activities in the project areas. The impacts associated with the proposed project
                              activities are short-lived and largely restricted to construction phase. Those that need to be


                                                                         Page 6 of 10
                           managed during operation relate to use of the pit latrines whose mitigation measures are feasible.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Not relevant
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project triggered the following safeguard policies: (i) OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment,
                           (ii) OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples, (iii) OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources and (iv) OP/BP
                           4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. In order to address the respective safeguard policies triggered, the
                           borrower has prepared the following safeguard instruments (i): Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework – ESMF; (ii): Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework – IPPF; (iii):
                           Chance finds procedure as part of ESMF; and (iv): Resettlement Policy Framework. The ESMF
                           gives basic guidance for environmental and social impact screening of component 2 civil works
                           investments, process for development of Environmental Management Plans where necessary,
                           guidance for development of monitoring plans and reporting format. The ESMF has also provided
                           a grievance redress mechanism to handle any complaints that may be encountered during project
                           implementation. IPPF sets out the measures that the borrower will ensure the IPs will receive
                           culturally appropriate social benefits and any adverse effects are avoided, minimized, mitigated or/
                           and are integrated in GPE project. Community empowerment tools will be specifically tailored to
                           reach and impact the IPs in line with the action plans defined. The chance finds procedure gives
                           guidance on how any PCRs that may be encountered during the execution of civil works will be
                           identified, handled, and managed including communication/notification and engagement of the
                           relevant government agencies. The RPF specifies the process of preparing, reviewing, approving
                           and implementing the RAPs including provides a step by step procedure on the identification of
                           project affected households, the assets to be lost, and compensation and other restoration measures
                           before relevant civil works are initiated.

                           The Borrower’s capacity to plan and implement the measures above exists to acceptable level,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           especially regarding existence of legal and regulatory framework and institutions. Consequently,
                           implementation of safeguards instruments and project adherence to these requirements will rely on
                           existing environmental and land management systems in Uganda. The Construction Management
                           Unit (CMU) of the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) will take lead in implementation of
                           the environmental and social requirements. The MoES has experience in implementing Bank
                           funded projects overtime. The A Civil Engineer under CMU has been assigned to be the
                           Safeguards focal person. However, capacity assessments undertaken in the course of project
                           design indicate a need to strengthen the capacity of key units of the MoES, including the CMU for
                           effective implementation of safeguard policies. It has therefore been proposed for the Ministry of
                           Education to either recruit Safeguard Specialists or hire services of Safeguard Consultants on a
                           retainer basis. Further, effort to strengthen capacity of respective local governments to execute
                           their tasks will be undertaken, especially the District Environment Officers and the Community
                           Development Officers who will be guiding and undertaking implementation of the ESMF, RPF
                           and IPPF at the Local level.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholders involved in this project include: Ministry of Education and Sports, Forum for
                           Education NGOs in Uganda, Development Partners in Education, Uganda National Teachers’
                           Association, District Local Governments, IP NGOs and Forums, schools (pupils and teachers) and


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           communities.

                           The preparation of environmental and social safeguards instruments involved consultation of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           listed stakeholders through formal and informal meetings. Disclosure of safeguards instruments
                           will be carried out by notifications in the print media, and placement of the safeguards instruments
                           at suitable public locations (MoES Library, NEMA library, District Education, Environment and
                           Community Development Offices, etc.)
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Sep-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           16-Sep-2013
                           Comments: Disclosure was done through the print media advertisements in the national and
                                         regional newspapers.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           16-Sep-2013
                           Comments: Disclosure was done through the print media advertisements in the national and
                                         regional newspapers.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Aug-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Sep-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           16-Sep-2013
                           Comments: Disclosure was done through the print media advertisements in the national and
                                         regional newspapers.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not applicable.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Andreas Blom
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 26-Jun-2014
                            Advisor:


                                                                        Page 9 of 10
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Barbara Weber (SM)       Date: 26-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 10 of 10
