                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1050
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Nov-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           South Sudan                       Project ID:    P145581
                            Project Name:      South Sudan Energy Sector Technical Assistance Project (P145581)
                            Task Team          Rahul Kitchlu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          15-Dec-2014                       Estimated   17-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (75%), Rural services and
                                              infrastructure (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:                 15.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               15.00
                              Total                                                                                     15.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the Recipient for improved
                           energy sector planning and management supporting access enhancement.
                            3. Project Description
                           A.      Project Components

                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         The proposed Project includes five components constituting a total investment of US$15 million to
                         allow for a rapid and sustained capacity/institution building in the preparation and management of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strategic energy infrastructure projects. The components are designed with a long term goal of access
                         enhancement through a well-functioning and strong energy sector that supports investment and
                         participation from the private sector. The Project components, described below, have been identified
                         as high priority issues by the GRSS and are part of the continued World Bank support to improve
                         sector performance, and contribution to growth and sustainable development for the years to come in
                         South Sudan’s energy sector. Each component is summarized below with estimated cost of activities.

                         Component 1: Improved Sector Planning: In order to design the electric power generation system of
                         the future in South Sudan, it is imperative that detailed technical planning exercise be carried out.
                         Activities under this Component will focus on two main areas: (i) development of a detailed least
                         cost investment plan (LCIP) (Master Plan) which will develop a framework for the GRSS in
                         identifying and sequencing investments to attract financing for infrastructure development as well as
                         effectively coordinate with donor and private sector partners, and (ii) initial technical identification
                         and pre-feasibility preparation studies for possible future investments, for up to 4 high-priority
                         projects that are needed to augment generation and transmission capacity of South Sudan. Beyond
                         the project, future developers will build on the information from the technical studies and may carry
                         out specific detailed design and feasibility studies, including environmental and social assessments
                         and mitigation plans.

                         (i)           The LCIP: Development of the LCIP will include an assessment of electricity demand by
                         carrying out load forecasting using user surveys as well as economic growth and consumption
                         patterns. LCIP will include development of a generation expansion plan that not only considers the
                         cost and availability (for instance, short term rentals vs. long term infrastructure) of power
                         generation, but also considers the technical issues (sufficient reserve margin, technology choices),
                         reliability (low supply interruption frequency), and diversity of the generation mix (risk mitigation).
                         LCIP will develop a transmission and distribution network expansion plan considering appropriate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity of lines and substation to most effectively evacuate power from generation plants to demand
                         centers. The LCIP will also consider regional interconnections and describe the long term plans to
                         develop a national grid transmission backbone in the country. In this context, the LCIP will be highly
                         complementary to the proposed Hydropower Expansion Plan and Regional Integration Plan being
                         supported by the Nile Basin Initiative/Nile Equatorial Lakes Subsidiary Action Program (NBI/
                         NELSAP). The LCIP will analyze the mechanisms for sequencing of investments with guidance on
                         policy level issues related to the development of the energy sector in the country, including, a
                         description of a feasible long term access expansion plan, off-grid rural electrification plan, tariff and
                         pricing policies, and institutional development needs.

                         (ii)     Technical Studies: Component 1 will also include support for carrying out initial technical
                         identification and pre-feasibility technical studies for possible future investments for up to 4 high
                         priority projects that are needed to augment generation and transmission capacity of South Sudan.
                         The list of possible candidate projects for the pre-feasibility studies has been prepared and it includes
                         high priority generation plants (hydropower/thermal power) as well as power transmission lines. The
                         projects for which studies will be actually carried out will be selected on the following selection
                         criterion: (i) feasibility of the project as a result of initial investigation under the LCIP, (ii) priorities
                         of the GRSS, (iii) appetite and interest of the private sector and other financiers, and (iv) overall
                         benefits of the project in enhancing the sector development.



                                                                         Page 2 of 9
                         Component 2: Capacity Building Support: This Component will support the development of a
                         comprehensive capacity building program, based on the recently carried out Capacity Building
                         Needs Analysis Report.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)      Training and Skill Development: It will also support the implementation of the activities for
                         sector institutions, MoEDIWR and SSEC, to support improved technical, managerial, and
                         operational skills (addressing legal and regulatory and financial viability issues). Support will be
                         provided for training, workshops/seminars, study tours, and associated resources needed for
                         developing and implementing long term skill building program, including the development of a
                         permanent in-house training facility for the institutions. Training areas will include, inter alia,
                         development of sector laws and regulations, support for developing utility reform programs (e.g.
                         possible management contract or concession for the SSEC), technical design of energy infrastructure
                         projects, long term planning, project management and implementation, procurement management,
                         financial management, operational efficiency improvement tools and systems, and environmental and
                         social safeguards management.

                         (ii)     Safeguards Capacity Building: As part of Component 2, the Project will support preparation
                         of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment for the energy sector.

                         Component 3: Efficient Management: This Component will finance a distribution efficiency
                         improvement program, primarily focusing on improved commercial operations. Currently, the
                         inefficiency and high losses represent fiscal burden of nearly 4 percent of the GRSS’ budgetary
                         expenses (which is much higher than average regional experience of 1-2 percent). The focus of the
                         support provided under this Component will be on loss reduction, efficiency improvement through
                         regular maintenance, enhanced ability of the sector institutions to service customers (e.g. through
                         introduction of on-site service kiosks), and to improve billing and collection of revenues. This
                         Component is not designed to invest in technical reinforcement of the network (substations,
                         transformer, or wiring). In this approach, support provided under this Component is complementary
                         with the planned program of activities being carried out by donor partners, such as, Norway and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         AfDB. Support will also be provided for developing and deploying pre-paid energy metering
                         systems, including demonstration and training for installation of a central management facility, a
                         vending and retail program for the meters and electricity credits, as well as associated information
                         technology tools and resources, such as, customer relationship management system (CRM) and
                         management information system (MIS). This Component will not only build the commercial
                         management, administration and customer service, and billing and accounting capacity of the sector
                         utilities, but will also support increased public awareness, targeted towards non-collection losses, and
                         theft prevention informed by a poverty and social impact analysis during implementation.

                         Component 4: Off-Grid Access: This Component will support expansion of access to modern energy
                         services to population segments that are not currently connected to the grid. This Component will
                         support the development of off-grid access through investment in solar lighting of public institutions
                         and market development of off-grid products and services.

                         (i)      Public Institution Solar Lighting: This Component will support deployment of solar lighting
                         equipment (such as: picoPV, solar home systems (SHSs), solar portable lanterns (SPLs)) at targeted
                         public facilities in selected rural communities. Involvement of the local inhabitants of these
                         communities will be solicited to ensure the safety and upkeep of the installed devices. Support will
                         be provided for the design of a pilot program, selection of the targeted areas, and will include
                         dissemination of solar powered devices to public schools, health centers, and government building.

                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         The support will include installation and maintenance of systems as well as educational and public
                         awareness building activities. The ESTAP will provide financing for the implementation of the solar
                         lighting of public institutions, including supervision support of experts working alongside sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                         utility personnel. The program will coordinate closely and build on the experience of ongoing Bank
                         operations in South Sudan, such as, the Local Governance and Service Delivery Project (LGSDP),
                         Health Rapid Results Project, and the Safety Net and Skills Development Project. Based on the
                         success of the pilot program, possible scale-up of the public institution lighting program will be
                         explored including possible provision of IDA additional financing or co-financing through donor and
                         trust fund programs.

                         (ii)    Market Based Approaches: This Component will also support the design and development of
                         GRSS’s programs for enhancing off-grid access through market development of the RE and EE
                         products and services. Support would be provided for policy and institutional development,
                         development of favorable legal and regulatory environment (geared towards possible development of
                         a REA in South Sudan), analytical assessment of supply chains, barriers to entry studies, and for
                         design and development of supporting programs. A coordinated approach will be followed by
                         various donor partner programs, including those led by the IFC, Bank's ongoing program supporting
                         Trade and Competitiveness to carry out planned activities under this Component. This includes joint
                         development of the Lighting Africa Program.

                         Component 5: Project Implementation Support: As the first IDA operation in the energy sector in
                         South Sudan, this Component will provide implementation support through appropriate expertise and
                         operating expenditure support to the ESTAP Project Management Unit (PMU). Support will be
                         provided for strengthening the implementing team’s capacity (e.g. financing of international
                         specialists for procurement and financial management) as well as for financing day to day expenses
                         related to setting up of the ESTAP PMU (e.g. information and communication technology (ICT)
                         equipment, office furniture, etc.). Lessons learned in post-conflict fragile states have highlighted the
                         need to invest early on in project planning lifecycles for the establishment of PMUs that can assist
                         with the planning, design, and execution of complex infrastructure projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B.         Project Financing

                         Lending Instrument

                         ESTAP will be financed as an Investment Project Financing (IPF) under an IDA Credit of US$15.0
                         million with implementation anticipated to span a five year period. The Project will encourage
                         effective coordination, participation of other international and bilateral donors, and participation of
                         national stakeholders, both in the public and private sectors. GRSS has demonstrated commitment
                         and leadership to strengthen the national energy infrastructure and to promote private investment in
                         the sector.

                         C.   Project Cost and Financing

                         Currently, there is limited historic costing and benchmarking data available for such operations in
                         South Sudan. Project costing for ESTAP is based on most recent record of actual costs of similar
                         contract and activities in other Sub-Saharan African countries with relevant local markup of
                         estimates based on anticipated higher cost of operation in fragile states.

                         D.   Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design

                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                         There are several key lessons learned from typical operations in post-conflict fragile states around the
                         world that have been incorporated in the ESTAP design:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Thorough analytical base: Experiences from previous post-conflict states, such as Sierra Leone and
                         Rwanda, suggest that prior to initiation of a program of sector wide activities, it is important to carry
                         out detailed analytical studies to determine the nature and scope of support required. Design of the
                         ESTAP Project included key elements identified by the ESSN, the Capacity Building Needs Analysis
                         and the Distribution Efficiency Improvement Reports.

                         Rigorous preparation support: A critical design element of the Project is the provision of
                         comprehensive preparation and supervision support for the GRSS. As the first energy sector IDA
                         operation in the newly independent state, it is imperative that sufficient expertise be provided to the
                         Government institutions in order to better design and implement the Project, in accordance with the
                         Bank guidelines. The support includes: mobilization of trust fund resources (to supplement the Bank
                         budget) from Africa Renewable Energy and Access Program (AFREA), which is part of the larger
                         ESMAP trust fund, to support preparation and initial implementation support. Support has also been
                         provided through allocation of a Project Preparation Advance (PPA) for the GRSS institutions to
                         undertake preparatory activities for the ESTAP.

                         Parallel execution of short and long term goals: Project design not only includes support for issues of
                         urgent need, such as: capacity building and efficiency improvement, but it also includes support for
                         longer term outcomes, such as, sector planning leading to large scale investment and initiation of off-
                         grid access enhancement programs. This dual approach of laying a strong sector foundation today
                         while also preparing it for future growth and investment (creating necessary conditions for private
                         sector investment and public-private partnership models) has been an important lesson from previous
                         Bank engagements in the energy sector.

                         Coordinating with sector partners: Given the magnitude of effort required, effective coordination and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collaboration with donor partners (and other sector stakeholders, including the private sector) has
                         been the guiding principle of the Project to establish a strong energy sector in South Sudan. The
                         ongoing coordinated approach is supporting reduction in duplication of effort and alignment of
                         objectives, in order to assist the GRSS’s towards achieving its sector goals.

                         Investment requires pipeline of bankable projects: The Bank's experience in energy sector, such as in
                         Myanmar and Liberia, has highlighted the need to invest in development of bankable projects in
                         order to promote private sector investment. ESTAP will support the development of detailed
                         technical studies that assist with this goal. In cooperation with the GRSS and other stakeholders, the
                         Bank will also support the overall development of favorable investment climate in South Sudan.

                         Complementarity of on-grid and off-grid access: GRSS is committed to expansion of access to
                         modern energy services to the masses. While grid-based access is the long term goal (supported by
                         various key actions as part of ESTAP), initiating off-grid rural electrification programs, as part of
                         ESTAP, will assist with the overall goal of access expansion. In this regard, lessons learned from
                         Bank's deep engagement in off-grid access programs in Sub-Saharan African countries, such as,
                         Lighting Africa, have been incorporated into the design of the Project. ESTAP also supports the
                         promotion of private sector participation in access enhancement.




                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project engagement will be national level with respect to putting place policy, systems and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procedures. Some pilots will be implemented in the field but are currently unknown.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         John Bryant Collier (GENDR)
                         Varalakshmi Vemuru (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The proposed project mainly focuses on technical
                          BP 4.01                                             support and capacity building. No adverse and
                                                                              irreversible environmental or social impacts are
                                                                              expected to be generated due to the
                                                                              implementation of the proposed project. The
                                                                              activities under Component 3 and 4 have
                                                                              negligible to minimal environmental and social
                                                                              impacts and will be implemented according to
                                                                              national and local laws and procedures.
                                                                              To strengthen the capacity of the client and lay
                                                                              the foundation for the sectoral safeguards
                                                                              management that will ensure sound
                                                                              environmental and social safeguards
                                                                              implementation, the client will undertake a
                                                                              Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                                                              (SESA) for the Energy Sector which will form the
                                                                              basis for the design of the policy, organizational
                                                                              structure and interventions for safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              capacity enhancement activities during
                                                                              implementation of the project. The ToRs for the
                                                                              SESA were prepared, consulted upon, approved
                                                                              and disclosed on February 6, 2014 in the Bank's
                                                                              Infoshop and in South Sudan.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               The proposed project does not include any
                                                                              activities that would trigger this policy.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               No project activities are expected to affect Forest
                                                                              resources and would trigger this policy.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No               The project does not involve pest management.

                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               The proposed project does not involve activities
                          BP 4.11                                             that affect PCR. Therefore this policy is not
                                                                              triggered.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               No activities for field level implementation are
                                                                              envisaged under the project that will require
                                                                              community involvement. The project is largely
                                                                              focused on providing TA at the level of the



                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                                                                                central government. It is also financing the
                                                                                installation of solar equipment at public facilities
                                                                                in villages and towns and thus does not involve
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                traditional lands. Local communities will be
                                                                                consulted and participate in installing and
                                                                                maintaining the equipment.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No               No land acquisition leading to involuntary
                            4.12                                                resettlement and/or restrictions of access is
                                                                                envisaged.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                 N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project is not taking place in disputed areas.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed Project mainly focuses on technical support and capacity building with a pilot
                              program on prepaid energy meters and off-grid access at limited scale. There are no adverse and
                              irreversible environmental or social impacts expected due to the implementation of the proposed
                              Project and the associated risk rating is ‘Low’. The activities under Component 3 and 4 would
                              have negligible to minimal environmental and social impacts. The anticipated impacts could be
                              easily mitigated and/or avoided through sensible and diligent safeguards management practices
Public Disclosure Copy




                              that would be implemented according to national and local laws and procedures. The
                              environmental assessment category of the proposed Project is assigned to Category ‘B’ and the
                              Bank's Operational Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Currently, the sector institutions have limited capacity for preparation and implementation of
                              environmental and social safeguards instruments. Therefore, to lay the foundation for the sectoral
                              safeguards management under the proposed Project and to ensure sound environmental and social
                              safeguards implementation, the Project will support a Strategic Environmental and Social
                              Assessment (SESA). The SESA will assist in developing clear procedures and methodologies for
                              environmental and social screening, planning, review, approval, and implementation of upcoming
                              energy sector projects; establish a mechanism to determine and assess the potential environmental
                              and social impacts of the upcoming investments in the energy sector; set out appropriate


                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                           mitigation, monitoring and institutional measures to be taken during implementation and operation
                           to avoid and/or minimize the expected environmental and social impacts to acceptable levels; and
                           provide clear guidance on the training, capacity building and technical assistance needed to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           successfully implement the provisions of the safeguards instruments.

                           The TORs for the SESA have been prepared, consulted, approved and publicly disclosed on
                           February 6, 2014 in the Bank's InfoShop and in South Sudan. The PMU will include
                           Environmental and Social Safeguards Officers who will not only support awareness creation but
                           also safeguards capacity enhancement activities at all levels during implementation of the Project.
                           With the ongoing support of the Bank's safeguards team, ESTAP will focus on establishment of
                           sound country systems for future growth of the sector.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the preparation of the SESA, consultation will be carried out with a range of stakeholders
                           including communities, NGOs, representatives of government from the relevant ministries, and
                           other Donors at the national and state levels. The final SESA draft will also be consulted upon
                           prior to finalizing the SESA. As part of the feasibility assessments for 3-4 high-priority projects
                           that are needed to augment generation and transmission capacity of South Sudan by assisting with
                           preparation of bankable transactions; extensive consultations will be carried out as part of the
                           Environmental and Social Assessments that will inform the designs of these investments.

                           The project does not involve any activities that will result in adverse impacts on communities. The
                           project will have positive impacts on communities based on the prepaid energy meters intervention
                           which will provide access for poor households to electricity, and the off-grid access based on
                           renewables which will involve public service centers like schools, health clinics and government
                           offices in boma and payam levels which will benefit communities. While rolling out both these
                           components extensive consultations with communities will be carried out to elicit their
                           participation and ownership of these initiatives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Feb-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           South Sudan                                                      03-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Rahul Kitchlu
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/      Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                         Date: 20-Nov-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
