                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA7051
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2013, 10-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P148009
                            Project Name:      INDIA: UTTRAKHAND RWSS ADDITIONAL FINANCING (P148009)
                            Task Team          Smita Misra
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          25-Nov-2013                        Estimated   16-Jan-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDU                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (30%), Sanitation (30%), Sub-national government administration
                                               (20%), General water, sanitation and flood protection s ector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        24.00           Total Bank Financing:  24.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                24.00
                              Total                                                                                      24.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The additional financing amends the project development objective of the parent project to address
                           the disaster mitigation activities.

                           The original PDO “To improve the effectiveness of rural water supply and sanitation services
                           (RWSS) through decentralization and increased role of Panchayati Raj Institutions and local

                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         communities in the state of Uttarakhand” is modified as follows:

                         “To improve the effectiveness of rural water supply and sanitation services (RWSS) through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         decentralization and increased role of Panchayati Raj Institutions and local communities in the state
                         of Uttarakhand and restore services of damaged schemes in the disaster affected areas.”

                         Following are the components under the on-going UKRWSSP and the additional component D for
                         RWSS Disaster Mitigation Activities:

                         Component A: RWSS Sector Development will support the state's sector reform process by
                         establishing and enhancing its institutional capacity to implement, manage, and sustain the state's
                         medium-term sector development program.

                         Component B: RWSS Infrastructure Investments aims to improve service and sustainable access to
                         RWSS services by financing infrastructure and software investments: (i) investments in water supply
                         schemes and catchment-area protection works, (ii) community mobilisation and development
                         activities; and (iii) sanitation programs.

                         Component C: RWSS Program Management Support and M&E: (i) operational and administrative
                         costs associated with the implementation of the sector-wide approach basket of the state's medium-
                         term sector program; and (ii) monitoring and evaluation.

                                  Component D: RWSS Disaster Mitigation Activities (New). This component will comprise
                         of the following sub-components:

                         •       Component D1: RWSS Sector Development (US$ 0.50 million). This sub-component will
                         continue with IEC and capacity building of the sector institutions and Panchayati Raj Institutions
                         (PRIs), along with sector studies, for managing and maintaining the reconstructed schemes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Component D2: Reconstruction and Restoration (US$ 18.79 million). This sub-component
                         will finance the reconstruction and restoration of an estimated 2,622 damaged Single Village
                         Schemes (SVS) and 579 Multi Village Schemes (MVS), 3,338 Individual Household Latrines
                         (IHHLs), 3,328 soak pits and 41,770 meters of drains.

                         •      Component D3: RWSS Program Management Support and M&E (US$ 8.57 million). This
                         sub-component will support implementation and M&E arrangements.
                         3. Project Description
                         The IDA credit of US$120 million for the Uttarakhand Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project
                         (UKRWSSP) was approved on September 5, 2006 and became effective on November 30, 2006.
                         The project development objective is ‘to improve the effectiveness of rural water supply and
                         sanitation services (RWSS) through decentralization and increased role of Panchayati Raj Institutions
                         and local communities in the state of Uttarakhand.’ The project was restructured in March 2010 to
                         adjust the reimbursement profile for investment. The project was restructured for a second time in
                         August 2011 to extend the project closing date from June 16, 2012 to June 16, 2014 as extended time
                         was required for capacity building and consensus building, especially for sector institutions that were
                         required to adopt new roles; and for time lost during National, State and local government election
                         cycles.



                                                                      Page 2 of 12
                         Uttarakhand has been affected by severe floods and landslides in June 2013. DEA has requested
                         additional IDA support of USD $24 million under the on-going UKRWSSP to reconstruct and
                         restore the partially damaged RWSS schemes due to the recent natural disaster.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The original project consists of three components: Component A RWSS Sector Development;
                         Component B RWSS Infrastructure Investments; and Component C: RWSS Program Management
                         Support and M&E.

                         An Additional Component D is being added on RWSS Disaster Mitigation Activities:

                         Component D on RWSS Disaster Mitigation Activities.
                         Sub-components:

                         Component D1: RWSS Sector Development (US$ 0.50 million). This sub-component will continue
                         with IEC and capacity building of the sector institutions and Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs),
                         along with sector studies, for managing and maintaining the reconstructed schemes.

                         Component D2: Reconstruction and Restoration (US$ 18.79 million). This sub-component will
                         finance the reconstruction and restoration of an estimated 2,622 damaged Single Village Schemes
                         (SVS) and 579 Multi Village Schemes (MVS), 3,338 Individual Household Latrines (IHHLs), 3,328
                         soak pits and 41,770 meters of drains.

                         Component D3: RWSS Program Management Support and M&E (US$ 8.57 million). This sub-
                         component will support implementation and M&E arrangements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The State of Uttarakhand, situated centrally in the Himalayas in north India, lies in two of its regions
                         -- Garhwal (north-west portion) and Kumaon (south-east portion). The state presents a variety of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         physical and hydro-geological characteristics in terms of topography, altitude, rainfall and
                         vegetation. The monsoon in the state commences after middle of June till mid-September, providing
                         four-fifths of total rainfall. In high hills rainfall generally occurs throughout the year with some
                         variations. The state’s hilly regions are well drained by numerous rivers and rivulets (locally known
                         as gad, gadhera and raula). The state has three main river systems: i) the Bhagirathi-Alkananda-
                         Ganga basin, ii) the Yamuna-Tons basin, and iii) the Kali system, which are important water
                         resources not only for the state but also for the whole Gangetic plains of north India. In general these
                         rivers make a steep descent in the first 10-20 km of their descent, with a lesser gradient later. Streams
                         and rivulets, both perennial and seasonal, which flow down almost in every fold of the mountain
                         ridges, and springs which occur all over the mountain region, form the main source of water to rural
                         communities, which do not have access to river valleys. The region, being located in unstable
                         Himalayan hills and with different river systems, is prone for natural hazards such as earthquakes and
                         flash floods. Thus, the state poses challenges for rural water supply and sanitation service provision.

                         Uttarakhand has been affected by severe floods and landslides in June 2013. A Joint Rapid Damage
                         and Needs Assessment (JRDNA) carried out by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank
                         (ADB), and the GoUK from July 29 to August 07, 2013 at the request of the Department of
                         Economic Affairs (DEA) estimated the cost of damage reconstruction to restore roads and bridges,
                         urban and tourism infrastructure, rural water supply and sanitation, and improve disaster
                         preparedness infrastructure to be US$661 million. The DEA, GoUK, ADB and the Bank have agreed


                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         on a framework for assistance in the disaster recovery and future risk reduction. ADB is assisting
                         GoUK to construct State roads and bridges, urban and tourism infrastructure, and disaster
                         preparedness infrastructure such as helipads. IDA is providing a $250 million credit under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project to restore housing, rural connectivity, and increase the
                         technical capacity of State entities to respond to future emergencies. DEA has requested additional
                         IDA support to the on-going UKRWSSP to reconstruct and restore the partially damaged RWSS
                         schemes due to the recent natural disaster. (The fully damaged RWSS schemes are being financed
                         through other resources.)

                         The Additional Financing will restore RWSS services for an estimated 1.05 million rural population,
                         of which 22% are Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribe, and 50% are female. The expected benefits of
                         the project interventions are: (i) value of time saved in water collection (about three hours per
                         household per day); (ii) value of incremental water supply; and (iii) value of health benefits due to
                         reduction in the incidence of diseases (diarrhea, gastroenteritis) prevalent in the State. Health
                         benefits include: (a) Reduction in mortality and loss of direct man-days (captured by DALYs); (b)
                         Reduction in loss of indirect man-days (by the attendant, usually the female household member); and
                         (c) Reduction in treatment-related expenses.

                         The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) of the on-going project is adequate to mitigate
                         and plan for any impacts of activities under the proposed additional financing. Additional safeguard
                         measures may be developed, as required, for implementation or for monitoring.

                         No new social development issues are envisaged during the implementation of the proposed
                         additional financing. No land acquisition is envisaged. In case land acquisition (other than public
                         land without any encumbrances) is required, it will be done through voluntary donation or purchased
                         at market rates. The current project has accomplished high levels of inclusion and equity through: (i)
                         a well-defined GP prioritization criteria and selection process, ensuring selection of ‘needy’ villages
                         for participation; and (ii) establishment of Users Water Supply and Sanitation Sub-Committees
                         (UWSSC for single village water supply schemes) / Multi Village Scheme Level Committees
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (MVSLC for multi village water supply schemes) providing for broad based local level community
                         institutions, with representation from both elected representatives and the general public including
                         women and other vulnerable households. In addition to the specific activities being pursued under the
                         existing project, the proposed additional financing will ensure the effective mobilization of, and
                         participation by, women with focus on social mobilization and participation.
                         . Apart from these, environmental and institutional strengthening and capacity-building benefits are
                         also expected to accrue as a result of project interventions.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Suryanarayan Satish (SASDS)
                         Pyush Dogra (SASDI)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project will support reconstruction of single
                         BP 4.01                                              and multiple village based rural water supply and
                                                                              sanitation schemes/services (RWSS), which will
                                                                              improve overall environmental conditions
                                                                              through expected improvement in quality of
                                                                              RWSS services. Incorporating the key


                                                                      Page 4 of 12
                                                                            environmental challenges identified under the
                                                                            EA, an EMF has been prepared. The EMF
                                                                            includes various environmental management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            strategies to be used during project
                                                                            implementation. Environmental Code of Practices
                                                                            have been prepared and included in the EMF.
                                                                            The above measures will be effectively utilized to
                                                                            screen the schemes from environmental impacts,
                                                                            and suggest measures of mitigation. The same
                                                                            practices will be followed in the current project.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The ongoing project does not provide any
                                                                            learning that project activities are in any way
                                                                            impacting natural habitat. Hence, policy is not
                                                                            triggered.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             Environmental Code of Practices have been
                                                                            prepared and included in the EMF for the
                                                                            schemes involving forest land. The above
                                                                            measures are effectively utilized to screen the
                                                                            schemes from environmental impacts, and
                                                                            suggest measures of mitigation. The same
                                                                            practices will be followed in the current project.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No              No activity will support use of pesticides or
                                                                            related activity, hence policy is not triggered.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No              The project activities do not foresee any impact
                            BP 4.11                                         on physical cultural resources. Hence, policy is
                                                                            not triggered.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              No issues have arisen during the last ten years
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            based on social, cultural, political and religious
                                                                            factors. No group has ever complained of being
                                                                            excluded as a result of their 'identity' hence, the
                                                                            Operational Policy 4.10, related to indigenous
                                                                            peoples was not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No              Lands need not be enquired involuntarily and
                            4.12                                            hence OP 4.12 is not triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              There is no water supply source involving dams
                                                                            or ponds hence policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International         No              No source is used for schemes which have flow
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            interstate or international flow across countries.
                                                                            Not applicable.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               Project is not in the disputed area, hence policy
                            7.60                                            is not applicable.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues




                                                                    Page 5 of 12
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           1) Environmental Assessment – OP/BP 4.01 - The project will support reconstruction of single
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and multiple village based rural water supply and sanitation schemes/services (RWSS), which will
                           improve overall environmental conditions through expected improvement in quality of RWSS
                           services.
                           While there are several positive impacts expected under the project (improved hygiene practices,
                           controlled discharge of human and domestic animal waste, reduction in faecal contamination and
                           improvement in overall Infant Mortality rate (IMR) and Maternal Mortality Rate (MMR), the
                           source sustainability (of springs and streams) has emerged as a major environmental challenge.
                           A comprehensive environmental assessment (EA) has been undertaken. This included an analysis
                           of sector specific environmental issues, policy and institutional bottlenecks, lessons learned from
                           past and ongoing projects and a focused case study on catchment area treatment. Incorporating the
                           key environmental challenges identified under the EA, an EMF has been prepared. The EMF
                           includes various environmental management strategies to be used during project implementation.
                           The EMF specifically indicates measures required to address and manage risks associated with the
                           following critical Environmental issues. :
                           (i) Source Sustainability
                           (ii) Water Quality
                           (iii) Environmental Sanitation
                           (iv) Grazing and Fuel wood pressure on the catchment area
                           Environmental Code of Practices have been prepared and included in the EMF. The above
                           measures are effectively utilized to screen the schemes from environmental impacts, and suggest
                           measures of mitigation. The same practices will be followed in the current project.

                          Forestry OP 4.36: Most water sources are located in forest areas, considering that Uttarakhand is
                          primarily a hilly state with almost 65% land under forests. The project ensures detailed
                          procedures for the use of forest land as per specifications by GoI. The EMF provides for adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                          management measures (during scheme implementation) to mitigate adverse impacts of any activity
                          in these areas. The Forestry policy is triggered but the project supports the overall objective of the
                          policy and has ensured that the design of the EMF is fully consistent with the policy.

                          Since EMF has been time tested in the current project, the same EMF and procedures will be
                          followed for screening of individual schemes from environmental and social perspectives in the
                          current additional financing project.
                          ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                          2) Social:

                          The AFP aims at repairing/ rehabilitating the existing (but damaged) water supply schemes, issues
                          and management measures will continue to be same as that of the on-going/ original project.
                          Social safeguard issues in respect of the on-going project are discussed/ addressed under two
                          broad categories: one, land related; and the other, Indigenous Peoples, in the context of
                          Operational Policy 4.10

                          Land Availability/ Contribution:

                          Land requirement arises for four purposes: FOR (i) water source; (ii) water treatment plants; (iii)


                                                                           Page 6 of 12
                         construction of ground level or overhead tanks (G/OHT) or cisterns; and (iv) water transmission
                         and distribution pipelines as well as sullage/ storm water drains. Majority of land requirement will
                         be met out of public/ forest lands. In a few cases, private lands will need to be secured. However,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         it is not essential that a particular piece of land at a particular place is needed. Rather, lands can be
                         chosen from a number of alternatives. The project’s activity/ success do not depend upon having a
                         particular piece of land. Thus, lands need not be enquired involuntarily and hence OP 4.12 is not
                         triggered. Given this, the project has worked out detailed procedures/ rules governing securing
                         lands. The same has been successfully adopted so far and 3091 schemes have been constructed.
                         Additional Finance Project activities too will adhere to the same rules of engagement, details of
                         which are enumerated below.

                         --Transmission / distribution as well as sullage/ storm drainage in the case of single village
                         schemes, are laid mostly in public land or along public streets and no land needs to be acquired. In
                         a few cases pipelines may have to pass through private agriculture fields. Since the pipeline are
                         laid at least 90 cms below ground elevation, no land acquisition is needed, but permission from the
                         land owner is taken. If such permission is not forthcoming, then alternative pipe routing is used,
                         even if it is more expensive to do so. In a few cases, where sources are located in the forests,
                         transmission lines may have to be drawn through the forest lands. In such a situation, procedure as
                         described below will be adopted.

                         Water Source. Uttaranchal being a hilly state with about 65 % of lands under forests, majority of
                         water sources are located in the forests. Government of India (GOI) as well as state government
                         has well laid out rules and procedures for making use of forest lands for non-forest purposes. Key
                         principle underpinning the land transactions are:

                         (i)      Gram Panchayat will make an application to the concerned Divisional Forest Officer
                         (DFO) requesting lands specifying location and area required as well as purpose for which it will
                         be used.
                         (ii)     DFO will examine and recommends to the state government which has powers to accord
Public Disclosure Copy




                         approval for lands up to one hectare and area beyond one hectare needs approval by GOI. Past
                         experience of the Bank assisted as well as other projects implemented by other sector institutions
                         indicate that a majority of schemes may not require more than 0.3 Ha (single village schemes) and
                         0.8 Ha (multi-village schemes). This means, most approvals will be sought within the state.
                         (iii)    Land transfer will require fees to be paid toward net present value (NPV), amounts meant
                         for compensatory afforestation elsewhere in lieu of forests given up for the project. NPV varies
                         from location to location and will be calculated on the basis of not only area but also forest
                         density.

                         G/OHT & Treatment Plant. When plots of lands are to be acquired for project installations, their
                         ownership could be either public or private. While it is easier to access public land, arrangements
                         will have to be made for securing privately owned land. All land purchases will be voluntary by
                         donations or market led sale-purchase transactions. This is being adopted as it is not mandatory
                         that a particular piece of land alone will be required without which scheme can not be grounded.
                         In other words, the project’s activity/ success do not depend upon having a particular piece of land.

                         Single Village Water Supply Schemes. The prevailing normal practice in the state is to obtain such
                         land plots either through voluntary donation or by outright purchase. But, again, actual cash
                         transactions were very few and most of them were based on a mutual understanding between the
                         owner and the community. This practice is expected to continue for the proposed AFP too for

                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                         single village water supply schemes. It may also be noted that most village communities are rather
                         quite small (being hill based) and are rather homogeneous in terms of social, economic and
                         cultural status and hence sense of community belonging and voluntariness are quite common.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Multi-Village Water Supply Schemes. In this case, the number of outright purchases with cash
                         transaction could be higher .In these cases, responsibility of making available lands will rest with
                         GPs/ UWSCs. Detailed principles underpinning securing lands are described below:

                         (i)      Project will not resort to involuntary land acquisition.
                         (ii)     To a large extent, as a first priority, efforts will be made to secure Public lands (lands
                         belonging to revenue or other departments).
                         (iii)    In case, public lands are not available, then, private lands will be secured in the open
                         market.
                         (iv)     Selection of Land. – All the three parties - GP, UWSSC and the respective state body –
                         together will decide on the selection taking into account suitability from all perspectives.
                         (v)      Prices. A district level advisory committee headed by the Block Pramukh with broad base
                         participation by other functionaries (Block Development Officer, Jr Engineer of the state sector
                         agency, Gram Pradhan and Chairman of UWSSC) will involve in negotiations with prospective
                         sellers and arrive at a negotiated price. This will be endorsed by DWSM.
                         (vi)     Right to Refusal. A seller will have a right to refuse to sell his/ her piece of land, if s/he so
                         wishes, at any point of time, till that time sale transactions are completed.
                         (vii)    Thus, all (private) land transactions will meet the following criteria:
                         a.       the land in question will be free of squatters, encroachers or other claims of encumbrances;
                         b.       no lands will be secured which has semi/ permanent structures;
                         c.       activity for which a specific land is chosen has the general acceptance by the local
                         community (as endorsed by the GP through consultations);
                         d.       verification of the voluntary nature of land sale purchase in each case -- independent
                         monitoring and certification by SWSM;
                         e.       due transparent measures for publicizing the rules of securing lands as well as the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transactions thereof;
                         f.       land transfers will be complete, land title will be vested with the (GP/ UWSSC);
                         g.       no project activity will start unless payments are made and title transfer are completed;
                         h.       provision will be made for redressal of grievances (ROG) PMU (SWSM) will act as a
                         redressal house with an officer designated particularly for monitoring the land purchases.
                         (viii) Lands will not be secured from socially poor and vulnerable households (such as those
                         belonging to Scheduled Castes/ Scheduled Tribes) who, after alienation, will be left with less than
                         a minimum holding essential to support livelihood.

                         Indigenous Peoples :
                         Social Assessment Enquiry, based on detailed analysis of several aspects, done for the ongoing
                         project concluded that: Uttaranchal has persons labeled as Scheduled Tribes (ST) who do not
                         qualify to be considered as 'Indigenous Peoples' as they do not meet with the characteristics listed
                         in Operational Policy 4.10. STs in Uttaranchal are not a distinct, vulnerable, social and cultural
                         group and do not meet with the following key characteristics: (i) self-identification as members of
                         a distinct indigenous cultural group; (ii) collective attachment to geographically distinct habitats
                         or ancestral territories in the project area and to the natural resources in these habitats and
                         territories; (iii) customary cultural, economic, social, or political institutions that are separate from
                         those of the dominant society and culture; and (iv) an indigenous language distinctly different
                         from the official language of the country or region.

                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                           The study substantiated the above by the following. STs are not among the most marginalized and
                           vulnerable segments of the population. In fact, STs have continuously participated in and derived
Public Disclosure Copy




                           benefits from several development interventions and that, their social, economic and legal status
                           are in fact, as good, if not better, than the other people. Some supporting data are as follows:

                           i.      ST habitations have better water supply coverage compare to the non-STcounterparts.

                           ii.    There are very few ‘Partially Covered’ and ‘Not Covered’ tribal habitations among the
                           STs compared to non-STs

                           iii. Poverty: Extent of poverty is higher among the non-STs. Per capita availability of land is
                           higher for STs.

                           v.      Literacy: There are more number of literate women among the STs than that in the non-
                           STs

                           vi. Uttaranchal ST list has several high caste persons including Brahmins (Semwals, Sharmas,
                           Chendolas), and Rajputs (Tomars, Chauhans ). Labeling of ST has been accorded based on an
                           ‘area’(Jaunsar) in Dehradun, wherein the maximum STs reside and not based on socio-cultural
                           identities. STs are interspersed with the others and hence a collective attachment of a particular
                           group to a particular 'territory' and/ or 'natural resources' does not exists. Rather, it belongs to the
                           interspersed community as a whole. While a number of dialects exists (true of India as a whole),
                           there is no 'language' distinctly different from that of the official langague - Hindi. There are no
                           customary institutions as all the entire state/ society functions under the mainstream social,
                           religious, cultural and political institutions recognized by the Indian Constitution.

                           Lastly, no issues have arisen during the last ten years based on social, cultural, political and
                           religious factors. No group has ever complained of being excluded as a result of their 'identity'. It
Public Disclosure Copy




                           may also be apt to say: the project has a highly robust Grievance Redressal mechanism which has
                           enabled bagging State Award for Right to Information more than once. With the above
                           substantiation, there is no need to trigger the Bank’s Operational Policy 4.10, related to
                           indigenous peoples.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           EMF and related environmental code of practices have been adopted in the on-going project. No
                           new activity other than reconstruction and improvement in the damaged schemes will be taken up
                           under the Additional Financing. The overall impact by following EMF / EMP will be positive in
                           the long period. Apart from these, environmental and institutional strengthening and capacity-
                           building benefits are also expected to accrue as a result of project interventions.

                           Social: No adverse impacts are foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Environment: Adverse impacts may occur only due to mismanagement during implementation of
                           individual schemes. The EMF provides specifications and environmental codes of practices to
                           ensure mitigation of any local level impact. Therefore alternative options will be considered
                           during the planning and implementation of individual schemes.

                                                                        Page 9 of 12
                           Social: The project is expected to result in positive impacts only. No negative impacts
                           are anticipated.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment: All environmental and social management measures are integrated within the
                           overall project scheme-cycle and are being implemented in the ongoing project in various stages
                           of single/multiple village schemes during planning, execution and post-implementation through an
                           integrated Operations Manual.
                           The State Water and Sanitation Mission (SWSM) is the implementing agency with the overall
                           project management support provided by the Swajal PMU. The other implementing partners are :
                           Jal Sansthan and Jal Nigam, the sector institutions of the state.
                           The Swajal PMU consists of resource people from different disciplines and government
                           departments responsible for managing the project. They are supported by the DPMUs in
                           implementing the project at the district level. The Swajal PMU has designated one of its members
                           as “Environment Coordinator” (EC) for being exclusively responsible for ensuring the
                           implementation of EMF in all the single/multiple village water supply schemes. Similarly,
                           Coordinators exist to undertake social development activities through Human Resource
                           Development (HRD) and Communications and Capacity Development Unit (CCDU). The
                           coordiantors are overall in-charge of implementing and co-ordinating the social / environmental
                           issues under the project. The Coordinators at the state level are supported by Specialists at district
                           level for Swajal PMU level, Uttrakhand Jal Nigam (UJN) and Uttarakhand Jal Sansthan (UJS)
                           similarly have project specific units both at state as well as district levels. Specialists of PMU,
                           UJN and UJS at the district level are providing regular technical and monitoring support to each of
                           the schemes. The above arrangement will continue in the current additional financing project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Extensive stakeholder consultation and dissemination of documents were undertaken while
                           formulating EMF. Later, based on field experiences and impact studies, more environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           social aspects related workshops and trainings were organized to bring awareness on
                           environmental and social aspects. The activity will continue during additional financing period.
                           Social: Extensive consultations have been conducted throughout the project implementation which
                           includes: capacity building programs, observation study tours, concurrent monitoring and
                           community mobilization as well as sanitation campaigns.. The stakeholders include: local
                           communities including women, GP representatives; Government officials, policy makers, NGOs
                           and consultants. These consultations have helped in mapping of the issues; analyzing their current
                           status and issues thereof; and future course of actions. The consultations will continue to underpin
                           the project implementation under the AFP as well. NGOs will be specially deployed to create not
                           only for mobilizing the local communities but also in creating an awareness about the provisions
                           of the project and thus ensure a demand for the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          07-Dec-2005
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       17-Feb-2006
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                     Page 10 of 12
                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not Applicable for current project as the same EMF as per the original project will be applied in the
                            current additional financing project.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:         Name: Smita Misra
                            Approved By


                                                                       Page 11 of 12
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)   Date: 10-Dec-2013
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Ming Zhang (SM)            Date: 10-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 12 of 12
