                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA1151
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Feb-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Morocco                           Project ID:    P143689
                            Project Name:     Clean and Efficient Energy Project (P143689)
                            Task Team         Roger Coma Cunill
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         23-Feb-2015                       Estimated   23-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEEDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (50%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%), Climate change
                                              (90%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     153.00           Total Bank Financing:               125.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  4.05
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   125.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                    23.95
                              Total                                                                                   153.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the capacity of ONEE to supply and dispatch clean electricity and to meet the demand of
                           targeted customers more efficiently.


                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will increase the ability of ONEE to supply and efficiently dispatch clean energy and
                         meet demand more efficiently. The country ambitious energy goals require a coordinated action to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         change the way in which energy is supplied, dispatched, and consumed in the system. This includes,
                         first, collaborating between different stakeholders to meet clean energy supply goals. Second,
                         modernizing the grid to ensure its effective and reliable operation as large shares of clean variable
                         generation are integrated into the system. And, lastly, managing demand to reduce consumption and
                         ensuring utility loses are controlled. These three complementary areas of action form the
                         components of the project, which are detailed herewith:

                         Component 1 – ONEE’s Solar PV Program:

                         In December 2013, ONEE adopted a 3-phase corporate strategy to develop 400 MW of grid-
                         connected decentralized solar PV in 16 sites located at the end of high-voltage transmission lines.
                         The Government strongly supports the implementation of this strategy, which will contribute to
                         achieve the ambitious national renewable energy targets established by 2020 (42% in installed
                         capacity, including 14% of solar energy). The strategy is also expected to have important local
                         benefits in terms of improved quantity and quality of electricity supply in communities with
                         significant poverty rates where economic activities, i.e. agriculture, tourism, crafts, and household’s
                         life quality are affected by voltage drops and regular outages. As part of Morocco’s national energy
                         strategy, ONEE’s solar PV strategy complements the 2,000 MW solar plant under implementation by
                         MASEN.

                         This component will finance the first phase of ONEE’s solar Photovoltaic (PV) program as public
                         investment and will assist ONEE in transitioning towards private sector financing of solar PV plants
                         in subsequent phases of its program based on lessons learned. The first phase will include the
                         development of solar PV plants, with a combined installed capacity of 75 MW, at three sites in
                         Missour, Erfoud and Zagora (Subcomponent 1.1). Each solar PV plant will evacuate the generated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         power through High Voltage (HV) transmission lines connected to the existing HV 60 kV grid. The
                         specific alignments of the HV evacuation lines will be determined by ONEE based on the results of
                         the on-going technical studies. ONEE will build the associated HV evacuation lines. Each site is
                         accessible from national and/or regional roads and secondary road tracks which will be rehabilitated
                         during the project but not upgraded with asphalt.

                         The project integrates a Technical Assistance activity (Subcomponent 1.2) to support ONEE in the
                         transition from a public to an IPP model for developing solar PV plants in the country. The study
                         "Enabling Environment for Private Participation" will include a market sounding analysis to test
                         private sector interest for grid-connected PV in Morocco.

                         Component 2 – Planning and dispatching of Renewable energies:

                         Transmission System Operators (TSO) such as ONEE are responsible for managing the electrical
                         system under strict safety and quality parameters. TSOs control key variables such as the voltage at
                         the local nodes and the frequency for the whole system. Both variables, voltage and frequency,
                         should be kept within predefined range of values all the time. Thus, ONEE programs daily the
                         production of the power plants connected to the high voltage grid to cover the forecasted demand at
                         the minimum possible cost. This component will finance a Renewable Energy dispatch center
                         consisting of SCADA software and hardware to ensure optimal power dispatch and system


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         protection. This investment will provide more opportunities to ONEE, the transmission system
                         operator, to optimally adjust supply and demand resources. Dispatch optimization will be carried out
                         according to supply/demands forecasts and hence, reduce investment needs in generation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transmission. The dispatch center will be co-located with the existing National load dispatch center
                         and integrated with real time measurement and information flow.

                         Component 3 – Utility Demand-side Management and Revenue Protection program:

                         ONEE plans to install smart-meters and advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) to its high and
                         medium voltage customers, as well as time-of-use meters -with integration capabilities to the AMI-
                         to its top-consuming households, small agricultural, and commercial clients. The two main objectives
                         are: (i) to keep non-technical losses (unmetered consumption) in electricity supply low systematically
                         and, hence, increase the company’s billing revenues; and (ii) incentivize customers with time-of-use
                         meters to subscribe to a time-of-use tariff and reduce their consumption during expensive peak hours.
                         The advanced metering infrastructure will initially be deployed to cover all of ONEE’s high voltage
                         clients (Distributors and Direct large clients) and all of its medium voltage clients. This category of
                         users represents 0.40% of the total number of clients and accounts for 78% of energy sales. The time-
                         of-use meters will be installed at 60,000 low-voltage client sites representing only 1.30% of ONEE’s
                         clients, but 10% of total consumption of ONEE’s low voltage users.

                         Component 4 – Technical Assistance:

                         This component will include training, capacity building, knowledge exchange, and study tour
                         activities in the following areas: (i) best practices by system operators to manage large shares of
                         renewable energy at the wholesale and distribution level, training and study tours (ii) new technology
                         trends in control and performance capabilities of renewable energy technologies and interconnection
                         standards, (iii) best practices and approaches for the supervision of PV, wind and other projects, and
                         other such as (iv) new emerging regulatory practices for private participation in renewables, access to
                         transmission networks, and others.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The national utility, the Office National de l’Electricité et de l’Eau Potable (ONEE) has identified
                         several sites next to the towns of Missour, Erfoud and Zagora in the South-eastern region of Morocco
                         to develop mid-size solar PV plants. The on-going feasibility study will confirm the precise siting as
                         well as technology choice.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arbi Ben Achour (GSURR)
                         Najat Maalla M'Jid (MNCMA)
                         Suiko Yoshijima (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment        Yes             Solar PV power generation does not produce any
                          OP/BP 4.01                                      pollutant. The panels of some solar PV sub-
                                                                          technologies, however, contain chemicals such as
                                                                          cadmium which might require particular attention in
                                                                          their replacement, and during de-commissioning in


                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                  case of damage. The main concern is expected to be
                                                                  on workers safety issues during construction. Such
                                                                  impacts will be small scale and site-specific, and can
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  be readily avoided/mitigated through implementation
                                                                  of the project environmental management plan.

                                                                  Therefore, the proposed project is Category B as per
                                                                  OP4.01.

                                                                  Three sites have been identified in Erfoud, Zagora
                                                                  and Missour. ONEE will make a decision on the
                                                                  specific photovoltaic technology to be used based on
                                                                  the recommendations of the on-going feasibility
                                                                  study. Site-specific Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                  Assessments (ESIAs)/ESMPs for the three sites and
                                                                  an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                  Framework (ESMF) for the associated facilities were
                                                                  prepared before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No        Sensitive natural habitat areas will be avoided.

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No        There are no forests in the proposed three locations.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No        No pesticides will be used.

                         Physical Cultural Resources    No        It was confirmed that proposed sites are far from the
                         OP/BP 4.11                               known physical cultural sites in Zagora and Erfoud.
                                                                  However, for due diligence, the ESIA and the ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  includes chance finds procedure annex in case any
                                                                  physical cultural resources are found during the
                                                                  construction phase.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No        The project sites where the solar PV plants are
                         4.10                                     proposed to be constructed are large extension of
                                                                  uninhabited bare land. Hence, indigenous people will
                                                                  not be affected.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes       While no involuntary resettlement is expected under
                         BP 4.12                                  the Project, there will be land acquisition, in
                                                                  particular for the planned solar PV plants and
                                                                  transmission lines.

                                                                  The specific alignments of the transmission lines and
                                                                  roads in the associated facilities are not fully
                                                                  determined.

                                                                  A Land Acquisition Plan (LAP)/Resettlement Action
                                                                  Plan (RAP), consistent with the requirements of OP
                                                                  4.12 has been prepared for the three sites and a



                                                              Page 4 of 8
                                                                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                             prepared for the associated facilities (transmission
                                                                             lines and roads) prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No

                            Projects on International      No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                            BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              In general, PV power generation does not produce any pollutant during operation and good site
                              management will minimize all the impacts. However, the choice of transformers will have to be
                              made to minimize the impacts. Overall, the project will have little impact on the three sites, whose
                              locations are well adapted for solar projects. The main anticipated impacts during the construction
                              phase, will be potential impacts on the soil such as ground settlement due to movement of heavy
                              machinery, soil erosion, and risk of accidental oil spills from equipment and machinery. During
                              the operational phase, there is the potential impact of fire outbreak from equipment and the visual
                              impact of the solar array on the landscape. The ESIA prescribes adequate measures to address
                              these issues during construction and operation phases. Issues related to workers’ health and safety
                              are also addressed in the ESMP. The ESIA also includes an annex containing draft environmental
                              and social clauses to be included in the contractual call for tenders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              While no physical displacement and no involuntary resettlement of persons is expected under the
                              Project, there will be land acquisition, in particular for the planned solar PV plants, and
                              transmission lines. Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered and RPF has been prepared for associated
                              facilities and LAP/RAPs have been prepared for three sites.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The long term impact of the project is visual. This will be addressed through adequate landscaping
                              measures to shield of the visual impact from major routes in the project areas.

                             The project will provide reliable green energy to inhabitants of the urban areas in Erfoud, Missour
                             and Zagora, in Morocco’s south eastern region. The solar PV plants will have positive impacts in
                             the economy, health, and quality of life of citizens, including women, living in these areas.

                              The Project will be implemented in areas where the poverty level is between 11.3% to over 30%
                              according to data from the national poverty map. It will thus contribute to unlock the economic
                              potential of these regions by providing green power with adequate quality for agricultural, tourism
                              and craft industries’ project.s.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.



                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           The project choice has been selected based on its minimal adverse effects on the project area.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ONEE’s Environmental department has actively been involved in the preparation of the safeguards
                           instruments and will be responsible for the implementation of the site-specific ESIAs, ESMPs,
                           LAP/RAP and RPF.

                           ONEE will provide updates on implementation of safeguards instruments to the Bank, which will
                           be included in the bi-annual project progress report.

                           ONEE has collaborated on development of many projects supported by the Bank and has a good
                           expertise of the procedures of land acquisition and compensation and the WB safeguard policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders are: ONEE; regional governments of Erfoud, Missour and Zagora; civil society
                           groups in the three regions; ethnic groups in the project affected areas; local businesses.

                           Consultation activities (interviews, focus group discussions, and public hearing) were held with
                           various stakeholders and members of communities in the three pre-selected sites.
                           Formal consultations here held on December 16, 2014 in Zagora, December 17, 2014 in Erfoud
                           and December 18, 2014 in Missour. These consultations were in compliance with World Bank
                           policies related to disclosure and public consultation (BP 17.50 and OP 4.01). Project-affected
                           peoples represented almost 30% of attendance at these meetings. Throughout the various
                           consultation activities, ONEE and the Bank teams recorded a widely significant public acceptance
                           by the communities and governmental stakeholders towards the proposed project.

                           Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) are easily accessible to potential affected people, who can
Public Disclosure Copy




                           express their complaints to the ONEE using different channels (mobile teams, ONEE offices at
                           provincial and local levels). Regarding land acquisition and compensation, they can also have
                           access to administrative (arbitration committee) and to judicial legal remedies if needed.). The
                           population can also use channels that are not specific to the power sector, such as local authorities
                           and independent constitutional grievance bodies (National Human Rights Council, Mediator and
                           Agency for Preventing and Fighting Corruption).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    19-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                 06-Feb-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive    ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                        18-Feb-2015
                           Comments: Documents available on the Client's Website: http://www.one.ma/FR/pages/interne.
                                         asp?esp=2&id1=10&id2=177&t2=1
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                    19-Jan-2015


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Feb-2015
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Morocco                                                          18-Feb-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Comments: Documents available on the Client's Website: http://www.one.ma/FR/pages/interne.
                                            asp?esp=2&id1=10&id2=177&t2=1
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Roger Coma Cunill
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                  Date: 20-Feb-2015
                         Advisor:
                         Practice Manager/    Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (PMGR)   Date: 21-Feb-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
