INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 166
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mali                       Project ID:  P146247
Project Name: Mali Obsolete Pesticides Disposal and Prevention Project (P146247)
Task Team       Dahlia Lotayef
Leader(s):
Estimated       24-Feb-2015                Estimated    30-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal.
AEFca:         Persistent Organic Pollutants
Area:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Pollution management and environmental health (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.14            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
O
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    1.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           3.19
DENMARK Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA)                               0.95
Total                                                                       5.14
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to reduce risks from existing publicly-held
obsolete pesticide stocks and associated waste; and strengthen the institutional framework for risk
Page 1 of 9


﻿mitigation of obsolete pesticides.
3. Project Description
The following three components are proposed:
0
Component 1: Disposal of publicly-held OPs and associated waste and reduction of risk from three
priority high-risk contaminated sites (Total financing: $3.62 million)
o         Sub-component 1.1: Disposal of publicly-held OPs and associated waste
i.     Removal and centralization of low-risk stocks: learning from the successful experience of
ASP-Mali, trained national teams will be tasked to remove and centralize stocks defined as low-risk
(stocks which do not contain WHO class la (extremely hazardous) or lb (highly hazardous)
pesticides and weigh less than 500kg), prior to their disposal as part of the overall disposal contract
as described below. Appropriate safeguard measures will be detailed in the ESIA.
ii.    Disposal of low, medium and high risk stocks: a qualified international firm will be
contracted for this specialized operation. Disposal will take place in an established treatment or
disposal facility in a highly regulated environment (most likely, but not necessarily, in Europe).
Overseas shipment of stocks and their disposal will meet the requirements of the Basel and
Stockholm conventions.
iii.   Sustainable management of OPs: a full national inventory update will be conducted at
project mid-term, with the aim of strengthening data management streams and updating the national
OPs database (the PSMS).
DNACPN will utilize the data in the PSMS, recently purchased equipment, risk profiling and
approved safeguard documents to facilitate the disposal of the OPs and waste stocks. The amount of
stocks to be disposed of and the cost of this sub component will be determined during project
preparation on the basis of the sites' audit and the current disposal unit cost.
Sub-component 1.2: Risk reduction from contaminated sites
i.     Risk reduction at three priority high-risk contaminated sites: the sites of Goundam, Bambara
Maoud6 and Kara were pre-identified during ASP-Mali as posing the highest risk of environmental
contamination and/or human health impacts. The above-mentioned pre-feasibility study,
characterizing the type and extent of contamination at each of the sites, will inform the technical
options for risk reduction.
ii.    National plan for decontamination of priority sites: The project will develop a national plan
for decontamination of other priority sites, already or to be identified in the country. The plan will be
based on characterization of sites and proposals for risk reduction and financing options. In
particular, it is expected that sites in the North that have been difficult to access due to security
reasons will be evaluated, including Tin Essako (a burial site 150km from Kidal), Gao (a destroyed
pesticide store, 1,200km from Bamako), and An6fis (a well and surrounding area heavily
contaminated by dieldrin, 90km from Kidal).
Local and international NGOs could play a role in carrying out independent monitoring of disposal
and contaminated soil removal activities via the Pesticides Action Network in Mali (PAN-Mali) with
the aim to ensure the objectivity of cleanup operations and promote awareness of civil society.
External supervision of disposal compliance with international standards will also be financed.
Page 2 of 9


﻿Expected outcome: Elimination of POPs, POPs waste and other harmful substances originating from
publicly-held OPs and associated waste, and reduction of health and environmental risks from highly
contaminated soil
0
Expected key outputs:
i.     Disposal of 580 tonnes of publicly-held OPs and associated waste (target to be confirmed)
ii.    An updated national inventory of publicly-held OPs and associated waste
iii.   Reduction of risk emanating from highly polluted soil in Goundam, Bambara Maoud6 and
Kara
iv.    A national plan for decontamination of prioritized sites polluted by pesticides
Component 2: Reduction of re-accumulation of OPs and associated waste (Total financing: $0.84
million)
ASP-Mali's key "prevention" achievements are the development of a National Prevention Plan
(PNP, dated July 2007), development and updating of legal and regulatory texts for re-accumulation
control, regulation enforcement support to government agencies, and pesticide and waste
management training to stak eholders. In addition, PAN-Mali educated and raised the awareness of
farming communities to the health risks of pesticide mishandling. Several programs were gender
focused, addressing the specific requirements of women. With regard to empty pesticide containers,
pilot activities were carried out in two of Mali's four cotton zones : PAN-Mali raised the awareness
of communities to the health risks of re-using contaminated empty pesticide containers, and as a
result, most of the containers were collected into collection points/stores in the villages, where they
are still being held. Finally, ASP-Mali helped activating the CNGP as a multi-stakeholder body
responsible for overseeing control of pesticides; however, CNGP did not continue functioning once
ASP-Mali was closed due to lack of funding.
Analysis of remaining key weaknesses along the pesticide life cycle in Mali shows that (i) there
remain some legislation gaps related to OP management procedures and responsibilities, container
management and pesticide import and registration; in addition, the texts and PNP that were
developed by the ASP-Mali need to be formally endorsed and put to implementation; (ii) there is a
a        lack of sustainable funding sources for pesticides, OPs and empty containers management and for the
CNGP; (iii) weak collaboration between importers/distributors and DNACPN, including on data
management (for both pesticides and OPs); (iv) there are capacity gaps for pesticide inspection and
control, and OPs management in the public sector; and (v) there is need for continued awareness
raising and communication with communities about OPs mishandling. The following activities are
proposed accordingly:
Sub-component 2.1: Pesticide management policy, regulation and institutional support
i.     Finalization of draft ordinances and procedures for pesticide management, and submission
for endorsement by the CNGP b efore submission for official approval:
*      Draft Ordinance on the implementation of the Polluter Pays Act No. 01-020 (May 30, 2001)
related to management of pollution and nuisance from seized OPs and related waste;
*      Draft Inter-Ministerial Ordinance on empty pesticide containers management;
*      Draft Inter-Ministerial Ordinance on rules for packaging, transportation, storage and disposal
of pesticides;
Page 3 of 9


﻿*      Draft ordinance on pest and pesticide control agents' registration;
*      Draft ordinance determining terms and conditions for pesticide use.
*      Forms and procedures for inspection and control of pesticides sale, import and/or
formulation;
Q)        *      Procedure for pesticides transportation control;
*      Procedures for managing seized pesticides and closed off stores;
 *    Procedure for pesticide marketing applications;
*      Procedure for notification of OP detention to DNACPN; and
 *    Draft text on OPs seizure and detention notification, in accordance with Article 38 of Act
No. 01-020 (May 30, 2001) on pollution and nuisance.
ii.    A feasibility study on sustainable financing instruments for pesticides management in Mali.
The study will include sections on the pesticide life cycle, empty container management, review/
analysis of the role of the private sector, and actions to ensure the sustainable operation of the CNGP.
The study will eventually be endorsed by CNGP and then submitted to the Government with
concrete recommendations for implementation.
iii.   Institutional support:
*      Support to DNACPN's data management ability, focusing on the PSMS as the main data
management instrument, and looking at the various data streams, including periodical inventory of
pesticide stores;
*      Support to DNACPN's strategic orientation and management capabilities;
*      Support to DNACPN to implement the polluter pays principle for OPs (information, raising
the awareness of users, and reinforcement of DNACPN's enforcement capacity); and
*      Training stakeholders in pesticide inspection and control, management of seized pesticides
and pesticides resale and trade (distribution/sale).
iv.    Evaluation and updating of the PNP accordingly, and having it endorsed by the concerned
authorities. The mainstreaming of key elements of the PNP into government's annual work plans and
budgets is expected as part of the recommendations of the sustainable financing study.
Sub-component 2.2: Empty container management
Continuing ASP-Mali's container collection efforts by (i) scaling up collection efforts to all cotton-
producing regions and (ii) establishing a recovery structure whereby collected containers are
a        centralized for subsequent treatment (recycling or safe disposal) in accordance with the results of the
sustainable financing study.
Sub-component 2.3: Communication and awareness raising
Updating and implementing ASP-Mali's communication plan (for communication between the
DNCAPN and government stakeholders) and developing and implementing a communication and
awareness raising plan with the audience being affected communities and stakeholders.
Expected outcome: Sustainable reduction of new accumulations of OPs and associated waste
Expected key outputs:
i.     Finalized ordinances and procedures for management of pesticides, OPs and waste endorsed
by the CNGP and submitted for official approval
ii.    A feasibility study on sustainable financing instruments for pesticides management endorsed
Page 4 of 9


﻿by the CNGP and submitted to government for approval
iii.   Training sessions for DNACPN staff and other stakeholders
iv.    Collection and recovery of empty pesticide containers in all cotton zones
v.     Implementation of communication and awareness raising tool for internal and external
audiences
vi.    An updated and endorsed PNP (on the basis of other outputs)
Component 3: Project management and Monitoring and Evaluation (Total financing: $0.48 million)
The project will be managed according to the following principles: (a) ensuring strong project
delivery; (b) building on existing competences and expertise from ASP-Mali; and (c) ensuring
sustainability of institutional arrangements (including sustainable financing) and capacity. A PMU
will therefore be embedded within DNACPN and comprise designated staff from the ministry;
technical consultants could be considered for a limited period of time at the beginning of the project.
It is expected that the PMU will comprise a coordinator, an administrative and financial manager, an
accountant and a procurement specialist (either from PAPAM or a consultant due to shortage of
experienced procurement specialists in the government).
The PMU's main tasks will be to monitor and evaluate project progress; prepare work plans and
procurement plans; facilitate stakeholders' workshops and meetings; and report on project progress
and financial status via periodical report according to an agreed timeline. Project M&E will be
carried out using ASP-Mali's existing M&E system, including software, data collection methods and
reporting formats according to an agreed results framework.
Expected outcome: Effective project management and M&E
Expected key outputs: periodical progress reports, including mid-term and completion reports,
Interim unaudited Financial Reports, internal and external financial audits, annual work plans and
procurement plans
Implementation and institutional arrangements
DNACPN will be the project Implementing Agency under the supervision of the Director General, or
any other high level official of DNACPN as designated by the Minister of Environment and
a        Sanitation. The project will be overseen by a National Steering Committee (NSC, based on the
Steering Committee of ASP-Mali) , which will be chaired by the MEA Minister and include
representatives from relevant ministries and directorates, pesticide importers and NGOs. The NSC
will endorse work plans and budgets, provide overall guidance to the PMU and ensure continued
government commitment to project objectives.
Where appropriate, the project may seek specialized guidance from consultants and ad hoc thematic
working groups under the NSC. Previously, a Prevention Working Group and a Soil
Decontamination Working Group were formed to help plan and implement prevention and soil
decontamination activities. It is therefore likely that these groups will be reconvened for the purpose
of the proposed project. In addition, discussions are ongoing between the World Bank and CLI about
the possibility of providing the PMU with technical support for disposal (OPs inventory and
collection training, review and supervision of the disposal contract, training and supervision of work
in the contaminated sites, etc.).
Page 5 of 9


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
3 sites have been identified: Goundam, Bambara Maoude and Kara.
0
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         In essence, the project's overall environmental and social
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               impact is expected to be highly positive because of the
nature of its activities. The project will reduce the risks of
exposure and consecutive potential acute intoxication of
human and the environment by removal and safely
disposing hazardous wastes (obsolete pesticides, empty
containers, and highly contaminated soils). Therefore, the
negative risks and/or impacts will arise from the
processing, mainly during the repacking, transportation,
remediation of sites, and temporary storage prior
evacuation, as for any activity related to the handling of
hazardous wastes. These adverse consequences would
affect human health (the communities living close to the
sites and the employees of the contractor) and the
environment through contaminated dusts or in cases of
accidental leakage or spills. The project is categorized A,
and the WBG environmental, health and safety (EHS)
guidelines also apply. The ESIA will integrate social
mitigation measures. The environmental assessment
report of ASP-Mali has been prepared, consulted upon
Q)                                            and disclosed in-country and at the Bank InfoShop prior
to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will not finance any activity that involves or
4.04                                affects natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project will not finance any forest management
related activity or any activity likely to indirectly induce
forest exploitation/degradation.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         The project involves the management of obsolete
pesticides, which is addressed in the ESIA.
Physical Cultural       No          The project's activities will not induce digging up,
Resources OP/BP 4.11                exploitation of borrow pits or quarries, or be implemented
at sites with physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
BP 4.10                             implementation areas.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project activities do not involve land acquisition
OP/BP 4.12                          leading to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of
access to resources or livelihoods.
Page 6 of 9


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance any activity related to dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project will not finance any activity which may
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 induce water resources uptake from the Niger river, of the
modification of its ecosystem.
O
Projects in Disputed    No           The project area is not being implemented in areas under
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     dispute between countries.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project triggers OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP 4.09 on Pest Management
due to potential environmental and social impacts from contacting highly toxic chemicals during
the collection, repacking and transportation of obsolete pesticide stocks, risk reduction actions in
pesticide polluted sites, and the temporary storage of stocks.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The Project's overall environmental and social impact is expected to be highly positive because of
the nature of its activities: the Project will reduce the risks of exposure and resulting potential
acute intoxication of human and the environment by collecting, safeguarding and safely disposing
of hazardous wastes (OPs and associated waste) and reducing risk from polluted soil. Risks and
negative impacts are related to contact with the chemicals, mainly during the collection, repacking,
transportation, treatment of polluted sites, and temporary storage prior transportation and disposal.
These adverse consequences could affect human health (the communities living close to the sites
and the employees of the contractor) and the environment through contaminated dusts or in cases
of accidental leakage or spills.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N.A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project is categorized as Category A (Full Assessment). An Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) has been developed, including an Environmental Management Plan (EMP),
and disclosed in country and at InfoShop on December 24, 2014. An updated EMP will be
prepared and submitted for World Bank approval and public disclosure by the disposal company
before the disposal activities commence. The same will done for safeguarding of low risk stocks
by local teams and for empty pesticide container collection activities in the four cotton zones. Pest
management issues are addressed in the ESIA.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
At the local level, beneficiaries are communities and individuals who live close to sites that
contain OPs, contaminated associated waste and polluted soil. These are mostly poor farming
households whose health is directly affected by the chemical substances, and whose awareness to
the proper use of pesticides is low. Urban households that reside in proximity to pesticide storage
Page 7 of 9


﻿facilities are also expected to benefit from project-funded activities, especially the collection and
overseas disposal of stored OPs. The Project will include education and awareness raising
activities specifically targeting women, with focus on limiting women's exposure to pesticides.
The Project will work with local non-governmental NGOs to teach women about the proper use of
O
pesticides, safe handling of OPs and the health risks associated with reuse of empty pesticide
containers. At the national level, key stakeholders are staff from relevant line ministries
(Environment, Water and Sanitation; Agriculture; Health; Trade), central laboratories, and
agencies (the National Center for Locust Control and parastatal pesticide distributing companies),
who will benefit from increased pesticides management capacity.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               22-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                            24-Dec-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  19-Feb-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mali                                                      22-Dec-2014
Comments: Disclosed on line on site of Ministry of Environment. Updated in January as
improved version of ESIA was available.
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                               //
Date of submission to InfoShop                            //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes[X] No[   ]   NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA [   ]
Page 8 of 9


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ]  No [   ]  NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dahlia Lotayef
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                      Date:
O
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


