                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5625
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Romania                           Project ID:    P145174
                            Project Name:      Health Sector Reform (P145174)
                            Task Team          Carlos Marcelo Bortman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Dec-2013                       Estimated   27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH1                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (70%), Public administration- Health (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       1105.00               Total Bank Financing: 325.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  780.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     325.00
                              Total                                                                                    1105.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives is to improve access to, and quality and efficiency of, public
                           health services in Romania.
                            3. Project Description
                           To achieve these objectives over a five-year period, the proposed operation will focus on three main
                           areas: (a) rationalization of the health facility network; (b) strengthening of prevention, health

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         promotion, and the primary care level; and (c) improvement of health sector governance and
                         stewardship. The proposed Project, therefore, would focus on rationalizing the health facility
                         network to address changing needs created by epidemiologic and demographic shifts in Romania and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         advances in technology, improving access, quality, and greater efficiency of health care services.

                         Component 1. Hospital network rationalization. This component aims to support the rationalization
                         of the health care service delivery network through strengthening hospitals’ support systems and
                         services, such as diagnostic services, and laboratory functioning. This component would have two
                         subcomponents:

                         Subcomponent 1. Strengthening selected secondary hospitals and Regional Tertiary Hospitals. This
                         subcomponent aims at (a) redefining the hospital’s role in the health care system, (b) merging
                         services and reducing the number of single specialty hospitals; (c) improving the quality of care in
                         hospitals functioning in a multi-building setting by moving them into single buildings with integrated
                         diagnostic and interventional platforms, and (d) concentrating the resources available on the regional
                         and county level.

                         This subcomponent would include civil works (in the facilities current sites), medical and other
                         equipment, technical assistance, and training. Civil works would include the (a) rehabilitation of
                         intensive care units, (b) rehabilitation of operating (surgery) rooms, (c) rehabilitation of emergency
                         departments, (d) improvement of Diagnostic Imaging Services, (e) creation of 4 new burn units (with
                         about 6 beds each within a regional hospital), (f) development of regional pathology and cytology
                         laboratories, and (g) development of regional radiotherapy units.

                         Subcomponent 2. Implementing Specialized Secondary Ambulatory Care. Hospitals are no longer
                         the exclusive institution for delivering numerous forms of routine surgical and medical care.
                         Specialized ambulatory care represents a better option from the patient’s operability and safety point
                         of view, substituting costly medical treatments with cost-effective ones. This subcomponent would
                         support:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i.       Establishment of hub centers for ambulatory diagnostic and treatment including (a)
                         improvement of Diagnostic Imaging Services, (b) implementing day care and ambulatory surgeries/
                         procedures, and (c) cancer screening centers.
                         ii.      Implementation of mobile units for cancer screening to support the cancer screening program
                         to reach hard to cover areas.
                         This subcomponent aims at creating the conditions to increase secondary specialized services (higher
                         volume–lower cost–greater quality) and reduce the admissions rate in hospitals for patients who can
                         be treated in outpatient settings.

                         Component 2. Primary care strengthening. This component aims to support primary care addressing
                         especially those who are “priority populations,” including low-income groups; minority groups (i.e,
                         Roma population); the elderly; and individuals with special health care needs, such as individuals
                         with disabilities, in need of chronic or end-of-life care, or living in inner-city or rural areas. The
                         component would support the scaling up of multifunctional rural centers currently under
                         implementation with the support of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), and
                         in implementing different types of long-term care currently being provided as regular hospital
                         services:
                         i.      Implementing multifunctional rural centers. These centers will support the implementation of
                         community care services for the provision of the primary prevention services for noncommunicable
                         diseases, for increasing the access of vulnerable groups to basic health care services. Community

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         care services will be part of the basic services to be provided to vulnerable groups (including mothers
                         and children, elderly, persons with disabilities, persons with rare diseases, and persons with mental
                         health problems).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii.     Implementing Differentiated Long-Term Care (LTC): Palliative care (including care for
                         chronic neurological cases requiring mechanical ventilation, other chronic long-term health care, and
                         terminal care) and social LTC.

                         Component 3. Health sector governance and stewardship improvement. This component aims to
                         support sector governance and stewardship improvement to bridge the gap between policy and
                         practice and to increase the capacity for conducting and improving the quality of medical care
                         services. Activities include:
                         i.       Improvement of Health Care Quality: Update of Clinical guidelines, implementing quality
                         control. Quality in services and facilities is a core precondition for Romania to obtain maximum
                         results from available resources. Greater heath care quality means better health outcomes, reduction
                         of the unfavorable evolution of diseases, reduction of the readmission rates, and reduction in the
                         number of avoidable medical procedures. In that regard, the existing capacity gap in terms of using
                         norms and protocols aligned with best international practice needs to be overcome.
                         ii.      Strengthening Health Technology Assessment (HTA). Within the last 30 years, many
                         European countries have established HTA programs to inform a variety of decisions, from
                         determining pricing and reimbursement to setting health service standards. Depending on the context,
                         a key policy objective behind HTA can also be to reduce variations in the adoption of new
                         technologies, thereby improving equity, and reducing variation in provider practices by informing
                         technology use in clinical protocols and pathways.

                         The MOH established the legal framework for the implementation of Health Technology Assessment
                         (HTA) to make further adjustments to the basic package of services. The HTA department was
                         created and the head of the unit selected. A draft interim HTA procedure to be applied to the already
                         preapproved drugs for compensation is being launched through the MoH web page. The methods and
                         processes employed in HTA would be enhanced by improving their timeliness while maintaining
Public Disclosure Copy




                         high-quality assessments. This subcomponent would support additional technical assistance,
                         equipment and training to further develop standards and protocols and implementation of performing
                         HTA.
                         iii.     Strengthening the communications strategy. The main objective of the health sector reforms
                         is not to reduce cost or services, but rather to reorganize service delivery to more effectively and
                         efficiently meet the new needs of the population in a sustainable manner. To mitigate this risk, this
                         component would finance a communications campaign to inform the Romanian public about the
                         reforms program and the expected outcomes of such reforms.

                         Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This component aims to support
                         the Project Implementation Unit to provide day-to-day project management, including the fiduciary
                         tasks of the Project and Monitoring and Evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Country-wide

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cesar Niculescu (ECSEN)



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                         Kosuke Anan (ECSSO)
                         Mihai Magheru (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The Project will have limited negative
                         BP 4.01                                      environmental and social impacts, as physical
                                                                      works will be undertaken to only rehabilitate the
                                                                      existing health care facilities. In most cases the
                                                                      works will be interior renovations; in a few cases
                                                                      they may include small additions to existing
                                                                      buildings within the hospital grounds. In some
                                                                      cases it is expected that the latter will include
                                                                      construction/rehabilitation of “bunkers” for
                                                                      radiotherapy. Some health care services and in-
                                                                      patients could be affected during civil works,
                                                                      which could involve transferring of in-patients to
                                                                      other hospitals. In order to mitigate negative
                                                                      impacts, standardized procedures will be applied
                                                                      to (a) inform both health service providers and
                                                                      patients about the planned civil works well-in-
                                                                      advance, and (b) transfer them to other hospitals
                                                                      in an adequate manner. The expected temporary
                                                                      environmental impacts and inconvenience to the
                                                                      surrounding dwellers during construction are
                                                                      limited and typical to small/medium scale
                                                                      construction works, such as generation of dust,
                                                                      noise and vibration; movement of the
                                                                      construction vehicles and machinery; piling of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      construction materials; and accumulation of
                                                                      demolition/construction waste. Some associated
                                                                      risks include improper disposal of construction
                                                                      waste, minor operational or accidental spills of
                                                                      fuel and lubricants from the construction
                                                                      machinery, and improper reinstatement of
                                                                      construction sites upon completion of works.
                                                                      Discharges from the medical facilities and
                                                                      disposal of medical waste are the main concerns
                                                                      for the operational phase. Measures shall be put
                                                                      into place to ensure the separate collection of the
                                                                      different categories of waste. In particular, staff
                                                                      will be trained and informed on the mechanisms
                                                                      for safe collection of hazardous wastes, and
                                                                      clinical wastes – both infectious and non-
                                                                      infectious. Disposal of obsolete radiation
                                                                      treatment equipment represents a special issue,
                                                                      and will be specifically addressed in the
                                                                      Environmental Management Framework (EMF).



                                                              Page 4 of 8
                                                                                All construction impacts are manageable and
                                                                                could be effectively mitigated by adherence to the
                                                                                framework and site-specific Environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                Management Plans (EMPs). As for the adequate
                                                                                handling of medical waste during operation of the
                                                                                facilities, not only it is a safeguard matter for this
                                                                                Project, but rather one of the expected outcomes
                                                                                of the planned investments and technical
                                                                                assistance.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              The Project is not expected to involve land take,
                            4.12                                                as physical works will be undertaken to only
                                                                                rehabilitate existing health care facilities. The
                                                                                construction works will be either entirely inside
                                                                                existing buildings or possibly an extension from
                                                                                an existing hospital into its garden or parking lot,
                                                                                within the fenced/walled boundaries of the
                                                                                hospitals. In the later cases, the client, before
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                starting any construction activity, will verify that
                                                                                there are no users of competing claims on such
                                                                                areas where such an extension might occur.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The social impacts of the proposed Project are expected to be positive. Some health care services
                              and inpatients could be affected during civil works, which could involve transferring of inpatients
                              to other hospitals. In order to mitigate negative impacts, standardized procedures will be applied
                              to: (a) inform both health service providers and patients about the planned civil works well in


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           advance, and (b) transfer them to other hospitals through standardized procedures as outlined in
                           the POM. Any complaints or grievances stemming from civil works of the Project will be
                           managed by an existing grievance redress mechanism in accordance with national legislation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The environmental impacts of the proposed Project are not likely be significant, long-term, or
                           irreversible on Romania’s environment, forests, or other natural resources. The Project includes
                           investment components to develop medical infrastructure, and thus triggers OP/BP 4.01
                           Environmental Assessment. The immediate impact of the proposed investment activities on the
                           environment would be limited and can be divided into construction impacts and operational
                           impacts.
                           Most of the physical works will be undertaken to rehabilitate the existing health care facilities. In
                           most cases, the works will be interior renovations; in a few cases, they may include small
                           additions to existing buildings within the hospital grounds.
                           For the operational phase, the discharges from the medical facilities and disposal of medical waste
                           could generate potential negative impacts if not managed properly. Disposal of obsolete radiation
                           treatment equipment represents a special issue, and will be specifically addressed in the
                           Environmental Management Framework (EMF), and further on in the site-specific Environmental
                           Management Plans (EMP).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:

                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           In order to avoid land acquisition, the borrower reviewed the status of land ownership and use as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           part of the selection process of hospitals to be rehabilitated.

                           Subproject sites will not all be identified prior to appraisal, but the works at all sites are expected
                           to be similar. Therefore, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared prior
                           to appraisal, to describe common environmental issues and their expected impacts, and provide
                           options of mitigation measures. This general Framework document will be based on the ECA
                           Region Checklist Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Small Scale Construction, and will
                           be used as the basis for preparing site-specific Checklist EMPs for any subproject where there are
                           no unusual risk factors. The site-specific EMPs will be attached to construction contracts. The
                           EMF will be disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop.
                           Borrower's capacity for implementation of safeguard policies is high—the Ministry of Health
                           (MoH) has adequate in-house capacity to implement health care waste management procedures,
                           enforce standards, and coordinate with other government actors involved in these issues (that is,
                           environmental, solid waste, and regional health authorities).
                           Arrangements for environmental monitoring of the Project will imply integration of environmental
                           supervision into the overall technical oversight of works, using monthly field environmental
                           monitoring checklists for tracking and recording status of compliance on a regular basis. In
                           addition, an environmental safeguards staff will be appointed within the PMU who will be
                           responsible for coordinating and supervising the Project environmental management plan and risk
                           mitigation measures.


                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           MoH will monitor implementation of the EMF and site-specific EMPs, and the Bank’s team will
                           conduct field visits and carry out reviews of the environmental safeguards application during
                           Project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Dec-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:   Name: Carlos Marcelo Bortman
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Daniel Dulitzky (SM)     Date: 16-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 8 of 8
