INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSAl 197
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Moldova                   Project ID:  P154238
Parent       PI18518
Project ID:
Project Name: Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project Additional Financing (P154238)
Parent Project Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P 1l8518)
Name:
Task Team       Anatol Gobjila
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Feb-2015               Estimated    30-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Agricultural extension and research (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
(50%)
Theme(s):       Rural markets (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     12.00            Total Bank Financing:   12.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                       Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               12.00
Total                                                                     12.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 6


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The Project Development Objective is to enhance the competitiveness of the agro-food sector by
supporting the modernization of the food safety management system, facilitating market access
for farmers, and mainstreaming agro-environmental and sustainable land management practices.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
Moldovan agricultural and food exports to the Russian Federation have been subject to various trade
restrictions through 2013 and 2014. The loss of the Russian Federation market represented a
significant blow to horticulture in Moldova as there are few alternative markets for the agro-food
produce, especially for apples and plums. These embargoes have the potential to have a major
negative impact on fruit growers' competitiveness by stalling, if not reversing, modernization, as a
result of deteriorating financial standing and de-capitalization.
The proposed project will add a new component to the Moldova Agriculture Competitiveness
Project: Component 5 - Compensatory Sales Support Grants. The new component will finance
targeted support to farmers with farms of less than or equal to 15 hectares, who sold apple, plums and
grapes domestically for processing in 2014. The grants will compensate the difference between the
potential non-embargo price and the domestic sales price, with an aim of avoiding possible de-
capitalization and collapse of the horticulture sector, thus giving it a much needed respite for
reorientation to new markets and/or amortization of the financial losses.
Approximately US$5.0 million of the project's funds will be allocated to provide compensations to
apple growers, US$1.0 million to plum growers and US$5.0 million will go to grapes growers. The
remaining amount will be used for project management, establishment of a grievance mechanism,
awareness campaign and price/physical contingencies. The remaining US$1.0 million will be
allocated for project management and price/physical contingencies.
The delivery mechanism for the compensatory grants will follow the design and will in part co-
finance the implementation of an on-going Government program. On September 8, 2014 the
Government of Moldova passed a resolution for approving a support package for apple and plum
growers of summer varieties. The targeting mechanism is simply based on documented sales of
produce to processors. The country's Agency for Interventions and Payments in Agriculture will
play a key role in the implementation of the compensations program, and will be in charge of
collection and consolidation of grant application files, including documented proof of ownership or
lease of productive orchards/vineyards, bills of quantities, receipts, etc; and in the final defrayment of
compensatory payments to farmers. While the Government's program targets the entire spectrum of
farm size, the proposed AF will only focus on smaller farmers. Proof of sale will indicate that
farmers have engaged in fruit production, as opposed to idle ownership of orchard farms. Such
farmers can be properly documented and targeted. The total number of expected beneficiary farmers
is in the range of 9-10 thousand farmers.
The project would also support costs associated with project implementation, including operational
and consulting costs for fiduciary, component coordination, monitoring and evaluation support to the
Page 2 of 6


﻿Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Industry and the Agency for Interventions and Payments in Agriculture.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented countrywide.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          This relates to the parent project.
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Not applicable
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Not applicable
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          This relates to the parent project. The Additional
Financing will not support purchasing of pesticides and
will not lead to their increased use. Furthermore, the
parent project provides an exhaustive framework for
addressing pest management issues in the horticulture
sector, which will complement the activities of the
Additional Financing.
Physical Cultural       Yes          This relates to the parent project.
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           Not applicable
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          The project will support apple, plum and grapes growers
OP/BP 4.12                           which cultivate their own land or land they officially lease
under a formal agreement. Thus no land acquisition or
resettlement will take place under the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable
4.37
Projects on International  No        Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The activities of the Additional Financing do not have potential to cause negative environmental
Page 3 of 6


﻿or social impacts, and thus do not trigger any safeguard policies "per se". However, since the
Additional Financing inherits the parent project's safeguard category, all the information provided
on the safeguards triggered and the mitigation measures put in place are related to the parent
project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Potential long term impacts are positive and relate to increased market diversification for
Moldovan fruit producers, and the resulting increase in rural incomes and poverty alleviation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The parent project has an exhaustive set of arrangements for addressing safeguard issues. The
Government of Moldova prepared an EMF which specifies the Environmental Impact Assessment
(EIA) requirements for the project activities. This document covers the following: rules and
procedures for environmental screening; guidance for preparing sub-projects EIA and/or simple
EMPs as well as of EMP Checklist for identified small scale construction and reconstruction
activities; possible mitigation measures for different types of sub-projects; requirements for
monitoring and supervision of implementing of EIA/EMPs. The EMF contains also a series of
measures to raise awareness and educate potential beneficiaries regarding safe pesticide handling
and use of Integrated Pest Management (IPM). The IPM agenda is relevant for the Additional
Financing and the parent's project measures will be highly complementary to it (without triggering
the Pest Management OP 4.09). These measures are targeted at providing a framework for
educating farmers on issues related to pesticide handling and promoting IPM and thus,
understanding and managing pest problems in the horticultural sector, reducing human and
environmental health risks associated with pesticide use, and protecting ecosystems by conserving
beneficial agents, such as natural enemies of pests and pollinators to increase productivity. Under
the parent project, an NGO with necessary expertise in horticultural crop and IPM capabilities and
capacity to deliver training to farmers has been retained to develop and deliver a training program
on IPM. The Consolidated Agricultural Project Management Unit (CAPMU) is coordinating the
implementation of these activities. The EMF is integrated into the Project's Operational Manual
and specifies responsibilities and arrangements for its implementation. The Additional Financing,
similarly to the parent project, will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Industry, which has extensive experience in successfully implementing World Bank projects.
CAPMU, which has nearly 10 years of experience in implementing World Bank and GEF projects
will serve as a fiduciary agent. CAPMU has a highly qualified Environmental Specialist, being
responsible for project safeguards issues. CAPMU's environmental and social performance has
been sonsistently qualified as satisfactory. The WB team will continue to monitor closely the EMF
implementation, providing, if needed, relevant assistance. The EMF will remain under the direct
responsibility of CAPMU.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The parent's project EMF was disclosed and consulted in the country. On January 18, 2011,
CAPMU has disseminated the draft summary EMF to key project stakeholders (Ministry of
Environment; Ministry of Agriculture and Food Industry; State Ecological Inspectorate) for review
and comments, also posting it in the same day its full English version along with the EMF
Page 4 of 6


﻿Summary in Romanian for the public at wide on CAPMU's web site (www.capmu.md). On
January 26, 2012, CAPMU conducted a public briefing and consultation meeting on the EMF
document. The meeting concluded that the draft EMF document covers practically all potential
impacts and possible mitigation measures. The draft document was revised after the meeting,
taking into account outputs from the consultation. The final version of the EMF (Romanian) and
its English version were posted on the CAPMU website and submitted to the World Bank for its
disclosure in the Infoshop. The existing EMF will be used by the client during the Additional
Financing implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Feb-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Mar-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Moldova                                                  18-Jan-2012
Comments: This relates to the parent projct.
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              //
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
"In country" Disclosure
Moldova                                                 //
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
Page 5 of 6


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [X]     NA
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anatol Gobjila
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name:                                      Date:
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


