                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA6484
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Congo, Democratic Republic               P128887
                                                                          Project ID:
                                              of
                            Project Name:     DRC Improved Forested Landscape Management Project (P128887)
                            Task Team       Laurent Valiergue
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       01-Apr-2014                         Estimated   30-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTN1                                Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Forestry (70%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Land
                                              administration and management (20%), Biodiversity (5%), Ru ral policies and
                                              institutions (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      36.90           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                              36.90
                              Total                                                                                     36.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to test new approaches to improve community livelihoods and
                           forested landscape management, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from deforestation and
                           forest degradation in selected areas.

                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1- – Integrated REDD+ Project in the Plateau District (PIREDD Plateau)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2 – Facilitation of Private Sector Activities to Reduce Fuel Wood Emissions.
                         a) Supporting agroforestry investments in DRC
                         b) Strengthening the cookstove sector and supporting the dissemination of cleaner cookstoves

                         Component 3 – Promote small-scale agroforestry systems to reduce land use emissions.

                         Component 4 – Project Management and Lessons Learned
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location:

                         Component 1 will be implemented in the Plateau District within the Bandundu Province.

                         Component 2a is geographically open. The area of intervention depends on the projects that will be
                         submitted for financing.
                         Component 2b targets the urban population of Kinshasa.

                         Component 3 is implemented in the Bas Congo Province and on the Bateke Plateau (Kinshasa
                         Province) in the Region of Mbankana.

                         Salient physical characteristics:

                         Out of DRC’s total population of over 65 million, more than 8 million live in Kinshasa. Kinshasa and
                         its surrounding areas are subject to a hot and humid tropical climate. Soils are mainly sandy with low
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to medium agricultural potential. Vegetation is mostly degraded savanna with some remaining forest
                         tracts (especially on the slopes along the Congo River and its affluents). Further north in the
                         Bandundu Province areas of savanna-forest mosaic remain.

                         Deforestation rates in the Project intervention area (mainly in the Plateau District) are well above the
                         national average and mainly driven by shifting cultivation in riparian forests and shrubby savannas
                         and processing of residual biomass into charcoal for the Kinshasa market.

                         The Bombo-Lumene Hunting Reserve (“Domaine de Chasse”) is the only protected area in the
                         project zone, and no activities will be undertaken inside this protected area. It is expected that the
                         promotion of agroforestry and improved cook stoves will reduce fuelwood collection pressure on this
                         Hunting Reserve.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              The exact locations where FIP’s activities will be



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         BP 4.01                                     implemented are still not known. Therefore, An
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) will provide guidance on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     managing environmental and social risks under
                                                                     Components 1, 2 and 3. The ESMF includes
                                                                     specific sections addressing the requirements of
                                                                     the lead DP applicable safeguards policies
                                                                     triggered in this project. It has been prepared,
                                                                     reviewed, consulted upon, and disclosed within
                                                                     the country and in the INFOSHOP of the World
                                                                     Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The Project will operate in natural habitats, but
                                                                     will not include activities that involve significant
                                                                     conversion or degradation of natural habitats.
                                                                     Instead, the Project activities are designed to
                                                                     reduce pressures on natural habitats and improve
                                                                     their conservation. Agroforestry activities will be
                                                                     promoted in degraded savanna lands. Potential
                                                                     impacts and proposed mitigation measures are
                                                                     included in the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           The project will operate in forested areas, but will
                                                                     not involve conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                     forest areas. The Project will however finance
                                                                     agroforestry and plantations in unforested or
                                                                     previously converted and degraded areas.
                                                                     Agroforestry activities under the Project will be
                                                                     designed to prevent and mitigate potential threats
                                                                     to biodiversity, including threats related to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     introduction of invasive species. Potential impacts
                                                                     and proposed mitigation measures are included in
                                                                     the ESMF. Forest management plans may also be
                                                                     prepared during project implementation.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           The Project will support intensification of
                                                                     agriculture and agroforestry activities developed
                                                                     by communities, private sector companies, local
                                                                     NGOs and farmer’s organizations. Activities may
                                                                     thus require pest management activities. In that
                                                                     case, an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP)
                                                                     has been prepared to ensure that environmentally
                                                                     friendly methods for pest control are applied,
                                                                     such as biological control, cultural practices, and
                                                                     the development and use of varieties that are pest
                                                                     and disease resistant or tolerant. The IPMP that
                                                                     has been reviewed and disclosed publicly in the
                                                                     country and at the Infoshop also provides
                                                                     guidance on the safe selection, handling and
                                                                     disposal of pesticides.


                                                             Page 3 of 9
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes              Components 1, 2b and 3 will be implemented in
                            BP 4.11                                               Provinces of Bandundu (Plateau District only),
                                                                                  Bas Congo and Kinshasa, and Component 2a will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  cover the whole country. Hence, Project activities
                                                                                  developed in these areas might be located in, or in
                                                                                  vicinity of, physicalcultural resources, notably
                                                                                  sacred sites of local communities. The
                                                                                  identification of possible physical cultural
                                                                                  resources will be conducted on-site with relevant
                                                                                  experts and project-affected groups. A Cultural
                                                                                  Resources Management Framework (CRMF) has
                                                                                  been prepared, reviewed, and disclosed in DRC
                                                                                  and in the INFOSHOP of the World Bank.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        Yes              An Indigenous Peoples’ Planning Framework has
                                                                                  been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed
                                                                                  considering that, under Component 2a, activities
                                                                                  or sub-projects developed by the private sector,
                                                                                  could also impact on Indigenous Peoples lands
                                                                                  and livelihoods. Specific Indigenous Peoples’
                                                                                  Plans (IPP) will be prepared and implemented, as
                                                                                  required. A social assessment and an iterative
                                                                                  appropriate gender and intergenerational inclusive
                                                                                  consultation framework will be developed to
                                                                                  ensure Indigenous Peoples receive culturally
                                                                                  appropriate social and economic benefits and
                                                                                  potential negative impacts are avoided,
                                                                                  minimized, mitigated or compensated.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              The development and implementation of local
                            4.12                                                  land use plans promoted by the project may
                                                                                  reduce the access to natural resources for some
                                                                                  households. A Process Framework and a
                                                                                  resettlement policy framework (RPF) will ensure
                                                                                  the appropriate measures have been taken in
                                                                                  elaborating and implementing those plans.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               N/A

                            Projects on International        No                   N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project impacts, though not fully identifiable until the sub-projects and activities are singled-


                                                                          Page 4 of 9
                          out, will be localized in activities and projects sites. No potential large scale, significant or
                          irreversible impacts are foreseen. The following operational Policies and related instruments will
                          be triggered in each of the Components to address potential adverse social and environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                          impacts:
                          Components 1 and 3: Community based natural resource management activities, agroforestry and
                          land planning activities under these Components may limit access to natural resources in the
                          Bateke Plateau and Bas Congo. A Resettlement Policy Framework and a Process Framework will
                          address potential loss of income sources or means of livelihood of local communities. There are no
                          Indigenous Peoples in the areas for those 2 components.

                           Component 2a: activities or sub-projects developed by the private sector could happen anywhere
                           nationwide and have an impact on Indigenous Peoples lands and livelihoods. An Indigenous
                           Peoples’ Planning Framework and Specific Indigenous Peoples’ Plans (IPP) will be prepared and
                           implemented, as required, in case IP communities are beneficiaries or affected by Project
                           activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There are no anticipated or foreseen long-term negative impacts. Reducing short and long term
                           impacts is one of the operational objectives of the Project. Furthermore, impacts should be
                           consistently positive, as the overall aim of the Project is to enhance sustainable management of
                           natural resources while improving the livelihoods of rural communities. The Project will support
                           community based activities while also addressing promotion of relevant private sectors
                           (agroforestry, agriculture, fisheries, charcoal, cooking stoves, among others).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project activities were selected following a series of consultations and comparative analysis of
                           potential areas of investments. The selected activities follows the Government’s priorities on
                           climate change mitigation and REDD+. The FIP Project will be a seminal initiative that will
Public Disclosure Copy




                           develop part of the Democratic Republic of Congo REDD+ enabling activities, strengthening the
                           overall National REDD+ Strategy. In addition, MECNT is further overseeing the launching and
                           carrying out of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) as part of DRC’s REDD
                           + readiness preparation process. The SESA will inform the formulation and development of
                           DRC’s National REDD+ Strategy and is intended to identify opportunities for maximizing the
                           positive social and environmental impacts of the REDD+ Strategy, as well as avoiding, and if this
                           is not possible mitigating and/or compensating any adverse impacts from the implementation of
                           the REDD+ Strategy.
                           MECNT is also overseeing the preparation of a first draft of an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) that will address potential impacts associated with the policies,
                           regulations and activities of the REDD+ Strategy.
                           In order to enhance how environmental and social impacts and related measures are tackled, the
                           REDD+ SESA and ESMF have been feed into the ESMF developed by the FIP Project.
                           Regarding social and environmental costs and benefits, the Government selected the areas
                           considered most appropriate to develop foreseen activities. Alternatives to selected sites were
                           considered less promising.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The government has timely prepared and disclosed six safeguards instruments: i) An


                                                                    Page 5 of 9
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); ii) An Integrated Pest Management
                           Plan (IPMP); iii) A Cultural Resources Management Framework (CRMF); iv) A Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF); (v) A Process Framework and vi) An Indigenous Peoples' Planning
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Framework (IPPF). The Ministry of the Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism
                           (MECNT), which will oversee implementation of the project, has prior experience with Bank’s
                           Safeguard Policies and a variety of safeguards instruments, including an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework that was finalized in 2009 in preparation for an investment project in the
                           forestry sector. MECNT is further overseeing the launching and carrying-on of a Strategic
                           Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) as part of DRC’s REDD+ readiness preparation
                           process. A key aspect of the SESA process is the participatory and inclusive stakeholder
                           consultation process that will support broad stakeholder involvement in the overall design of the
                           REDD+ Strategy.
                           The capacity of the Government, and specifically of the MECNT, to address safeguard issues will
                           be further strengthened as part of the SESA process as well as during project preparation for this
                           Project. Nevertheless, capacity levels at the Government level remain low and need continued
                           strengthening.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Ministry of Environment, Nature Conservation and Tourism (MECNT), provinces, local
                           communities and civil society are the key stakeholders of the project. The selected project
                           activities are the result of a series of consultations and at national, provincial and local level.
                           Additional stakeholders consulted include, the international donor’s community and likewise,
                           international NGOs.
                           Further, the preparation of the safeguards instruments was subject to consultations at national and
                           provincial levels. The results of the consultations are included in the safeguards instruments.
                           Continues consultations at local community level, is the key project implementation strategy.
                           Among others, the project will develop, in consultation with communities, agricultural and
                           forestry income generating activities that will support enhancement of their livelihoods and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           standards of living. Moreover, key safeguards instruments will be summarized and translated into
                           local languages and distributed to all stakeholders as part of the consultation and participation
                           processes.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       15-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                     09-Apr-2014
                           Comments: On the Ministry website
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       15-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Apr-2014




                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    09-Apr-2014
                           Comments: On the Ministry website
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    09-Apr-2014
                           Comments: On MECNT website
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    09-Apr-2014
                           Comments: On the Ministry website
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?


                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                        Page 8 of 9
                         Task Team Leader: Name: Laurent Valiergue
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 10-Apr-2014
                         Advisor:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Benoit Bosquet (SM)           Date: 10-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 9 of 9
