INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC4409
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Africa                     Project ID:   P130871
Project Name:    Regional Communications Infrastructure Program Phase 5 - Uganda (P130871)
Task Team        Peter Silarszky
Leader(s):
Estimated        23-Mar-2015                Estimated     26-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Telecommunications (50%), Information technology (35%), Public
administration- Information and communications (15%)
Theme(s):        Regulation and competition policy (5%), Rural services and infrastructure (5%),
Infrastructure services for private sector developme nt (50%), e-Services (10%),
e-Government (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      75.00             Total Bank Financing:    75.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      75.00
Total                                                            75.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objectives of the proposed RCIP 5 project are consistent with the PDO of the RCIP
Program as a whole, namely to support the Recipient's efforts to:
(i) lower prices for international capacity and extend the geographic reach of broadband networks
(the connectivity development objective); and


﻿(ii) improve the Government's efficiency and transparency through e-Government applications (the
transparency development objective).
C. Project Description
This is the fifth horizontal phase of the Regional Communications Infrastructure Program (RCIP)
that was approved on March 29, 2007. RCIP is focused on closing the terrestrial connectivity gap by
linking the capitals and major cities in E&SA. Each project under RCIP complements the submarine
cable projects in the region by accelerating national infrastructure roll-out and facilitate uptake of
a      services through e-Government initiatives. To maximize flexibility and client responsiveness in this
multi-country effort, RCIP has been designed as a customizable menu of options from which
individual governments can choose from and adapt to their unique circumstances. The menu of
activities is categorized under three overarching components: (a) enabling environment including
monitoring and evaluation; (b) connectivity; and (c) e-Government applications. The instrument is a
series of Projects under Investment Project Financing (formerly known as an Adaptable Program
Loan, APL).
The proposed RCIP 5 project would include two country operations - RCIP South Sudan and RCIP
Uganda.
The instrument is a series of Projects under Investment Project Financing (formerly known as an
Adaptable Program Loan, APL). The proposed RCIP 5 is the fifth phase of RCIP which was
approved by the Board on March 29, 2007. RCIP 5 would include two country operations - RCIP
South Sudan and RCIP Uganda.
SOUTH SUDAN
The proposed RCIP credit for South Sudan would be for US$30 million over five years (one third
regional and two thirds' national IDA), complemented by anticipated funding of US$12 million in
co-financing from the African Development Bank and a US$12m parallel investment from the
private sector, which would be secured with the help of an IDA Partial Risk Guarantee, making US
$54 million in total. The proposed project is composed of three components, as described below:
Component 1: Enabling Environment (US$10m, of which US$2m from AfDB and US$8m from
WBG)
1A     Strengthening the National Communications Authority (US$8m from WBG)
1B     Applications development and piloting, including Mobile Money and eGovernment (US$2m
from AfDB)
Component 2: Connectivity (US$42m, of which US$20m from the WBG; US$10m from AfDB, and
US$12m in parallel financing from the private sector)
2A     Government backbone network and data centres (US$10m from AfDB)
2B     Accelerating the roll-out of a fibre backbone network, under a Public Private Partnership (US
$20m in WBG funding and credit guarantees plus around US$12m in parallel private sector
investment)
Component 3: Project Implementation Unit (US$2m WBG)
The final component for the investment grant in South Sudan would be funding for a project
implementation unit (PIU). RCIP-5 will need its own PIU with its own technical staff and will need
to maintain liaison with the future regulator and the private sector.


﻿UGANDA
The proposed RCIP Uganda IDA credit would be for US$70 million over a period of five years, of
which about US$27 million would come from the Regional IDA allocation. Discussions have been
initiated for financing of related activities with the African Development Bank, the Islamic
U       Development Bank, and the Government of Korea should additional funding be required. The
proposed RCIP 5 project in Uganda would consist of the following four components:
Component 1: Enabling Environment (US$5m)
This component aims to support the capacity of NITA-U (implementation agency), Ministry of ICT
and other stakeholders to develop and review the relevant national policies, strategies, laws and
technical regulatory frameworks in order to support the development of a vibrant ICT sector
Component 2: Connectivity (US$30m)
This component would support implementation of ICT infrastructure in Uganda through the
following subcomponents: (i) pre-purchase of international bandwidth for priority targeted user
groups (US$6 million); (ii) implementation of missing links to improve reach, availability and
resiliency of the National Backbone Infrastructure (NBI) (US$14 million) and (iii) Government
network providing broadband connectivity to MDAs, schools, hospitals, Universities and Research
Institutions and NGOs (US$10 million).
Component 3: e-Government Applications (US$30m)
The objective of e-Government component under RCIP Project is to support the Government of
Uganda in leveraging advances in ICT with the aim to transform public service delivery using ICT to
improve the lives of Ugandans. In this respect, the government intends to:
1)     Establish the enabling e-Government foundations (US$21 million)
2)     Sector e-Transformations (US$9 million)
a.     2-4 strategic e-services
b.     sector "Quick Wins"
c5      Component 4: Project Management (US$5m)
This component will finance project management related issues including project coordination,
procurement, financial management, monitoring & evaluation, project communication, and
environmental and social safeguards. This component will finance consultancy on managing RCIP
o      project including logistics, consumables and would also provide support incremental operating costs,
and audits. This will also support development and implementation of communication strategy,
awareness and partnership building as well as technical assistance (TA) necessary to support the
successful implementation of the operation and providing support for monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) of RCIP operation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
In Uganda, project locations would be concentrated in and around Kampala City and other major
urban and periurban areas in Uganda, and transit corridors for the fiber-optic network. The exact
routing of the network and auxiliary infrastructure (e.g., antennae, masts, etc.) would be determined
during project feasibility studies during implementation. The salient physical characteristics relevant
to the safeguards analysis include: telecommunications infrastructure components of the project,
particularly associated with the linear excavations for burying fiber-optic cable (alternatively
overhead stringing of the cable) and civil works associated with building of national terrestrial
backbones and roll-out of wireless networks.


﻿E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
In Uganda, the Borrower has abundant experience with linear infrastructure and telecommunication
infrastructure projects, including World Bank financed. The Borrower also has an established
national EIA system that would be used to ensure environmental due diligence. The National
Information Technology Authority - Uganda (NITA-U) would be the implementing agency and
would prepare environmental due diligence documents by engaging a consultant from an existing
roster of registered environmental practitioners and would obtain approval by the National
o      Environment Management Authority (NEMA) before proceeding with civil works. NITA-U does not
have in-house environmental and social safeguards capacity. During project Appraisal, safeguards
implementation arrangements and staffing shall be discussed with a view of either recruiting
Safeguards Specialists or hiring Safeguards Consultants on a Retainer basis, in order to establish
capacity for safeguards implementation.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
Herbert Oule (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         RCIP 5 is assigned to social and environmental
OP/BP 4.01                              category B due to site specific and easily manageable
risks. There would be localized potential
environmental and social impacts associated with the
infrastructure components of the project, particularly
associated with the linear excavations for burying
fiber-optic cable (alternatively overhead stringing of
the cable) and civil works associated with building of
national terrestrial backbones and roll-out of wireless
networks. Uganda will prepare ESMF that would set
forth the basic principles and prerogative to be
followed during project implementation. The ESMF
shall be prepared in a Consultative manner. Once
completed, the ESMF will be reviewed and cleared
by the World Bank and then publicly disclosed both
in-country and at InfoShop prior to appraisal. During
project implementation, ESIAs and/or ESMPs shall
be prepared where applicable before start of any civil
works. In South Sudan, the ESMF will be prepared
during project implementation, as it is an FCS.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes        The project may traverse through ecosystems such as
forests and wetlands. Assessment and mitigation of
any likely impacts on natural habitats shall be
covered under the project ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes         The project may traverse through forest areas.
Assessment and mitigation of any likely impacts on
forests shall be covered under the project ESMF.


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09      No           N/A because the project will not involve
procurement and/or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          This policy is triggered because of the linear
OP/BP 4.11                                infrastructure/civil works aspects of the project
which may affect known or unknown PCRs. As part
of the ESMF, a Chance Finds Procedure shall be
developed. During project implementation a PCRs
inventory and assessment shall be undertaken and
their mitigation measures included in the projects
ESIAs and/or ESMPs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes           Since the project will be implemented throughout
4.10                                      Uganda, it may affect IPs areas in Kisoro District and
Karamoja Region. An Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) shall be prepared in a
Consultative manner, and disclosed both in-country
and at InfoShop before Project Appraisal. In South
Sudan, it is proposed that the safeguards instruments
will be deferred until implementation, as it is an FCS.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The activities proposed to be funded under RCIP 5
BP 4.12                                   could involve land acquisition for or loss of access
(even temporarily) to some socioeconomic assets
during the construction of telecommunications
infrastructure such as ducts for laying fibers optic
networks or access roads. However, whenever
possible, the linear infrastructure would be placed in
the existing, unencumbered rights of way (road
reserves, railway reserves, etc.). To comply with OP/
BP 4.12 policy requirements, Uganda will in a
Consultative manner prepare RPF that sets forth the
basic principles and prerogative to be followed
during project implementation. Like the ESMF, once
cleared, the RPF will be publicly disclosed both in-
country and at InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           N/A since the project does not support and is not
associated with development of any dam structures.
Projects on International    No           The project does not depend or support
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      developments related to International Waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         There is a potential risk of project activity in a
BP 7.60                                   disputed area in South Sudan, but no construction
work is currently planned close to the border with the
North. In Uganda, the project is not envisaged to be
implemented in any area of dispute.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Feb-2015
B.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
In Uganda, preparation of ESMF, RPF and IPPF was initiated in October 2013, and expected to be
completed by February 27, 2015.
As the detailed physical location of facilities or/and infrastructures to be financed are still
unknown and would be determined only during implementation through feasibility studies,
Uganda will prepare the required social and environmental safeguards instruments, namely the
ESMF, RPF, and IPPF. These will set forth the principles and guidelines borrowers must follow to
comply with the requirements of the triggered policies. To the extent possible, the ESMF, RPF,
and IPPF would draw on existing frameworks prepared and implemented for similar types of
infrastructure. These documents will be reviewed, cleared and disclosed at publicly accessible
locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons (i) in-
country, and (ii) at InfoShop prior to appraisal. World Bank staff would help the Borrower with
detailed guidance on the preparation of these environmental and social safeguard instruments and
would conduct close supervision. In South Sudan, it is proposed that the safeguards instruments
will be deferred until implementation, as it is an FCS.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Silarszky
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)            Date: 25-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Mavis A. Ampah (PMGR)                  Date: 25-Feb-2015
Manager:


