                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8168
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                           Project ID:    P131558
                            Project Name:      Transmission Efficiency Project (TEP) (P131558)
                            Task Team          Peter Johansen
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Apr-2014                       Estimated   31-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASVS                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         730.00                 Total Bank Financing:      500.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 230.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    500.00
                              Total                                                                                    730.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the capacity, efficiency and reliability of
                           electricity transmission services in selected parts of the network in Vietnam
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is comprised of the following three components: (i) The Transmission
                           Infrastructure Component; (ii) The Smart Grid Component; and (iii) The Capacity Building and

                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         Institutional Strengthening Component.

                         The Transmission Infrastructure Component will finance transmission lines and substations at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         voltage levels of 220kV and 500kV. The investments will target three areas that are key to the overall
                         economic development of Vietnam, namely the Greater Hanoi Area, the Greater Ho Chi Minh City
                         Area and the Mekong Delta. Investments at the 500kV level will help increase the transport capacity
                         of the main 500kV trunk system while increasing its reliability. Investments at the 220kV level are
                         aimed at increasing the capacity of the supply points to the distribution utilities and improve the
                         reliability of the network that serves these points.
                         The subprojects will be selected based on key parameters, including: (i) priority areas in the PDMP7
                         and the match with the Project’s PDO; (ii) technical and economic justification; and (iii) readiness
                         for implementation in terms of environmental issues and land acquisition. Since all sub-components
                         are derived from the short- to mid-term needs identified in the PDMP7, they are already at a
                         reasonably advanced stage of preparation from a technical perspective. Many sub-components have
                         basic detailed design and detailed technical and economic justification.

                         The Smart Grid Component will support modernization of monitoring, control, and protection
                         equipment in 500kV and 220kV substations to improve the reliability of the interconnected power
                         system as a whole and of some bulk-supply points in the distribution network. Today, 60 percent of
                         the faults in substations are a consequence of faulty operations of monitoring, control, and protection
                         equipment. Aided by monitoring and control gear, protection equipment: (i) detects - among other
                         things - the locations and intensity of faults and, based on such information, determines what
                         equipment should be disconnected to protect the system from damage; and (ii) decides when
                         disconnected equipment should be reconnected to ensure that interruptions in the provision of
                         electricity services are minimized.

                         The Capacity Building and Institutional Strengthening Component. In line with the power sector
                         reform agenda, this component will support the National Power Corporation’s (NPT) move towards
                         becoming an independent transmission company with cost-reflective tariffs and performance tracking
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for regulatory purposes. This will achieve the combined objectives of financial viability for NPT and
                         provision of adequate and reliable transmission services which is key for the functioning of the future
                         electricity wholesale market. The Component 3 activities have been selected to support this
                         development and to complement other ongoing activities in the context of the overall institutional
                         energy reform agenda including the World Bank’s (WB) Development Policy Operation (DPO)
                         series and technical assistance (TA) on Strategic Options for Enhanced Financial Performance of
                         Electricity of Vietnam (EVN).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be focused on the greater Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City areas, the central region, and
                         the Mekong Delta.

                         The sub-projects under component 1 would be scattered in many provinces covering a wide variety
                         of physical landscapes, including mountainous areas in the north, central highlands in the central
                         provinces, and the flat flood plains in the south. The preliminary identified sub-projects would be
                         located in the provinces on Quang Ninh, Hoa Binh, Bac Giang, Bac Ninh, and Hanoi in the north;
                         Quang Ngai and Binh Dinh in the central; and Ho Chi Minh city, Binh Duong, Dong Nai, Long An,
                         and Tien Giang Province in the south.



                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         The smart grid activities under component 2 would be executed in the existing five 500kV
                         substations in Hoa Binh, Ha Tinh, Da Nang, Pleiku provinces, and Ho Chi Minh city, and eleven
                         220kV substations in Hanoi, Ninh Binh, Thai Binh, Thai Vinh, DakLak, Binh Dinh, Lam Dong, Tien
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Giang, and Can Tho).

                         Most 500 kV and 220kV transmission lines would start from the existing substations. The routes
                         would go over some mountainous areas in the north, hilly terrains in the central provinces, and flat
                         flood plain of the Mekong Delta. They may traverse some agricultural (rice and cereals) and garden
                         land (fruit trees and coffee), rural residential land, and undeveloped land (covered with shrubs).
                         Although there are protected areas in the project provinces, there are no protected or declared
                         conservation areas or nature reserves within the project site or surrounding areas that might
                         potentially be affected by project activities. The existing vegetation cover of the substation and
                         transmission line construction areas contains no sites with rare plant species. Installation of the
                         transmission towers for the 500 kV and 220kV lines at high elevations and in uplands along both
                         sides of water bodies will have no significant negative impacts on water quality.

                         During project preparation, aligning transmission corridors and locating substations will be carefully
                         considered in order to avoid critical habitats and important physical cultural resources and to limit
                         land acquisition.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Son Van Nguyen (EASVS)
                         Nghi Quy Nguyen (EASVS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes             This policy is triggered because the Project
                         BP 4.01                                              involves the construction, rehabilitation, and
                                                                              operation of high-voltage substations and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              overhead transmission lines, requiring the
                                                                              identification, mitigation and monitoring of
                                                                              potential adverse environmental and social
                                                                              impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes             The screening of the Group 1 sub-project
                                                                              environmental assessments confirmed that no
                                                                              natural habitats will be affected by these sub-
                                                                              projects. However, there are new sub-projects to
                                                                              be identified during implementation, which may
                                                                              involve natural habitats. As a result, a
                                                                              precautionary approach has been adopted by
                                                                              triggering this policy under the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes             The policy is triggered considering that some
                                                                              subprojects may involve acquisition of forest land
                                                                              for maintaining the right of ways of the power
                                                                              transmission lines. These activities may have the
                                                                              potential to have adverse impacts on the rights
                                                                              and welfare of local people and their level of




                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                                                                               dependence upon low quality natural forests and
                                                                               plantation forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No              The Project will not involve any investment that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               would result in procurement of pesticides or any
                                                                               increase in the use of pesticides. Therefore, the
                                                                               policy is not triggered.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes             The sub-projects under the project may be located
                            BP 4.11                                            in the vicinity of physical cultural resources such
                                                                               as monuments, temples, churches, religious/
                                                                               spiritual and cultural sites.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes             The Project will entail multiple subprojects
                                                                               mainly in West Hanoi, Central Region, Mekong
                                                                               Delta Region, and North-East HCMC. Given the
                                                                               large geographical area and scattered distribution
                                                                               of the ethnic minority population in Vietnam, the
                                                                               presence of ethnic minoritypeople in a given sub-
                                                                               project of TEP is not unlikely.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes             The Project would have impacts involving the
                            4.12                                               temporary or permanent involuntary land
                                                                               acquisition (agricultural, orchard, garden or
                                                                               residential) and the loss of structures and assets
                                                                               (or access to assets) associated with land. The
                                                                               Project’s potential impacts are due to the
                                                                               construction of transmission lines (foundations,
                                                                               right-of-way), substations, and access roads,
                                                                               among others.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The Project involves no construction of dams nor
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               are the project activities vulnerable in any way to
                                                                               any upstream dam. Therefore, the policy is not
                                                                               triggered.
                            Projects on International          No              No Project activities are to be carried out on an
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               international waterway. Therefore, the policy is
                                                                               not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                No part of the Project activities are in a disputed
                            7.60                                               area so the policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Implementation of the project components would benefit NPT and all segments of the population
                              from: (i) Improved power reliability, which will reduce un-served demand and the number and
                              duration of power outages; and (ii) Increased energy efficiency, which will reduce overall costs
                              and, potentially, GHG emissions. The project would also bring direct temporary benefits for
                              skilled and unskilled workers that would be employed for the construction of the project. Project
                              investments in Component 1 are divided into two groups. Group 1 investments consist of eight

                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                         sub-projects whose location, design and impact are defined at this stage of preparation. The
                         detailed list of sub-projects is provided in Annex 6 of the PAD. The impacts pertaining to these
                         sub-projects are described in the ISDS. Group 2 investments are not yet defined and their detailed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         design will be agreed upon during project implementation. The preparation of safeguard
                         instruments reflects this situation so that adequate measures are in place to deal with the known
                         and potential set of investments.

                         The potential adverse impacts would mainly be associated with implementation of component 1,
                         which includes typical civil works at the subproject areas such as new construction, rehabilitation,
                         and expansion of the substations (transformers and other electrical equipment) and transmission
                         lines (power towers, poles, and wiring). Potential adverse impacts of the project during site
                         preparation and construction include (i) those related to (i) land acquisition and resettlement for
                         construction of the substations, power towers, and ROW; (ii) increased levels of dust, noise, and
                         other emissions from excavation activities, land clearing activities, material stockpiles, operation
                         of heavy equipment, and transportation of construction materials and electrical equipment; (iii)
                         construction site waste generation; (iv) traffic disturbance and road damage due to the
                         transportation of building materials and equipment; (v) small scale soil erosion, sediment,
                         landslide risks, and localized flooding; (vi) unexploded ordnance risks; and (vii) health and safety
                         issues for workers and community. The impacts, however, will be small to moderate, localized,
                         and temporary, and can be mitigated.

                         The potential negative impacts during operation of Component 1 sub-projects would be the effects
                         associated with exposure to electric and magnetic fields from high voltage power lines and
                         substations. These risks can be reduced to minimum by strictly applying national technical
                         regulations and standards, which are comparable with international standards, in the design phase
                         and following electricity safety regulations during operation. The potential risk of oil leakage from
                         transformers is addressed by construction of emergency oil collection and storage tank as required
                         by the Vietnamese regulation and included in the EMPs of such type of sub-projects. The potential
                         risk of the Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) will be treated strictly as in Section 5 of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared for this project. The
                         environmental assessment (EA) instruments of the eight Group 1 sub-projects under Component 1
                         confirmed the above mentioned impacts.

                         Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs): The sub-projects under the project may be located in the
                         vicinity of physical cultural resources such as monuments, temples, churches, religious/spiritual
                         and cultural sites, and thus may have the potential to have impacts on these PCRs. The ESMF
                         includes a screening process aimed at identifying possible PCRs and at consequently refraining
                         investments in nearby areas. Further, the ESMF includes a "chance find" procedure in case such
                         property is encountered, establishing an immediate cessation of construction activity and reporting
                         to the appropriate authorities. The impacts and associated mitigation measures for relocation of
                         graves will be included in the related subproject environmental management plan (EMP) and
                         resettlement plan (RP).

                         Indigenous People (IP): The screening of group 1 (already defined) sub-projects confirmed that
                         only one sub-project has ethnic minority people living in the area (Hoa Binh – West Hanoi 220kV
                         Transmission Line sub-project). The impact is expected to be minor, mainly related to the
                         acquisition of small parcel of land for tower position, limited use of existing land in ROW,
                         disturbance for communities during the construction. These impacts and associated mitigation
                         measures are included in the relevant safeguard documents prepared for this subproject (e.g. RP,

                                                                   Page 5 of 11
                           EMDP). In Hoa Binh – West Ha Noi 220kV TL, there are totally 95 ethnic minority households
                           affected by land acquisition for the construction of the tower foundation. Furthermore, since there
                           are new sub-projects in group 2 (potential) that are still to be identified, the likelihood of having
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ethnic minority communities living in these subproject areas is relatively high. The Ethnic
                           Minority Planning Framework includes a screening procedure and guidelines to screen for these
                           potential sub-projects and ensure the achievement of policy’s objectives.

                           Involuntary Resettlement (IR): The land acquisition impacts are only limited to investments
                           proposed in component 1. The level of impacts may vary depending on the nature of infrastructure
                           and typically include the physical relocation, the loss of land (agricultural, residential) and
                           associated structures/assets. These impacts and associated mitigation measures are covered in
                           Resettlement Plan of each of the 8 sub-projects in Group 1. These sub-projects impact 1785
                           affected households, of which 11 households need to be relocated and 259 households loose more
                           than 20% of their total land holdings. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is also
                           developed to guide the preparation and implementation of RPs for investments of group 2 which
                           will be identified during project implementation.

                           Natural habitats: The screening of the Group 1 sub-project Environmental Impact Assessments
                           (EIAs)/Environmental Protection Commitment (EPC) confirmed that no natural habitats will be
                           affected by these sub-projects. However, there are new sub-projects to be identified during
                           implementation, which may involve natural habitats. As a result, a precautionary approach has
                           been adopted by triggering this policy under the project. Thus, all subproject proposals will be
                           screened for potential adverse impacts on natural habitats and necessary mitigation measures will
                           be prepared as part of the subproject specific EIA and EMP. The Project will not fund any sub-
                           project that would involve the significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats.

                           Forests: Some sub-projects may involve acquisition of forest land for maintaining ROW of the
                           power transmission lines. These activities may have the potential to have adverse impacts on the
                           rights and welfare of local people and their level of dependence upon low quality natural forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and plantation forests. Impacts on forests and associated mitigation measures will be included in
                           the subproject EIA and EMP. The project will not fund any subproject that would involve
                           significant conversion or degradation of critical forest areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential impacts related to operation of the subproject infrastructure are described in previous
                           section. No other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts
                           due to future activities are anticipated in the project areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           During preparation of the project, screening has been carried out for all Group 1 sub-projects to
                           exclude all investment proposals that would go against the project development objective. To
                           minimize the potential adverse impacts, the project has also considered alternatives to the
                           investment proposals prepared by the regional Power Project Management Boards (PMBs),
                           prioritized them based on the anticipated positive and negative impacts, and developed screening
                           checklists to exclude all investment proposals that may cause significant or irreversible social and
                           environmental impacts. A sub-project will not be eligible for funding if it would: i) involve the
                           significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats; ii) involve significant conversion
                           or degradation of critical forest areas; iii) contravene applicable international environmental

                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                           agreements; and iv) be located in a physical cultural resources site recognized at the national or
                           provincial level. In addition, PMBs will ensure that the transmission lines will go mainly over high
                           to low hills, agricultural land, irrigation canals, and along the corridor of existing roads, avoiding
Public Disclosure Copy




                           residential areas, urban centers where the project may cause significant impacts on land acquisition
                           and relocation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address the project negative social and environmental impacts the following safeguard
                           documents have been prepared by the PMBs, reviewed by the Bank environment and social
                           specialists and found to be satisfactory.

                           Environment:
                           Given that the sub-projects willbe implemented following a two-group approach, an ESMF has
                           been prepared by NPT to ensure that activities to be financed under the project would not create
                           adverse impacts on the local environment and local communities, and that the residual and/or
                           unavoidable impacts will be adequately mitigated. The framework covers requirements for: (i)
                           adequate safeguards screening including impacts on natural habitats, forests, and physical cultural
                           resources; (ii) impact assessment and development of mitigation measures, including the
                           Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOP) for construction activities and chance finds procedures;
                           (iii) safeguards documentation preparation and clearance; (iv) safeguards implementation,
                           supervision, monitoring, and reporting; (v) institutional strengthening and capacity building
                           programs; and (vi) institutional arrangements and budget. The ESMF identifies the requirements
                           for the preparation of an Environmental Management Plans (EMP) for a subproject to comply with
                           the World Bank’s and Government’s regulations on EIA. The ECOPs will be incorporated into the
                           bidding and contract documents and be closely monitored by supervision engineers.
                           The Government’s regulations on EIA require the preparation of an Environmental Impact
                           Assessment (EIA) an Environmental Protection Commitment (EPC), which is a simplified EIA,
                           for an investment project. Accordingly, seven EIAs and an EPC for the Group 1 sub-projects have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           also been prepared and submitted for Government approval. The Group 2 sub-projects will comply
                           with Government regulations, which require an EIA for every Component 1 sub-project, as well as
                           the Bank’s safeguards policy requirements as specified in the ESMF.
                           The EMPs for the eight Group 1 sub-projects have been prepared following the ESMF. These
                           EMPs have also been reviewed by the Bank and found satisfactory. The same procedures will
                           apply to the Group 2 sub-projects during implementation.

                           Social:
                           Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF): The EMPF will cover the potential sub-projects in
                           group 2 that will be defined during implementation. These sub-projects may cover a large
                           geographical area and it is likely that ethnic minority households may be affected. The EMPF was
                           prepared, conforming to the OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, ensuring that the development of sub-
                           projects fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and culture of affected ethnic
                           minority peoples. The implementing agencies (PMBs) must be able to demonstrate that it has
                           obtained broad community support for the subproject through a process of free, prior, and
                           informed consultations with the affected ethnic minority communities. In this regard, the EMPF
                           sets out guidelines to: (a) ensure that the ethnic minority peoples receive social and economic
                           benefits that are culturally appropriate; (b) avoid potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority
                           communities; and (c) when such adverse impacts cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or
                           compensate for such effects. The framework covers guidance on (i) preliminary screening; (ii)


                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                           social assessment; (iii) preparation of EMDP; (iv) implementing arrangement; (v) Estimated
                           budget; and (vi) Monitoring and Evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP): Within the 8 sub-projects in group 1, only 1 sub-
                           project will impact an ethnic minority group which is the Muong community. The project has
                           prepared an EMDP for this sub-project Hoa Binh – West Ha Noi 220kV T/L. The EMDP includes
                           a summary of the SA, consultations, the scope of impacts and mitigation measures, activities for
                           the enhancement of project implementing agencies and estimated costs for the Plan. The estimated
                           budget for EMDP is 864,000,000 VND (equivalent to US$ 41,142).

                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF): PMBs have also prepared a resettlement policy framework
                           (RPF) in accordance to OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and address the various types of
                           land acquisition and resettlement that may occur during subproject preparation and
                           implementation in group 2. It lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of
                           displaced persons, modes of compensation and rehabilitation, participation features and grievance
                           procedures that will guide the compensation and potential resettlement of these persons. It further
                           describes the planning and documentation requirements for such activities under the project.

                           Resettlement Plans (RPs): In consistency with the above-mentioned frameworks, PMBs have
                           prepared 8 individual RPs for the 8 sub-projects in group 1 of component 1. The RPs include
                           measures to ensure that displaced people are: (i) informed about the options regarding
                           resettlement; (ii) consulted and offered alternative resettlement choices; and (iii) provided with
                           effective compensation and livelihood restoration. The estimated budget for resettlement related
                           activities is 401,853,266,352 VND (equivalent to US$ 19 million).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           In addition to the EVN NPT, subproject PMBs responsible for the implementation of the project,
                           other key stakeholders are people’s committees, local authorities, local communities, mass
Public Disclosure Copy




                           organizations, and general public.
                           Public consultations and disclosure of theGroup 1 sub-project EIAs, EMPs, RPs and EMDPs were
                           carried during project preparation. Consultation with people and households affected by the
                           project, local authorities, and mass organizations has been conducted at the subproject level.

                           During preparation of the ESMF, RPF and EMPF, a consultation workshop was held in January
                           2014. Key participants included staff of implementing PMBs, representatives of MoIT, NPT, and
                           local consultants. Feedbacks from all the consultations were taken into account in the preparation
                           of the final documents and for sub-projects’ design.

                           Prior to project appraisal, all safeguard documents (ESMF, EIAs/EPC, EMPs, RPF, EMPF, RPs,
                           EMDP) have been disclosed in Vietnamese at the Vietnam Development Information Center, the
                           NPT, the PMBs, and subproject areas in the project provinces. They have also been disclosed in
                           English at the Bank’s InfoShop in Washington DC.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Jan-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-Jan-2014



                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Vietnam                                                          24-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          24-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          24-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?


                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Peter Johansen
                            Approved By


                                                                       Page 10 of 11
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)        Date: 10-Apr-2014
                         Advisor:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Jennifer J. Sara (SM)      Date: 11-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 11 of 11
