INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 121
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         SriLanka                   Project ID:   P151916
Project Name:    Early Childhood Development Project (P151916)
Task Team        Saurav Dev Bhatta
Leader(s):
Estimated        05-May-2015                Estimated     25-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Pre-primary education (90%), Public administration- Education (10%)
Theme(s):        Education for all (90%), Other human development (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      50.00
Total                                                            50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective is to enhance access to and improve the quality of
ECD services for 3-5 year old children in Sri Lanka.
C. Project Description
Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) currently has an embryonic Early Childhood Development (ECD)
program (framework) encapsulated in different policy and plan documents, including the National
Policy on Early Childhood Care and Development, the National Plan of Action for Children of Sri


﻿Lanka 2013-17 and the Sri Lanka Budget which includes a three-year plan. The program reflected in
these documents identifies key challenges in the ECD sector, policy directions and activities for
implementation. It provides a foundation for the proposed IDA-financed operation which will
support implementation of selected strategic areas and components of the existing program. Drawing
O
on the findings of an ECD study conducted by the World Bank in FY 2013-14, the proposed
operation would enable GOSL to further develop this program into a more coherent and
comprehensive one.
The proposed IDA-financed operation would include two components. Component 1 would provide
support for the expansion and quality enhancement of ECD service delivery. It would seek to
increase access to ECD services in unserved and underserved areas of Sri Lanka and enhance the
quality of services across the country. Component 2 would finance technical assistance, program
management and monitoring and evaluation.
The operation to support implementation of GOSL's ECD program would be financed through a US
$50 million Investment Project Financing (IPF) using a result-based funding modality.
Disbursements would be made against selected eligible budget items in the annual budgets, or
'Eligible Expenditure Programs' (EEPs). Disbursement would be conditional on the achievement of
pre-specified results measured by Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs). Government stakeholders,
including the Ministry of Finance and Planning (MoFP) and MCDWA, have expressed their
preference for this financing approach.
Component 1: Program Support for the Expansion and Quality Enhancement of ECD Services
Guided by the national ECD framework, the Project would focus on two areas to improve the
provision of ECD services in Sri Lanka: (i) expanding access to ECD services, and (ii) improving the
quality of ECD provision.
(i)    Expanding access to ECD services
o
Both demand and supply-side interventions would be used to make ECD more accessible to all and
increase enrollment of children in the 3-5 year old age group.
o      Demand-side interventions
Parental awareness and interaction programs: Parental awareness programs would be conducted
across the country to help families (parents, relatives and care-givers) better understand the
importance of holistic child development and encourage the use of ECD centers in their
communities. These programs would also include regular meetings of parents, moderated by
facilitators, to discuss child development principles and approaches. Targeted towards parents of
children in the 0-5 year age group , these programs would provide information on parenting skills for
early stimulation, approaches to leaming for children with special needs, plus child health and
nutrition. To enhance the effectiveness of such programs, they would be linked to nutrition
campaigns targeting mothers and children. Different stakeholders, including government agencies,
civil society organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs), would work in partnership
to conduct these programs.
Fee subsidies to ECD centers in selected underserved areas: To increase the enrollment of children
who would not be able to attend ECD classes due to financial constraints, the Project would provide


﻿fee subsidies to centers in selected underserved areas. Participating ECD centers, including both
state- and non-state-run centers, would be required to lower their per child fees to a predefined level.
They would also be required to provide a certain number of full fee waivers for the poorest children.
To compensate for the loss of income faced by centers as a result of fee reduction and fee waivers,
O
the Project would provide cash payments to them according to the number of enrolled children. The
selection of under-served areas for fee subsidy support would be based on poverty mapping
information from the Department of Census and Statistics and administrative records of the
MCDWA.
Supply-side interventions
Construction and upgradation of facilities in unserved areas: The Project would finance the
construction of new ECD facilities in unserved areas after mapping existing ECD facilities across the
country. The national mapping of ECD facilities to identify unserved and underserved areas would
be completed prior to Project effectiveness.
Space for the construction of facilities would be identified and provided by provincial councils, local
government authorities and beneficiary communities. Construction grants could be used to build new
facilities on government- or community-owned or common land. They could also be used to add
ECD facilities to existing government- or community-owned structures. Furniture, equipment and
teaching-learning materials would be provided under the Project.
In unserved areas where existing building space is made available by communities for use as ECD
centers, the Project would provide funds to renovate and furnish these structures in accordance with
GOSL's minimum quality standards for ECD facilities. Teaching-learning materials would be
provided under the Project.
The new ECD centers in unserved areas would have teachers with the minimum prescribed
qualifications. These teachers would be eligible for teacher training support under the Project.
Support for centers in under-served areas: Most ECD centers in Sri Lanka are run either by the
private sector or by NGOs, temples and churches. In under-served areas, the Project would provide
financial support to both state- and non-state-run centers to expand enrollment beyond existing
levels. Support would be in the form of annual performance-based grants where each center receives
o       a cash award for increases in enrollment over that of the previous year. The Project also proposes to
support under-served children in orphanages and those from marginalized groups, such as fishing
communities, plantations/estates and urban slums.
(ii) Improving the quality of ECD provision
To improve the quality of ECD provision in Sri Lanka, the proposed Project would support quality
management, the provision of material inputs, the improvement of ECD facilities and training for
ECD teachers, trainers and administrators.
Quality management: The Project would finance the revision of the curriculum framework and child
development standards which guide the teaching-learning processes in ECD centers. The revision
would focus on promoting holistic, child-centered, play/activity-based approaches for children's
cognitive and non-cognitive development and prepare them for primary school. The Project would
support the development of teaching-learning materials for teachers and 3-5 year old children in the
Sinhalese, Tamil and English languages. Development of these materials would be guided by the


﻿curriculum framework and standards endorsed by GOSL. The Project would also support
strengthening GOSL's existing minimum quality standards and registration system for ECD centers.
Provision of teaching learning materials: To help ECD providers enhance the quality of services, the
O
Project would support the provision of age-appropriate quality teaching-learning materials to both
state- and non-state-run centers. Priority would be given to centers in remote and/or under-served
areas. A sound monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system would be put in place to ensure proper
utilization. of the support provided by the Project.
Improvement of existing ECD center facilities: Eligible state and non-state-run ECD centers would
receive block grants to improve their physical facilities. Centers not meeting the quality standards set
by the government would be required to use these funds to bring their facilities to a minimum level.
Other centers would have greater flexibility in using the funds for improving their facilities. All
centers receiving Project funds for quality improvement would have to attend to the requirements of
children with special needs. Priority would be given to centers in remote a nd/or under-served areas.
To be eligible for support from the Project, centers would have to provide detailed data to the Project
on the state of their facilities when seeking funding.
Training of ECD teachers, trainers, and administrators: The Project would support the development
and delivery of training programs for ECD teachers, teacher trainers and administrators, including
new teachers hired in program-supported centers. As an initial step in the development of training
programs, GOSL would prepare and endorse a comprehensive capacity development plan for these
stakeholders.
Two categories of training for ECD teachers would be supported: (i) short-term training programs for
in-service teachers, freshly recruited incoming teachers and potential new teachers; and (ii) one- to
two-year long ECD certificate and diploma programs. To encourage learning through peer
interaction, the Project would support teacher exchanges across ECD centers. Given that children's
smooth transition from pre- to primary school depends partly on the primary school teachers'
understanding of child development principles, the Project would support short orientation programs
on holistic child development for primary school teachers and head teachers. These training
programs would give special emphasis to approaches for facilitating the learning of children with
special needs, and activities/techniques aimed at enhancing the development of cognitive skills. The
Project would prioritize training for ECD teachers from geographical areas which lag behind others
in terms of teacher training and qualifications.
Short-term training would be delivered through a combination of state- and non-state-run training
institutions which have formal partnerships with ECD centers for providing trainees hands-on
experience. Certificate and diploma programs would be delivered by universities and other
recognized institutions. The Project would provide funds to these institutions for scholarship support
to qualified and financially needy candidates interested in pursuing these programs.
The training of trainers supported by the Project would prepare the necessary pool of trainers to
deliver different types of ECD training to teachers across the nation. These training programs would
also be delivered by a combination of state and non-state providers. Training for administrators
would focus on the capacity development of the different units and agencies, at all levels of
government, engaged in implementing ECD activities. It would cover a broad range of topics,
including administration, planning, budgeting, procurement, financial management, ECD domain
knowledge and computer literacy.
Component 2: Program Management, Technical Assistance and Monitoring and Evaluation (M &E)


﻿Program management: The Project would finance incremental program management costs,
consulting services, transportation, equipment, staff training and other administrative expenses
incurred during implementation.
0
Technical assistance: The Project would support the review and revision the embryonic national
framework to bring greater coherence and consistency to the setting of objectives for and the
planning of ECD programs and activities in Sri Lanka. The framework would be revised through
extensive consultation with stakeholders in the sector. The Project would provide support for
technical assistance to the program management team in a number of areas including, inter alia,
institutional analysis, the preparation of guidelines, the development of information systems,
training, monitoring and evaluation, procurement, financial management and social and
environmental safeguards.
M&E and feedback system: The Project would develop and implement a robust and comprehensive
ECD monitoring and evaluation system to ensure compliance with quality assurance standards and
provide constructive feedback to ECD centers. While overall responsibility for carrying out and
coordinating M&E activities under the Project would lie with the Children's Secretariat, relevant
units at each administrative level would be responsible for local-level monitoring and data collection
and entry. The Project would develop and use an electronic management information system (MIS),
which would include ECD mapping data, as an integral part of the M&E system. The MIS would
allow decentralized entry of data on ECD centers, teachers and children and the continuous updating
of monitoring information. The Project would also support tracking studies, impact assessments and
other research activities.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in all 9 provinces of Sri Lanka. Physical activities are proposed to
be undertaken on state owned or community land identified for development. No natural habitats or
forest areas will be opened up for physical interventions.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
A comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for the conservation of natural resources and
environmental management is in existence Sri Lanka. The Central Environmental Authority (CEA) is
the key regulatory body that is mandated by the National Environmental Act (NEA) to implement all
regulatory provisions outlined in its statutes. All development projects, that fall in to a set of
prescribed categories are required to conduct a comprehensive environmental screening and
mitigation planning process (EIA or IEE). These processes are largely consistent with the Bank's
safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment. With over two decades of experience the CEA
demonstrates the technical expertise in evaluating environmental impacts of development projects.
However even with an enabling legal environment and CEA capacity, field level enforcement of
legal instruments and subsequent monitoring of environmental management activities has been very
low. In addition, the types of interventions proposed will not fall within the EIA regulations of the
country and therefore, the role played by CEA will be minimum. The Institute for Construction
Training and Development (ICTAD) has also developed a set of comprehensive Environmental
Codes of Practice which are to be implemented during construction activities and have been
successfully implemented in Bank funded operations.
The key implementing agencies for the project have been identified as the Child Development


﻿Authorities/Departments in the MCDWA, the Project Counterparts and the district offices which take
part in provision of services and facilities for Child Development in various ways. The capacities
and strengths of these entities will be assessed in relation to the implementation of environmental and
social safeguards in line with program implementation. The proposed lead implementing agency, the
O
U       Ministry of Child Development and Women Affairs )MCDWA), has no prior experience with Bank
funded project and is therefore not familiar with Bank safeguard procedures, guidelines and
requirements. In this account, there are substantial capacity constraints that will have to be ardently
addressed via the second component of project, which is devoted to addressing capacity building
needs.
During project preparation a detailed evaluation of the implementing agencies capacity for the
implementation of safeguard policies will be conducted and instruments for capacity building will be
put in place as part of the proposed Environmental Assessment and Management Framework
(EAMF) that will be prepared prior to appraisal, based on the findings. The client will be provided
with the required capacity building and technical assistance and guidance to prepare the EMGs as
well. The EMGs will be prepared in a manner that will maximize the use of the existing country
systems with which government agencies are generally acquainted with implementing. The capacity
building instruments are envisioned to be included as a part of the Technical Assistance being
provided via the project under Component 2. The EAMF will provide guidelines for evaluating
environmental impacts and recommend possible mitigation measures to be applied during program
implementation, outline relevant national standards and guidelines to be followed in terms of
construction and operation, and discuss the relevant monitoring and reporting activities and
processes.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Darshani De Silva (GENDR)
Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSURR)
Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GENDR)
SII. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Bank will provide financing for the development
OP/BP 4.01                              of the GOSL's ECD program. Under the identified
supply side interventions of Component 1, the
construction and upgradation of ECD facilities in
unserved areas will be financed. It is expected that
potential environmental impacts from the proposed
physical intervention will not pose major,
irreversible environmental impacts due to their
nature and scale. In order to mitigate potential
impacts that may be caused due to new construction
activities and upgrading as well as to ensure that all
such activities undertaken are conducted in an
environmentally sound manner, an Environmental
Assessment and Management Framework (EAMF)
will be prepared by the client with guidance from the
Bank.


﻿The EMGs will include environmental assessment
and screening guidelines, environmental codes of
practice, impact identification and mitigatory
measure implementation guidelines, environmental
safety guidelines, monitoring mechanisms etc. that
are in line with bank safeguard requirements whilst
maximizing the use of country systems.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The construction of new facilities will be on either
state owned land or community owned land as set
forth in the project design. The rehabilitation and
upgrading activities will focus on existing ECD
centers operating in government/community owned
structures. Thus there will be no impacts to sensitive
natural areas or designated natural areas due to
project interventions.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           No activities in forests or in close proximity to forest
areas are expected.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           Not Applicable as no project interventions are made
where significant use of pesticides and other such
substances are utilized.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          Project interventions are not envisioned to be
OP/BP 4.11                               conducted in areas close to sites of cultural
importance. Renovation, rehabilitation and
improvements will be made to buildings built over
the last few decades and not deemed socially or
culturally important. Measures to safeguard chance
fmds will be included as part of the measures taken
under Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD         Project will be implemented in all 9 provinces
4.10                                     including the areas where historically known
indigenous people are living scattered. The national
population census does not show presence of IP
population in the country or in specific locality. On
the other hand, the project focuses on individuals
than communities to provide early child education
support. Thus, the project cannot aim at any specific
interventions or programs targeting IP as a group or
in specific locations. Decision to trigger the policy
to be decided prior to appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Although, it is expected that construction of ECD
BP 4.12                                  facilities will be confined to existing premises, new
constructions of training centers are proposed to
build at district and provincial levels in Government
owned lands. Therefore, the policy is triggered as a
precautionary measure in case there are temporary


﻿occupations of land by squatters and to ensure free
form any encumbrances. Involuntary Resettlement
Framework will be prepared to guide the project in
managing potential social issues related to land and
assets.
Safety of Dams 0P/l3P 4.37  No           Not applicable as the project does not involve new
construction/rehabilitation of any Dams
 Projects on International  No          Not Applicable
Waterways 0P/l3P 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        Not Applicable
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 04-Mar-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The EAMF and IR framework are scheduled to be completed prior to appraisal, by 30th March
2015 (Tentatively)
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Saurav Dev Bhatta
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                         Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                         Date:
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


