                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA8031

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-May-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Djibouti                          Project ID:    P149621
                                                       Parent         P130328
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     DJ Social Safety Net Project Additional Financing (P149621)
   Parent Project    DJ Crisis Response - Social Safety Net Project (P130328)
   Name:
   Task Team         Stefanie Koettl - Brodman
   Leader:
   Estimated         19-May-2014                       Estimated   30-Oct-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    MNSSP                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
   Theme(s):         Social safety nets (60%), Other social protection and risk management (20%),
                     Nutrition and food security (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                  5.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                             5.00
     Total                                                                                   5.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                             Page 1 of 5
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objectives are to: (a) support the provision of short-term employment
   opportunities in community-based labor-intensive works for the poor and vulnerable; and (b)
   support the improvement of nutrition practices among participating householdsfocusing on pre-
   school children and pregnant/lactating women.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed AF would extend the closing date by two years to September 30, 2018. The main
changes of the proposed AF (US$5 million) will be: (i) a scale up of the nutrition-sensitive social
safety net program under Components 1 and 2 to extend implementation by one year, widen
geographic coverage, and increase benefit levels so that an additional 230,000 person-days of labor-
intensive community work will be provided to eligible households; (ii) an expansion of the social
registry under Component 3 to increase coverage and development of new modules (e.g., unique
authentication, smart cards, and linkages to program management information systems); (iii)
additional funds under Component 4 to ensure project management and administration until the end
of project implementation. The PDO will remain unchanged. The results framework, implementation
schedule and disbursement estimates will be revised in line with expanded activities.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The AF will be carried out in both urban and rural areas.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Fatou Fall (MNSSU)
Helena Munir Freih Al-Naber (MNSEE)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
 BP 4.01                                             policy is triggered because of potential site
                                                     specific and less adverse impacts that may be
                                                     associated with the sub-projects particularly for
                                                     small construction/rehabilitation works. It is
                                                     expected that all the sub-projects to be Category
                                                     B or C.

                                                     The original project was prepared under the OP
                                                     8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
                                                     Emergencies), and an Environmental and Social
                                                     Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF).

                                                     The ESSAF has been updated and reinforced with
                                                     social safeguards related wording and has been


                                             Page 2 of 5
                                                       submitted for consultation. It will be published in
                                                       country and at the Infoshop, prior to appraisal.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              The project will not finance investments that have
                                                       potential to cause significant loss or degradation
                                                       of natural habitats.
   Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              The project will not finance investments that have
                                                       potential to impact forests.
   Pest Management OP 4.09             No              The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
                                                       dispose of pesticides and/or pesticide application
                                                       equipment.
   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The project does not trigger this policy.

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              Project funding will not be allocated to activities
   4.12                                                necessitating (1) Involuntary land acquisition
                                                       resulting in involuntary resettlement and/or loss
                                                       of assets or access to assets, shelter, revenues or
                                                       means of livelihoods, loss of access to resources,
                                                       and (2) The involuntary restriction of access to
                                                       legally designated parks and protected areas
                                                       resulting in adverse impacts on the livelihoods of
                                                       the displaced persons.

                                                       The ESSAF will be updated and reinforced with
                                                       social safeguards related wording, prior to being
                                                       submitted for consultation and published in
                                                       country and at the Infoshop.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              The project does not trigger this policy.

   Projects on International        No                 The project does not trigger this policy.
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project does not trigger this policy.
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale and site specific, thus
     easily remediable. No indirect or long term adverse impacts are expected.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The project is classified as Environmental Assessment Category B as the works implemented
     under Component 1 might have localized environmental impacts. The AF does not trigger

                                               Page 3 of 5
  additional safeguards policies, change the safeguard categories or raise safeguard-related issues
  that were not covered in the original project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  An Environmental and Social Screening Assessment Framework (ESSAF) has been prepared for
  the Social Safety Net project. It prescribes the mechanisms by which the individual community
  works under Component 1 will be screened for their potential environmental impacts, as well as
  the risks and mitigation measures to be employed to address those risks. The ESSAF has been
  updated and reinforced with social safeguards related wording and has been submitted for
  consultation. It will be published in country and at the Infoshop, prior to appraisal. The ESSAF
  will be used also for the activities implemented under the AF. As the implementing agency, ADDS
  is responsible for monitoring the implementation of safeguards for these small community works.

  For the original project, ADDS is responsible for monitoring the implementation of safeguards for
  the small community works. The Monitoring and Evaluation unit at ADDS, consisting of 2 staff
  members, is responsible for the monitoring of ESSAF implementation: the coordinator for high
  labor intensity works, a civil engineer by training, prepares the checklists, which are then revised
  by the M&E unit. In general, ADDS’ capacity to address safeguards issues is week. The World
  Bank carried out 3 training sessions with ADDS, including on filling the checklists and preparing
  a simple EMP for category B projects, and will continue support for the ADDS through training,
  as needed.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The updated ESSAF has been consulted in new project areas, and will be disclosed in country and
  at the Infoshop, prior to appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Apr-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Apr-2012
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Djibouti                                                         00000000
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level



                                             Page 4 of 5
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Stefanie Koettl - Brodman
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                      Date: 17-May-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-                   Date: 17-May-2014
                                  Gammal (SM)




                                             Page 5 of 5
