                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSR8745
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of                      Project ID:           P113416
                            Project Name:     Egypt - Wind Power Development Project (P113416)
                            Task Team         Waleed Saleh I. Alsuraih
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         27-Apr-2010                                  Estimated   15-Jun-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    MNSEE                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme:            Climate change (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        803.50            Total Bank Financing:                                    70.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            62.30
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               70.00
                              Borrowing Agency                                                                                   450.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                              150.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                                         70.00
                              GERMANY KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KF                                                           0.70
                              Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility                                                      0.50
                              Total                                                                                              803.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?


                                                                               Page 1 of 10
                         2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         The proposed project development objectives are to assist the Government of Egypt to
                         commercialize and scale-up its Wind Energy program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The proposed project development objectives are to assist the Government of Egypt to
                         commercialize and scale-up its Wind Energy program.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project comprises transmission infrastructure development and support for the construction of
                         the first 250 MW BOO wind project along with technical assistance for (i) facilitating the
                         competitive bidding and (ii) to establish procedures to enable the system operator to manage the
                         integration of large blocks of intermittent wind generation within the power system. The
                         transmission infrastructure development for wind power development in the Gulf of Suez and Gabel
                         El-Zait area requires 220kV and 500kV transmission lines and associated substations to evacuate
                         about 3000 MW of wind energy. By 2015 wind power would reach 2,530MW at Elzait and Ras
                         Gharib in addition to the existing 545MW in Zafarana (1) and (2) and 540MW at Gulf of El-zait by
                         2013. The new 500 kV transmission line funded under the project would be required by 2015 to
                         reinforce the capability of the grid to enable the evacuation of an additional 2,530 MW of wind
                         power from Suez Gulf to distant load at the national network. The 500kV transmission line would
                         initially transmit the power from the 250MW IPP wind farm along with another two upcoming wind
                         farms to reach 2,530MW by 2015 in the Ras Gharib (Gulf of Suez). In particular, the project will be
                         undertaken through the following major components:

                          Component A- Transmission Infrastructure (US$ 343 million, of which IBRD is US$ 70 million,
                         CTF is US$ 148.2 million, EIB is US$ 70million and GoE is US$ 54 million). This component
                         involves several sub-components that together contribute to the full transmission infrastructure
                         development and brings together financing from IBRD/CTF, European donors led by European
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Investment Bank (EIB), but including Agence Française de Développement (AfD)/Neighborhood
                         Investment Funds (NIF) and Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW)/NIF.

                           #      A1- 500kV double-circuit Overhead Head Transmission Line (OHTL): This sub-component
                         involves construction of the transmission line from Suez Gulf to Samallout (about 280 km). This
                         includes the single responsibility Design, Supply and Installation rate based contract for all
                         components (towers, cable, insulators and materials, ground wires with fiber optics communication
                         links, and foundations for the complete construction of the Transmission Line. Tendering for the
                         transmission line will be based on a preliminary route survey to provide estimated quantities of tower
                         types, foundations, conductors, etc. provided by EETC’s consultant EPS.

                           #      A2 Construction of 500kV/220kV GIS Substation in Ras Gharib (at Suez Gulf): This sub-
                         component to be financed by the EIB includes a single responsibility Design Supply and Install
                         contract for the provision of all components (switchgear, breakers, switches, protection, control,
                         telecommunication, etc.) for the complete construction of the Substation based on design details
                         provided by EETC’s consultants. The sub-component also includes one Supply and Install contract
                         for one transformer 500kV/220kV, 500 MVA.

                           #     A3 Extension of Samallout 500kV/220kV GIS substation: This sub-component to be
                         financed by EIB includes a single responsibility Design, Supply and Install contract for the provision


                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         of all components (switchgear, breakers, switches, protection, control, telecommunication, etc.) to
                         accommodate a new 500MVA 55/22kV transformer and the associated GIS busbars. This contract
                         will be based on a design provided by EETC’#s consultants that includes the supply and installation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of one 500kV/220kV, 500 MVA transformer.

                          #      A 4 Construction of double-circuit 220 kV line from Ras Gharib to Gabel El-Zait: This sub-
                         component involving construction of about 50 km of 220 kv transmission line that will be financed
                         by the borrower in accordance with EETC’s standard procurement practice.

                          Component B Technical Assistance to support the expansion of Egypt's wind generation program
                         (US$ 2.9 million of which CTF is US$ 1.75 million)

                          #      B1 Technical Assistance for the development of the wind BOO program ( US$ 1.5 million of
                         which CTF is US$ 1 million): This component would provide consultant support to the EETC in the
                         competitive bidding program for the first 250 MW project. The advisory services are being provided
                         in two phases with the first phase having already commenced with support from the PPIAF to
                         provide support in the preparation of the Request for Proposals (RFP) and the second phase to be
                         supported under the CTF to provide legal and financial advisory support through financial closure.

                          #      B2 Technical Assistance to support Management of Wind Power Integration in Egyptian
                         Power Market (CTF $500,000): This objective of this component is to support the rapid development
                         of the wind energy market in Egypt by recommending guidelines to the system operator for the
                         optimal scheduling of complementary generation and demand so as to integrate wind generated
                         power into the Egyptian power market while ensuring the security of the transmission system
                         operations

                          #      B3 Technical Assistance to perform Environmental Assessment including Ornithological
                         survey (KfW $650,000) An environmental and social assessment including ornithological survey is
                         underway covering roughly 200 Sq km area (roughly 1000 MW) including the site of the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         250 MW BOOT project with support from the KfW.

                           #     B4 Knowledge Management (CTF $ 250,000) This sub-component would be expected to
                         address three basic elements : (i) communications with local stakeholders, including Civil Society
                         Organizations (CSOs) and the private sector on project activities, results and lessons; (ii) capture of
                         lessons during the project implementation process; and (iii) the sharing of such lessons with other
                         CTF country partners.

                          #        Component C- Gulf of Suez 250 MW BOO project (US$ 450 million): This component will
                         involve development and construction of a 250 MW wind farm in Gulf of Suez by a private sector
                         operator under a BOO approach. As described earlier, the pre-qualification of bidders has been
                         completed and the wind measurement program is scheduled to begin during July 2010. This will be
                         the first in a series of competitive bidding tenders for wind power. The EETC is considering
                         monetization of the GHG benefits of the overall competitive bidding program including this first
                         project through the development of a CDM program of activities.

                         The additional sub-components to be financed by the project savings under Component A consist of:
                         A5) A5- extension of the 220 kV network along Suez Gulf Coastal area; A6) rehabilitating five
                         existing transmission lines which are mostly located within the Nile Delta Governorates where there
                         is a significant amount of agricultural lands. All the routes of these OHTLs when constructed were

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         on barren desert, but now, four of them have been reclaimed and became agricultural lands, and the
                         fifth is still desert owned by the government .The details these two sub-components are the
                         following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A5) extension of the 220 kV network along Suez Gulf Coastal area

                         i)      Hurghada North GIS Substation and its interconnections

                         The component includes constructing a GIS Substation with 2x125MVA, 220/66kV, 2×40 MVA
                         66/22 kV at North Hurghada; and its connection with the national grid through 2km 220kV and 7km
                         66kV Double Circuit overhead transmission lines, both as In/Out connections to North Hurghada.

                         The substation is located in plain desert area north Hurghada City, off the OHTL of Gabal El Zeit
                         Hurgahda South which is under construction. The total area of the land is 300 m x 300 m and the
                         land was owned by the Governorate and the ownership was transferred to EETC. The in/out opening
                         from the substation was observed in terms of lengths to be less than2km to be crossing the road and
                         pass through plain desert area until it connects to transmission line of Gabal El Zeit-Hurgahda South.

                         ii)     Al-Qusair GIS Substation and its interconnections

                         The component includes constructing a GIS Substation with 2x125MVA, 220/66kV, 2×40 MVA
                         66/22 kV at El-Qusair ; and its Connection with the national grid through 90km 220kV Double
                         circuit overhead transmission line- scope details are as follows.

                         The substation is located in plain desert area west El Qusseir City off Qeft road. The total area of the
                         land for the substation is 225 m x 375 m and the land was owned by the Governorate and the
                         ownership was transferred to EETC. The initial routing for the 90 km length OHTL has been
                         determined in coordination with the Military authorities and it will be located in a distance that will
                         vary between 500m to 3 km from the main road and inside the desert/ mountainous areas. It is quite
Public Disclosure Copy




                         unlikely that the OHTL will affect any of these residential and tourism communities.
                         A6) Rehabilitation of the existing 232 km of Overhead Transmission Lines
                         This will include the following five existing transmission lines

                         i)      220kV, OHTL, Menouf/ Tahrir Badr with a length of 35Km in Alex & West Delta Zone
                         ii)     220kV, OHTL, Menouf/ Basous with a length of 32 Km in Alex & West Delta Zone
                         iii)    220kV, OHTL, Menouf/ Basous with a length of 45Km in the Delta Zone
                         iv) 220kV, OHTL, El-Manayef/ Abu-Soltan with a length of 40 km in Canal Zone
                         v) 220kV, OHTL, Suez2/ Badr with a length of 80 km in Canal Zone

                         Around 152 km of the total 232 km targeted routes are located in agriculture land, while 80 km are
                         desert areas. The rehabilitation of the existing OHTL will not involve any need for additional land.
                         The process will only include temporary disturbance for the cultivation activities due to the use of the
                         rehabilitation machines/equipment in the farms. In case damaging crops proved unavoidable, EETC
                         will prepare a RAP/ARAP and will be paying compensation to PAPs based on the requirements of
                         OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and the Egyptian legislations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         TThe 250 MW wind farm will be located at Ras Gharib in the Red Sea Governorate and the


                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         transmission line will run from Ras Gharib in the Red Sea Governorate to Samallout 500 KV
                         substation west of Nile river in the Al-Minya Governorate. The route all along the Red Sea
                         Governorate goes through an empty, uninhabitated, uncultivated, state- owned land area. With the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         exception of about 30-35 km near the Nile River where the 280 km 500kV double circuit east-west
                         line would cross agricultural land, the line will go through uninhabited desert land. On the east-west
                         route no population or human settlements were observed between the Samallout 500kV substation in
                         Al-Minya Governorate and Ras Gharib in the Red Sea Governorate.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Knut Opsal (AFTCS)
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
                         Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (MNSSU)

                         6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Environmental Category: B - Partial Assessment
                         BP 4.01
                                                                              Based on the project scope, it was determined that
                                                                              the social and environmental impact are limited
                                                                              and the transmission line will pass through a large
                                                                              land tract of desert with minimal environmental
                                                                              and social issues.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              Based on the project scope, it was determined that
                         4.12                                                 the social and environmental impact are limited
                                                                              and the transmission line will pass through a large
                                                                              land tract of desert with minimal environmental
                                                                              and social issues.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                         Projects on International        No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                         7.60




                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) indicates that the proposed
                              transmission schemes and substation are expected to be generally environmentally clean and non-
                              polluting in nature as most of the area is characterized by uninhabited and uncultivated desert land.
                              The anticipate environment and social impacts on the surrounding environment will be restricted
                              to rights of way (ROW) and substations. The study presents baseline of flora and fauna known to
                              exist in the region, particularly around Red sea and Nile valley as well analyses of alternative
                              routes. The ESIA does not indicate presence of any sensitive habitat (mangroves, wetlands or coral
                              reef); receptors or archeological sites within or along the proposed alignment that may be affected
                              by the proposed project activities. The study does indicate that some part of the anticipated 500
                              KV transmission line route between Samallout and Suez Gulf, particularly at Jabal El-Zayt may
                              fall under the known migratory route of birds with potential to impact migratory birds if project
                              results in removal and destruction of surrounding vegetation near tower footings or sub stations.
                              These impacts will be mitigated by avoiding removal or clearance of vegetation in the Jabal El-
                              Zayt area, where strain towers will provide additional roosting and nesting platform for large
                              raptors such as vultures and Eagles. The design of transmission lines under the project will also
                              include providing colored markers on the transmission lines to deflect any potential birds and
                              providing bird friendly design of towers. The ESIAstudy indicate that the impact of potential
                              collision of birds with T- line is, however, unlikely.

                                The study assessed current and anticipated environmental impacts during the construction phase
                              of power transmission line including impacts on terrestrial and aquatic habitat and humans due to
                              electric and magnetic fields and hazardous materials. Given the geographical and ecological
                              features of the area through the proposed transmission routes as well as transmission line route
Public Disclosure Copy




                              selection based on principles of avoidance, the project environmental impacts are expected to be
                              construction related and not significant. The Environment and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                              details measures to minimize environmental, health and safety impacts during planning, design,
                              construction and supervision, including recommendations for mitigating habitat loss, vegetation
                              damage and fragmentation; avoid inconvenience to local community due increased access to wild
                              lands, paths/access roads; avoid run off and sedimentation from grading of access roads; fully
                              avoid chemical contamination by using only manual maintenance techniques; avoid procuring or
                              using PCBs in electrical equipment; mitigate the impact as a result of change in land use and
                              population relocation due to location of towers and substations, including induced secondary
                              development during construction; minimizing avian hazards by selecting appropriate design for
                              transmission lines and towers; avoid impairment of cultural and aesthetic resources, health and
                              safety, fire hazards and pollution; prevent loss of agriculture/community land by avoiding physical
                              displacement of population, and minimize, if not avoid, displacement of population and ensure
                              that the livelihood of those affected is improved or restored

                              Land acquisition along the expected 280 km transmission line will be limited to compensation for
                              areas covered by the tower footings, if located on private land and a Resettlement Policy
                              Framework has been prepared. However with the exception of the first 30-35 km near Samallout
                              on the Nile River which may affect agricultural areas, most of the proposed routing passes through
                              uninhabited desert land which is owned by the State. At Samallout, 500 KV/220/132/66/33


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                          substation is located at the desert edge, west of Nile river. This substation will be expanded to
                          house new equipment associated with the construction and operation of new transmission lines.
                          No land taking or resettlement is associated with this site of substation. At Suez Gulf and Jabal
Public Disclosure Copy




                          El-Zayt, area for substation has been allocated and the land has been transferred to EETC by the
                          local authorities of Red Sea Governorate. The area is free of encumberance and is located on
                          uncultivated desert land. The site of the substations and the entire route of transmission line are
                          accessible through the regional road from El-Sheikh Fadl ro R as Gareb, therefore no access road
                          is envisaged as part of the project. Overall the social and environmental impacts of the project
                          interventions are not significant, unprecedented or irreversible.

                          A supplementary ESIA has been prepared to address the environmental and social impacts of the
                          additional subcomponents, including an ESMP for management and monitoring of potential
                          environmental and social impacts. A supplementary RPF has also been prepared to address
                          resettlement issues. The supplementary ESIA described the baseline environmental and social
                          conditions at the location of these subcomponents, it has indicated that two main environmental
                          and social sensitivities could be related to the project activities: 1- Possible locations of the new
                          OHTL in the Red Sea near birds migration corridors, this has been addressed in the ESMP through
                          initiating a special ornithological study s before construction works, this study could be carried out
                          in two stages: the first will include a rapid assessment to indicate if the proposed routes of the
                          OHTLs need to be modified, then the second stage will include more detailed assessment in
                          autumn and spring seasons to recommend certain mitigation measures to avoid birds fatalities at
                          certain stretches of the lines. 2- Possible temporary damages to crops in the agriculture areas of the
                          existing lines that will be rehabilitated. Around 152 km of the total 232 km targeted routes are
                          located in agriculture land, while 80 km are desert areas. The rehabilitation of the existing OHTL
                          will not involve any need for additional land. The process will only include temporary disturbance
                          for the cultivation activities due to the use of the rehabilitation machines/equipment in the farms.
                          In case damaging crops proved unavoidable, EETC will prepare a RAP/ARAP and will be paying
                          compensation to PAPs based on the requirements of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement and the
                          Egyptian legislations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The supplementary ESIA of indicated that the environmental and social impacts of the additional
                           subcomponents are expected to be limited and could be mitigated following the measures of the
                           ESMP.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The Bank financed project does not anticipate any indirect or long term impacts that will be
                           adverse due to anticipated future activities. However, the area around the proposed wind
                           generation projects to be financed by private investors will develop in future for which an
                           environment and social impact assessment will be undertaken after establishing feasibility.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            The EA studied three alternative routes and recommended the 3rd alignment, as the best option.
                           There are three proposed routes in the green area at Samallout route segment:

                          #        The first options included alignment that would have passed close to existing housing
                          blocks and crossing the Nile River at 600 m width, and therefore rejected.
                          #        The second option was not preferred as it passes through mining area located at the eastern
                          side of the Nile River and constitutes a source of pollution, which may adversely affect the line

                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                          insulators, in addition to crossing the Nile River at 900m width.
                          #        The third option, which is the preferable and the selected alignment route allows the
                          project in avoiding all housing blocks and passes far from the mining area and crosses the Nile
Public Disclosure Copy




                          River at its narrowest width, i.e. 600 m distance.

                          The ESMP and the RPF follow the basic principles of avoidance, minimization and mitigation. As
                          part of the EA, several alternative alignments are analyzed and choice is made on the basis of
                          several criteria including environmental and social sensitivity of the routes. Near Samallout
                          different options are being considered to minimize land acquisition.

                          The supplementary ESIA studied two alternative routes for the Safaga Qussair OHTLs:
                          #        The first is to go parallel to the coastal road,
                          #        The second is to further west in the mountains
                          The second alternative has been preferred as It will cause less visual impacts and nuisance for the
                          users of the coastal road, less potential for interfering with future tourism or urban development
                          and less potential for interfering with any bird routes (if exist).

                          The supplementary ESIA has also studied two alternatives for increasing the capacity of the
                          existing lines:
                          #       The first is constructing a parallel ACSR line
                          #       The second is replacing the existing conductors with the more capacity INVAR
                          conductors.

                           From the environmental and social perspective the second alternative is preferred as it will not
                           require new ROW and it will have less impacts during the construction.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Project Management Unit will have the overall responsibility for implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environment and Social Management Plan and the RPF. The PMU will hire environmental and
                           social specialists who will work closely with contractors and sub-contractors to ensure that all
                           environment and social impact mitigation measures including occupation, health and safety
                           guidelines are mainstreamed into the project design; monitored and supervised. These specialists
                           will have direct responsibility for implementation of the Environment, Health and Safety measures
                           as well as the RPF for the site during construction and operation. Relevant staff will be trained in
                           identification of key environmental and social issues as well as in implementation of management,
                           mitigation and monitoring measures, including occupational health and safety; and contingency
                           plans and emergency procedures.

                           This staffing arrangement will also cover the supervision and reporting on the ESMP and RPF of
                           the additional subcomponents.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The ESIA has been consulted with the project stakeholders including the Red Sea Governorate,
                           El Menya Governorate, NREA, EEAA, General Organization for Physical Planning, Suez Gulf
                           Development Organization, Electric Project Services Company, different scientific and research
                           organizations, Local People Councils, Different NGOs and general citizens.

                          The supplementary ESIA and the RPF of the additional subcomponents have been consulted with

                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           the local community at the locations of these Subcomponents. For the subcomponent of the
                           rehabilitation of the existing OHTL, EETC has been consulting sample of the farmers and
                           agriculture associations along the targeted existing OHTL. Inviting and collecting the farmers have
Public Disclosure Copy




                           been done in coordination with the agriculture associations and the interviews were mostly
                           conducted in small discussion groups. For the 2 substations and their interconnections, EETC
                           cooperated with the Red Sear Governorate and affiliate local units to announce for and host one
                           public consultation in Safaga City. Diverse group of stakeholders were involved in the
                           consultation. EETC has prepared Arabic material including brief on the projects and has
                           distributed to the participants of the various consultation events. The content of this brief has been
                           also verbally explained to farmers who participated in the consultation for the rehabilitation of the
                           OHTL.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Jun-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Jun-2010
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          11-Jun-2010
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          11-Jun-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                      Page 9 of 10
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Waleed Saleh I. Alsuraih
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                                   Date: 13-Jun-2014
                            Coordinator:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Sector Manager:     Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (SM)                       Date: 13-Jun-2014




                                                                       Page 10 of 10
