                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA10388
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-May-2013, 23-Jun-2014, 28-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                       Project ID:    P119343
                            Project Name:      Cebu Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Project (P119343)
                            Task Team          Ajay Kumar
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          04-Feb-2013                       Estimated   26-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General transportation sector (40%), Public administration- Transportation
                                              (40%), General finance sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Urban services and
                                              housing for the poor (25%), Climate change (25%), G ender (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     228.50           Total Bank Financing:                116.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  87.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    116.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                     25.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                         0.00
                              Total                                                                                    228.50
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the over-all performance of the urban


                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                         passenger transport system in the Project Corridor in Cebu City in terms of the quality and level of
                         service, safety, and environmental efficiency.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project consists of six main components as following:

                         Component 1 – BRT Infrastructure and System (Total base cost: US$162.0 million; WB: US$80.2
                         million, CTF: US$8.8 million; AFD: US$43.0 million; GoP: US$30.0 million). This component will
                         finance goods, works, and services for detailed design, construction and supervision of BRT
                         infrastructure, and corridor traffic management systems. Land acquisition and resettlement cost will
                         be financed by GoP.

                         Component 2 – Traffic Management (Total base cost: US$15.6 million, CTF: US$13.2 million,
                         AFD: US$2.4 million). This component will finance goods, works, and services for intelligent
                         transportation system components, traffic management, and road and intersection upgrades across
                         Cebu City.

                         Component 3 – BRT Concept Dissemination and Development (Total base cost: US$7.0 million,
                         WB: US$4.0 million, AFD: US$3.0 million). This component will finance studies, training, and
                         capacity building to support bus improvements and BRT application in the Philippines, as well as
                         preparation of feasibility study and detailed design of the proposed Metro Manila BRT system.

                         Component 4 – Urban Realm Enhancements (WB: US$3.0 million). This component will finance
                         goods, works, and services to foster integration of land development and BRT system in Cebu City
                         by establishing physical connections from stations and terminals to major trip attractors and
                         generators.

                         Component 5 – Project Outcome Monitoring (Total base cost: US$5.0 million, WB: US$3.9 million,
                         CTF: US$1.1 million). This component will finance technical assistance, equipment, and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operational support monitoring project performance and results.

                         Component 6 – Project Management (WB: US$6.1 million). This component will finance technical
                         assistance, equipment, vehicles, office equipment, outreach activities, and other operational support
                         for management of implementation of BRT and related measures.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The location of the civil works is within the city limits of Cebu City. Because of the geographic
                         constraints of interior mountains and the sea, the overall configuration of the transport system in
                         Metropolitan Cebu is linear in a general northeast – southwest direction. The proposed BRT corridor
                         follows the major roadway network put in place over the last 40 years and traverses urbanized, mixed
                         use (residential, commercial, and institutional) areas of Cebu City, starting from Bulacao in the
                         southwest of the city to Talamban in the north east of Cebu City.

                         For a diagram of the proposed BRT route which consists of segregated operation between Bulacao
                         and Ayala, as well as within the South Reclamation Project (SRP), and buses running with some
                         priority between Ayala and Talamban, please see PAD.

                         The BRT project includes:


                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         (a)      A segregated busway between Bulacao and Ayala Mall, 10 km in length (BRT running lane
                         width of 3.5m, overtaking lane: 3.5 m, sidewalk: 2.0 m, physical segregation between BRT and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         general traffic lane: 0.3m);
                         (b)      BRT overtaking lanes at all transit way stations;
                         (c)      Stations and terminals along the segregated bus way route;
                         (d)      A depot for overnight, off-street overnight bus parking, bus servicing and maintenance;
                         (e)      An area Traffic Control (ATC) system to facilitate BRT priority at signals in the corridor and
                         provide improved traffic flow benefits city-wide;
                         (f)      A service plan where BRT services operate beyond Ayala Mall to Talamban even though
                         dedicated BRT transitway infrastructure is physically limited to the segment between Bulacao and
                         Ayala Mall because of right of way constraints (in mixed traffic segments, BRT bus passage will be
                         facilitated by signal and other priority measures at intersections and where otherwise achievable
                         within the confines of the roadway);
                         (g)      Traffic management measures to improve traffic flow outside of the corridor that are seen to
                         complement the BRT and maximize its impact;
                         (h)      Parking management measures to similarly complement BRT and improve traffic flow;
                         (i)      Interchange improvements to offer enhancement to the level of service received by all public
                         transport passengers; and
                         (j)      Urban planning improvements consisting of public realm enhancements and enhanced
                         integration of transport and land use.

                         The section between Bulacao and Ayala Mall is mostly a dual 3-lane road with sidewalks and
                         requires minimal Right of Way acquisition. The section between Ayala Mall and Talamban, on the
                         other hand, is partly constrained by a two lane road. Taking this into consideration, the BRT project
                         will maintain an exclusive transit-way for buses from Bulacao to Ayala Mall while extending bus
                         operations to Talamban in the shared ROW, with prioritized access to buses at intersections. Special
                         arrangements are proposed for Osmeña Boulevard in recognition of the historic nature of this route.
                         In particular, the project has sought to maintain linearity, protect the vista of the Capital building and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhance the accessibility of Fuente circle. The overall design of the project ensures to minimize
                         adverse environmental and social impacts while demonstrating a successful integrated approach to a
                         BRT system.

                         For Component 3, the preparation of feasibility study and detailed design will be in Metro Manila for
                         the Metro Manila BRT system.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Simon Peter Gregorio ()
                         Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             Though the project has environmental and social
                         BP 4.01                                               benefits through improved and more efficient
                                                                               public transport system, it is also expected to
                                                                               generate negative environment and social
                                                                               impacts. Civil works will generate dusts, wastes,
                                                                               noise, vibration, and contribute to the worsening
                                                                               traffic problem during construction. Trees may


                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                                                                         also be removed along the sides and in the median
                                                                         along the work areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         The project will result in loss of income for (a)
                                                                         vendors and business establishments along the
                                                                         corridor; and (b) PUJ operators and drivers. It will
                                                                         also result to displacement of some vegetation,
                                                                         houses and establishments located along the BRT
                                                                         corridors.

                                                                         The preparation of the feasibility study and
                                                                         detailed design for the BRT in Metro Manila will
                                                                         also have downstream environment and social
                                                                         impacts when implemented.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            The project is located in the center of Cebu City,
                                                                         an urban center and the Philippines second largest
                                                                         city outside Metro Manila. It is a heavily built up
                                                                         area, where natural habitats, as defined by the
                                                                         policy, is not affected by the project based on the
                                                                         EIA study. There may be individual trees along
                                                                         the road sides that maybe affected but these are
                                                                         just few trees and do not constitute natural
                                                                         habitats. A government-issued tree cutting permit
                                                                         will obtained prior to the cutting of the trees and
                                                                         each tree cut will be replaced with 10 seedlings
                                                                         planted at designated areas in the city.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            No forest will be affected by the project as the
                                                                         project is located in an urban center.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not involve any purchase and/or
                                                                         use of chemical pesticides nor will it lead to
                                                                         increase usage of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The EIA has confirmed that the project will not
                         BP 4.11                                         be affecting any historical and cultural assets.
                                                                         Nevertheless the EIA has prescribed chance find
                                                                         procedures which will be strictly observed during
                                                                         the construction phase. As a precautionary
                                                                         measure, the contract will include a provision
                                                                         requiring the contractor to immediately stop
                                                                         excavation activities and promptly inform the
                                                                         authorities if archaeological and cultural assets
                                                                         are discovered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            The project is located in urban centers without IP
                                                                         communities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Project requires land for (a) bus depot and
                         4.12                                            terminal; (b) expansion of the sidewalks and
                                                                         roadway in areas fronting median stations; (c) bus



                                                                 Page 4 of 14
                                                                               stops from Ayala to Talamban; (d) resettlement of
                                                                               physically displaced informal settlers.
                                                                               In addition to the government land, about 66.5
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               hectares of land will need to be acquired, which is
                                                                               estimated to impact 243 private structures,
                                                                               occupying an estimated 20,000 square meters or 2
                                                                               hectares. Currently a large percentage of these
                                                                               structures (81%) is commercial and commercial
                                                                               cum residential in use. About 57 or one in four
                                                                               (23%) are purely residential. There are a few
                                                                               informal settlers residing and doing business in
                                                                               the vicinity of the proposed stations.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The project will not involve construction of any
                                                                               dam nor is it dependent on any existing dam or
                                                                               dam under construction.
                            Projects on International        No                The project is not located on International
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                The project is not located in a disputed area.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project triggers two safeguard policies as indicated above - OP 4.01: Environmental
                              assessment and OP 4.12: Involuntary Resettlement. Although there are no issues related to
Public Disclosure Copy




                              physical cultural resources as confirmed by the EIA Report, precautionary measures would be
                              taken by the project through inclusion of provisions in tender and construction contract documents
                              requiring the contractor to immediately stop excavation activities and promptly inform the
                              authorities if archaeological and cultural assets are discovered.

                             Environment and Social Issues: Though the Project is environmentally enhancing, it would
                             generate negative environment impacts during the construction phase, most of which are
                             temporary and reversible during the operational phase. As part of the construction phase, civil
                             works will create to some extent unavoidable dust and waste, noise and vibration, in addition to
                             removal of trees at the road side and in the median along the work areas. However, the removal of
                             trees will not interfere with the sites protected for their biodiversity as the Project is more than
                             30km from the nearest area protected for its biodiversity and landscape properties, falling in the
                             urban area, mostly within the roads’ ROW.

                             The project will result in loss of income for: (a) vendors and business establishments along the
                             corridor; and, (b) PUJ operators and drivers.

                             Survey revealed three types of vendors plying their trade on the BRT corridor: (a) tenured street
                             vendors; (b) informal or untenured street vendors; and (c) ambulant vendors. The tenured street
                             vendors are officially registered by the city government. There are 1,195 legitimate sidewalk


                                                                       Page 5 of 14
                          vendors throughout Cebu City in 2011, 405 of these are currently located along the Cebu BRT
                          Corridor. The informal or untenured street vendors stay in front of the Cebu South Bus Terminal
                          and in front of the Development Bank of the Philippines building at the corner of N. Bacalso and
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Osmeña Boulevard. The mobile food hawkers are distinguished by their push-carts or carts
                          attached to bicycles with multi-colored umbrellas to protect their goods. The mobile food hawkers
                          transfer from place to place, timing their presence during the lunch hour and dismissal time of
                          schools and offices along the corridor.

                          The project would result in cancellation of 22 PUJ routes, which would impact 916 operators and
                          2,620 drivers, in the following ways:
                          (a)     Reduction in passenger volume for some PUJs (others will increase where PUJs have an
                          enhanced role as feeder to BRT);
                          (b)     Cancellation of the present PUJ routes that are along the BRT corridor and that become
                          noncommercial due to passenger transfer;
                          (c)     Dislocation of drivers and operators of affected PUJs; and
                          (d)     Changes in the role of existing transport cooperatives.

                          Land Acquisition and Resettlement Issues: Project requires land for a) bus depot and terminal; b)
                          expansion of the sidewalks and roadway in areas fronting median stations; c) bus stops from Ayala
                          to Talamban; d) resettlement of physically displaced informal settlers. The land proposed as a
                          depot is city-owned and currently used as a solid waste segregation and vehicle impounding area;
                          there are no persons residing in the area. For the informal settlers, the RP has identified two
                          potential resettlement sites: Labangon in the city center and in Barangay Sinsin. Land in these sites
                          is owned by the city and only lot subdivision and additional development is required.

                          In addition to the government land, about 66.5 hectares of land will need to be acquired, which is
                          estimated to impact 243 private structures, occupying an estimated 20,000 square meters or 2
                          hectares. Currently a large percentage of these structures (81%) is commercial and commercial
                          cum residential in use. About 57 or one in four (23%) are purely residential. There are a few
Public Disclosure Copy




                          informal settlers residing and doing business in the vicinity of the proposed stations.

                          The total cost of land acquisition, replacement of structures, and resettlement is estimated at
                          PHP1.23 billion (US$30.0 million).

                          With regard to land classified as commercial, industrial and institutional, the total number of
                          businesses using this land totaled 108. Most of these are in the services sector, and dominated by
                          enterprises engaged in “wholesale retail, food repair motor vehicles, motorcycles and personal
                          household goods”. The number of employees ranges from 1 to 33 with a maximum income loss
                          estimated at PHP36 million (USD900,000).

                           The preparation of feasibility study and detailed design for the Metro Manila BRT will have
                           downstream environmental and social impacts once implemented. These impacts will be assessed
                           as part of the feasibility study and detailed design preparation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Project will not have any adverse long term impact. While the improvement in the road
                           system in Cebu will potentially cause increase in traffic and commercial activities that will
                           indirectly lead to additional pollution, the Project adopted an alternative approach to introduce


                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                          high occupancy public transport system to reduce carbon dioxide (CO2) and local air pollution. In
                          terms of social impacts, the project will generate indirect long-term benefits to women, the elderly,
                          and the physically challenged by responding to their concerns which were identified during design
Public Disclosure Copy




                          stage stakeholder consultations.

                           As observed earlier, the project would result in loss of income for PUJ operators and drivers
                           operating along the route and business establishments. Specific mitigation measures and an action
                           plan have been developed by the City in consultation with the affected people.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The design is guided by consultation with users, specialist interest groups and stakeholders
                           together with ethnographic study of transport users. The impact on current jeepney operators and
                           drivers is minimized by addressing their specific concerns as part of route rationalization. Five
                           options have been identified to manage PUJ operator and driver impacts which are listed in the
                           section on mitigation measures. Broadly the options include allowing the PUJ to continue
                           operating along the corridor, restructure the route, or facilitate their participation in BRT bus
                           operations.

                          The location of the stations on the median of the existing national road minimized land
                          acquisition, and physical and economic displacement. Widening of the roadway and sidewalks in
                          areas fronting these stations was further minimized by adopting a staggered design for stations.
                          This asymmetrical design has entrances to and exits from the stations at different parts rather than
                          at a single point, thereby minimizing congestion on the pedestrian crossings and station platform.
                          From Ayala to Talamban, where the right of way narrows, the project avoided major land
                          acquisition by providing kerb-side bus stops instead of at the median.

                           Physical displacement of informal settlers was minimized during the feasibility studies by moving
                           the proposed location of the terminal from the land near the Visayas Electric Cooperative (VECO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sub-station to a hundred or two meters north of the corridor to a land presently used by a hardware
                           and lumber corporation. The bus depot and the proposed resettlement sites in Sinsin and
                           Labangon are government-owned lands.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An environmental assessment was made for the proposed Cebu Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Project
                           of the Department of Transportation and Communications (DOTC) and the Cebu City
                           Government (CCG). It was carried in accordance with OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
                           andOP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement.

                          Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. An EIA and Social Impact Assessment (SIA)/
                          Social Management Plan (SMP) have been carried out under this project to identify and minimize
                          potential adverse environmental impacts through formulation of an environmental management
                          plan (EMP). The EMP will form part of the TOR and the Environmental Code of Practice (ECoP)
                          in the Detailed Engineering Design (DED) and bid documents for the Contractor. The EMP will
                          be updated and customized by the Contractor based on the results of the DED subject to the final
                          approval of the government.

                          Under the Philippines’ environmental framework, the following laws and regulations are
                          considered: (i) PD 1586 - Establishing the Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, (ii)

                                                                     Page 7 of 14
                         Republic Act No.9275 - Philippine Clean Water Act of 2004, (iii) RA 6969 -Toxic substances &
                         Hazardous & Nuclear Waste Control Act of 1990, (iv) RA 8749 - Philippine Clean Air Act of
                         1999, and (v) RA 9003 - Act Providing for an Ecological Solid Waste Management Program. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project when implemented should be able to comply with pertinent provisions of the above stated
                         national environment laws which govern the management of solid waste, water quality, air quality
                         and hazardous wastes. Presidential Decree 1584 or the Philippine Environmental Impact Statement
                         System (PEISS) established the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) process to enhance
                         planning and decision making in projects involving transport-related investments.

                         Resettlement Plan (RP). A Resettlement Plan (RP) was prepared in close collaboration with the
                         stakeholders. It endorses commitment to ensure that no irreversible harm will occur from
                         implementation and that project benefits are equitably distributed. The RP involved extensive
                         stakeholder consultation in local languages, in a culturally appropriate manner with focus on
                         gender and poverty. The scope of the RP covers: a) replacement or compensation for loss of land
                         and structures; b) resettlement of those at risk of physical displacement; and c) livelihood
                         restoration for those losing various types of income due to property acquisition by the project. It
                         addresses impacts on people with different types of rights over the land; a) owners b) occupants/
                         users of land; c) informal settlers; d) encroachers on the road right of way; e) employees of
                         businesses which will be permanently closed due to the project. The RP is consistent with the
                         Bank safeguard policy OP 4.12 and contains policies and procedures that govern all aspects of
                         land acquisition, compensation and resettlement with emphasis on key legal and administrative
                         instruments that are currently enforced locally. It also provides measures to bridge the gaps
                         between O.P.4.12 and Philippine laws.

                         The RP mandates that all civil works will commence only after completion of resettlement
                         implementation. Resettlement implementation is not considered complete unless payment has been
                         made to affected persons. For those who opt for expropriation, payment equivalent to 100% of
                         BIR Zonal Value must have been made or the money placed in escrow for this requirement to be
                         satisfied. No physical and economic displacement will be undertaken without complete payment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of affected assets or commencement of livelihood restoration measures. The government will not
                         transfer the site to the civil works contractor until all persons physically displaced have vacated the
                         area and relocated.

                         The Resettlement Plana and Social Management Plan will be validated and updated during
                         detailed design.

                         Mitigation measures

                         The contractor will include EMP in the bidding and contract documentation. Prior to bidding, the
                         DED consultants will develop site-specific environmental management plans based on the EMP
                         and the DED. The broad content of the EMPs is included in the construction mitigation section.
                         The EMPs will demonstrate the manner (location, responsibilities, schedule/ timeframe, budget,
                         etc.) in which the Contractor will implement the mitigation measures specified in the EMP.

                         The requirements in the construction contract will include full implementation of the EMP to
                         ensure contractors are fully aware in advance of their environmental and social responsibilities and
                         obligations, including any displacement during civil works. National BRT-PMO and BRT-PIU
                         shall ensure that the EMP and above plans are included in the bid and contract documents for civil
                         works. National BRT-PMO and BRT-PIU will require the contractor to engage capable and

                                                                    Page 8 of 14
                         trained staff or site agents to take responsibility for the environmental management at the working
                         level and to audit the effectiveness of the contractor’s EMP and review mitigation measures as the
                         project proceeds. The effective implementation of the EMP will be audited as part of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         For the preparation of feasibility study and detailed design for the Metro Manila BRT, an EIA and
                         SIA/SMP will be carried out as part of the feasibility study and detailed design, including
                         preparation of resettlement plan, where needed, all in accordance with the relevant Bank safeguard
                         policies.

                         The RP has avoided significant physical displacement by changing the proposed location of the
                         terminal and using vacant city-government land for the depot. Staggered station designs have also
                         minimized the width of the station thereby, limiting the extent of land taking beyond the
                         designated right of way. Where taking of private land is unavoidable, the RP has an entitlement
                         matrix detailing the compensation to be received and specifying the method of valuation for
                         affected fixed assets as well as for income losses and permanent losses of livelihood resulting from
                         the land take. A resettlement site has been identified to accommodate displaced informal settlers.
                         An independent property appraiser will be hired during the DED to estimate replacement cost at
                         the time of taking. The RP contains measures for updating its contents. Finally, the RP sets out the
                         procedure to be followed for negotiations with the property owners, informal settlers, and tenured
                         vendors as well handling disputes or grievances that may arise in the process of land acquisition
                         and resettlement.

                         The SIA/SMP sets out options for jeepney operators and drivers to be displaced by the operation
                         of the BRT. Five options have been identified to manage PUJ operator impacts. These include:

                         Option 1: Remain on their route, despite the impact of the BRT, and hope that a sufficient number
                         of other operators will withdraw to make the route viable for those who remain;

                         Option 2: Remain on their route, which has been restructured and will remain strong;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Option 3: Operate on newly opened routes;

                         Option 4: Cancel their PUJ franchise and apply for open franchises of other transport services such
                         as trucks-for-hire or school service; and

                         Option 5: Transform their investment to participate in BRT operations

                         (iii) Implementation Arrangements

                         The institutional set-up presents the requirements and responsibilities during pre-construction,
                         construction, and operation phases. At the national level, DOTC would provide the overall sight
                         through the National BRT Project Management Office which will operate under the guidance of
                         the Steering Committee (SC). At the local level, there is Cebu Project Implementation Unit (PIU)
                         that will oversee the works of the Contractor and the BRT Operator. Mitigation measures during
                         construction will be implemented by contractors with the cost incorporated in the bidding
                         documents and be closely supervised by the supervision consultants, NPMO and PIU. The
                         Technical Support Consultants (TSC) will be recruited to support the BRT-PIU management
                         during project implementation. The TSC provides engineering, procurement, construction
                         management support and is engaged to undertake detailed design, draft bidding documents and

                                                                   Page 9 of 14
                         supervise the construction.

                         The Contractor and the BRT Operator are tasked to carry-out implementation of the environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and social management plan under day-to-day supervision by PIU. Overall regulatory compliance
                         of the project would be continuously and independently monitored by DENR and Cebu City
                         Environment and Natural Resources Office.

                         The PIU will have dedicated safeguards pe rsonnel and will be supported by a City Resettlement
                         Implementation Committee (CRIC) with members consisting of the heads of different city
                         departments and relevant national government agencies. One of the first tasks of this PIU will be
                         to draft a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Operations Manual in coordination with the social
                         development specialists and property appraiser in the Detailed Engineering Design consultant
                         team. The CRIC will hold the responsibility to deal with operational questions and coordination
                         issues among agencies involved in land acquisition and resettlement. Staff from these city
                         departments can be seconded to the PIU to assist the social safeguards staff.

                         With regard to environment, National BRT-PMO through its BRT-PIU is required to obtain
                         approval and the Environmental Clearance certificate (ECC) from the Department of Environment
                         and Natural Resources (DENR) following environmental assessment and public consultation.
                         Under the Philippine EIS System, the project requires EIA and compliance to the EIS System is
                         necessary and DENR-EMB Region 7 is the authority to issue the necessary ECC for the project.

                         The Project also defines measures and frequency for monitoring the compliance on various
                         provisions of the EMP during pre-construction, construction and operation phases. BRT-PIU
                         would implement a number of measures during detailed design phase (e.g., incorporation of
                         environmental design measures into the detailed design, preparation of draft method statements/
                         SEMPs, etc.). During construction, monitoring works are implemented by the contractors and their
                         environmental performance, in terms of implementation of such works, is monitored by BRT-PIU.
                         During operation, EMP implementation is the responsibility of the BRT Operator.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In the context of resettlement and land acquisition, specific implementation arrangements will be
                         determined after the project has been approved by the NEDA Board and Monetary Board.

                         A service center or one-stop shop will be established to handle inquiries, receive grievances, and
                         facilitate the securing of documentation to obtain payment or prove eligibility, and getting
                         payment. The one stop shop will have representatives of the City Assessor’s for matters relating to
                         tax arrears, local transfer taxes, and facilitating changes in the tax declaration. This one stop shop
                         will be open at certain times of the week. An External Monitor, which can be a non-government
                         organization, will undertake external monitoring and evaluation of land acquisition and
                         resettlement implementation.

                         (iv) Capacity of the Borrower. In addition to the implementation arrangements, BRT-PIU and
                         Environment and Social Safeguard Specialists will be trained to ensure proper monitoring in the
                         preparation and implementation of EMP, SIA/SMP and RP. As the project is under
                         implementation, BRT-PIU will engage staff as Environmental and Safety Officers (ESOs) to
                         undertake environmental management. It will also engage social and environmental safeguard
                         specialists to supervise updating and disclosure of the plans during the detailed design phase and
                         the implementation of the RP and SMP.



                                                                   Page 10 of 14
                          (v) Public Consultation

                          Within the context of “meaningful consultation”, DOTC and the Cebu City government (CCG)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          initiated a process of consultation during project preparation and intend to continue it during the
                          construction phase. Consultations were held with key stakeholders, including: (i) NGOs, and local
                          government unit (LGU) planning officials; (ii) commuters, (iii) people in settlements and
                          establishments along the corridor, (iv) public transport jeepney and bus drivers and operator, v)
                          vendors and business establishments along the BRT corridor. Details of the project components
                          were presented to the stakeholders and their views on the respective proposals were gathered.
                          Stakeholders expressed support to the proposed project.

                          Project disclosure activities were also done during the conduct of the Feasibility Study from
                          January 2012 to July 2012. More than 1,000 key stakeholders have participated in all of these
                          consultation works. During detailed design, DOTC and CCG will conduct public consultations and
                          information disclosure. Affected stakeholders and property owners will be invited to attend these
                          proposed consultations since detailed mode and scheme of property and structure acquisition and
                          compensation will be presented and discussed. DOTC and CCG shall keep records of
                          environmental and social complaints received during consultations, field visits, informal
                          discussions, and letters, together with the subsequent follow-up and resolutions of issues. The EIA,
                          SIA/SMP and RP were disclosed locally on March 13, 2013 and in the Bank’s Infoshop on March
                          29, 2013.

                          Additional public disclosures and consultations will be held during the detailed engineering design
                          phase. By this time, the disclosures and public consultations will be held by affected barangays to
                          inform people of the presence of surveyors, enumerators for the 100% census, and the real
                          property appraisers. At this time, (a) census of all affected people will be carried out; (b) cut-off
                          date will be announced and published; (c) tagging of affected structures will be done; (d) detailed
                          appraisals will be undertaken, and ( e) an offer will be made to the affected owner by the PIU with
                          a deadline for a response.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Grievance Redress Mechanism. Implementation of the proposed Cebu BRT project will be fully
                           compliant to WB’s safeguards requirement on grievance redress mechanism. DOTC and CCG
                           would disclose the proposed mechanism in public consultations during detailed design and in
                           meetingsduring the construction phase. Complaints and concerns about environmental
                           performance of the project during construction phase would be handled by an ad-hoc Joint DOTC
                           and CCG Environmental Complaints Committee for expeditious resolutions, while complaints
                           during the operation phase would be brought to the attention of DENR-Environmental
                           Management Bureau (EMB). DOTC and CCG would address promptly, at no costs to the
                           complainant and without retribution, any complaints and concerns. The joint committee would be
                           co-chaired by DOTC and CCG and would have members from the contractor, barangay level
                           LGU, concerned NGOs, and women’s organizations. DENR-EMB is mandated by PD 1586 to act
                           on complaints about environmental performance of projects issued with environmental compliance
                           certificates.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders of the project include DOTC, LTFRB and line agencies, CCG, CITOM, PUJ
                           organizations, individual jeepney driver/ operators, commuters, and private car owners, The
                           Project followed an approach through the communications and consultation process during


                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                           preparation and will continue to implement measures to ensure the participation momentum is
                           maintained throughout the duration of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           During preparation, the objective was to gain a baseline understanding of the key issues to be
                           considered in the outline design process (consultation) whilst raising awareness and promoting a
                           general understanding and acceptance of the Cebu BRT concept in the city (communications). The
                           overall approach was based on the premise that the technical aspects of the work are to be led by
                           the demands and objectives of the user throughout the study. The BRT concept was therefore
                           developed systematically through consultation with key stakeholders and the travelling public.

                           To ensure stakeholder participation through the project cycle, a series of communication tools
                           have been developed to accompany the planned press releases and associated promotional
                           materials at appropriate stages of the project. They include:

                           (a)      A study website (in English and Cebuano language);
                           (b)      Social media communications (Facebook and Twitter) managed by the Communications
                           Manager
                           (c)      Posters / flyers (in English and Cebuano language);
                           (d)      Promotional materials e.g. fans, t-shirts, badges;
                           (e)      Exhibition banners for display at shopping centers and other public locations; and
                           (f)      A BRT conference to which all stakeholders, politicians, media and adjacent cities are
                           invited (planned).

                           In addition, the Bank team will continue to undertake field visits such as those undertaken during
                           the preparation stage to interact with the people and stakeholders to have a firsthand assessment of
                           impacts and issues on the ground.

                           Public Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           All safeguard instruments, namely the EIA, RP, and SIA/SMP for the proposed project have been
                           prepared and disclosed electronically and in paper at the Bank’s Infoshop on March 29, 2013 and
                           locally on March 13, 2013. Brochures in English and Sugbuanon will be distributed on the rights
                           and responsibilities of displaced people and notices posted on the barangay, in Manila, and
                           InfoShop.

                           Further details on disclosure of safeguard documents are described below.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        18-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     29-Mar-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                        13-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process


                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Feb-2013
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Mar-2013
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Philippines                                                      13-Mar-2013
                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                       Page 13 of 14
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Ajay Kumar
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sector Manager:     Name: Michel Kerf (SM)         Date: 28-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 14 of 14
