                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8880
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Mar-2013, 08-Apr-2014, 20-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uzbekistan                        Project ID:    P127764
                            Project Name:     SOUTH KARAKALPAKSTAN WATER RESOURCES MGMT
                                              IMPROVEMENT (P127764)
                            Task Team         IJsbrand Harko de Jong
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       14-Apr-2014                         Estimated   10-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: ECSAR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (70%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%),
                                              Other public sector governance (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     337.43           Total Bank Financing:               260.79
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     76.64
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  18.29
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           242.50
                              Total                                                                                 337.43
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) of South Karakalpakstan Water Resources Management
                           Improvement Project (SKWRMIP) is to restore irrigation and improve water management in the


                                                                     Page 1 of 15
                         project area in a sustainable and financially efficient manner.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project contains the following components:

                         A. Modernization of the Irrigation Network.
                         This component will improve sections of the Right Bank Canal (to increase the conveyance capacity
                         from 75 to 150 m3/s), construction of the Bustan Canal and reprofiling and rehabilitating existing
                         main and secondary canals, including Pakhta-Arna, Keltaminor, Old Bozyap and Bogyap Canals.
                         The construction of the Bustan Canal will eliminate the need for first level pumping from the Amu
                         Darya. The rehabilitation of the existing canal systems will eliminate the need for second-level
                         pumping from inter-farm canals to on-farm channels. Moreover, there are 90 main structures
                         (control, cross-drainage and bridges) to be constructed or rehabilitated. More than 20 distribution
                         canals (inter-farm canals) have been identified for rehabilitation. In addition, the component will
                         finance installation and implementation of a Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA)
                         system in the Elikalla and Pakha-Arna/Bustan canals to monitor and control the operations of the
                         irrigation system on a real time basis. Finally, the component will address all safeguard measures
                         under the project, including implementation of the Environmental and Social Assessment and
                         Management Plan (ESAMP), which consists of an Environmental Assessment and Management Plan
                         (EAMP) and Social Assessment; Resettlement Action Plan/Resettlement Policy Framework (RAP/
                         RPF); and dam safety measures.

                         B. Modernization of Agriculture
                         This component will invest in improving irrigated agricultural production in the project area so that
                         farmers take full advantage of improved water management. To that end, the project will strengthen
                         capacities, promote crop intensification and diversification, invest in cotton harvest mechanization
                         and conduct outreach and information dissemination. All training under this component will be
                         conducted in an iterative manner, including needs assessment, implementation and feedback/
                         evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capacities of local water resource management institutions will be strengthened, including Amu
                         Darya Basin Water Organization (BVO), Lower Amu Darya Basin Administration of Irrigation
                         Systems (LABAIS), Pakhta-Arna-Nayman Irrigation System Administration (PAN-ISA) and
                         Karakalpakstan Hydro-Geological Meliorative Expedition (KKGME). Relevant stakeholders (in
                         particular the Water Consumer Association (WCA) support unit in PAN-ISA) will be trained in
                         providing support to WCAs. The subcomponent will also finance study tours to expose water
                         resources and irrigation and drainage (I&D) stakeholders to a range of best water management
                         practices.

                         The component will provide support to intensify and diversity production, including (i) capacity
                         strengthening of selected farmers and WCAs through demonstrations and Farmer Field School (FFS)
                         and the provision of goods and training on, inter alia, I&D management and improved agricultural
                         practices; (ii) assistance to farmers to access lines of credit(including assistance in the preparation of
                         business plans); and (iii) provision of modern tools and maintenance equipment to WCAs to
                         undertake on-farm maintenance activities. In addition, the component will support for cotton harvest
                         mechanization through (i) the acquisition and provision of mechanized cotton harvesters in the
                         project area; (ii) provision of cleaning equipment to ginneries; and (iii) strengthening cotton
                         ginneries’ capacity to operate and maintain the machinery and to adopt crop husbandry methods
                         which are appropriate for cotton mechanization. Finally, the component will support the development


                                                                       Page 2 of 15
                         and carrying out of communications strategies and public awareness raising campaigns on project-
                         related data and information, including on the issues relating to child and/or forced labor.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
                         This component will (i) support the preparation of a feasibility study and bidding documents for
                         follow-up investment activities; (ii) develop a comprehensive management information and data
                         collection and reporting system on key performance outputs and impact indicators through, inter alia,
                         baseline surveys; participatory assessments; mid-term reviews; and final evaluations; (iii) support the
                         preparation of a strategy for WRM in the lower Amu Darya area; (iv) development of operating rules
                         for the Tuyamuyun Dam reflecting the fact that, following the dismantling of the pumping stations
                         under component 1.3, water releases to serve downstream pumping won’t be required; (v) provision
                         of TA to assist the government in developing a strategy for agricultural diversification away from
                         cotton; and (vi) carrying out a study on the necessary requirements and arrangements to certify that
                         cotton produced in the Borrower’s territory complies with applicable laws and regulations on child
                         and/or forced labor.

                         To reflect the more hands-on involvement of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in day-to-day
                         project management and implementation, staffing of the PIU will be strengthened, prior to project
                         effectiveness, to include a number of technical, financial management, monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) and safeguards (social and environmental) experts. An independent M&E consultant will be
                         recruited to establish a Management Information System (MIS) and arrange for data collection and
                         reporting. This component will also finance preparation of a strategy for water resources
                         management (WRM) in the lower Amu Darya, and assist the government in developing operating
                         rules for Tuyamuyun Dam that will reflect the fact that water releases to serve downstream pumping
                         are no longer required and that water will be abstracted from the dam through a gravity off-take.
                         Detailed implementation arrangements will be spelled out in the Project Operational Manual (POM),
                         to be prepared as a condition of effectiveness.

                         Cotton is harvested during the months of September and October. It is sensitive to weather
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conditions, and must be harvested as quickly as possible. Although mechanized harvesting was used
                         more extensively during the Soviet times, the subsequent farm restructuring and institutional changes
                         in the state cotton system during the transition led to the deterioration of the large mechanical cotton
                         harvester combines, which were not replaced. Moreover, cotton harvesting technologies more suited
                         to local conditions were until recently not locally available. A large workforce is needed when cotton
                         is harvested by hand. High peak labor demand during the cotton harvest period, in combination with
                         the state procurement system led to the state-sponsored use of forced adult and child labor for cotton
                         - with staff from schools, universities, hospitals, and other government organizations joining the
                         cotton harvesting, and local governments (hokhimiyats) providing the transportation.

                         The government of Uzbekistan is a signatory of several International Labor Organization (ILO)
                         conventions related to child and/or forced labor, but the enforcement of these conventions, as well as
                         of existing national laws reflecting international agreements, has remained challenging, especially
                         during the cotton harvest. Forced child labor in cotton harvesting used to be widespread. However, a
                         joint ILO-government of Uzbekistan mission which took place during the cotton harvesting season in
                         September-October 2013 to monitor the use of forced child labor concluded that: “In general terms,
                         the monitoring observed widespread awareness of national laws and instructions not to allow the use
                         of children under 18 years of age in the cotton harvest. Moreover, it would appear from the
                         monitoring that there was no systematic recourse to forced child labor.” However, forced child labor
                         has been reportedly substituted with forced adult labor organized by local authorities and

                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         administrators of public institutions in many areas.

                         Recognizing the need to change the system, the government of Uzbekistan has announced its plans to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fully mechanize cotton harvesting by 2016. The Asian Development Bank, with full engagement
                         from the World Bank, is working with the government to formulate a strategy to mechanize
                         agriculture, with a particular emphasis on cotton production.

                         The World Bank, in consultation with the government and development partners, has adopted a
                         multi-pronged approach to address child and/or forced labor issues in Uzbekistan. These include (i)
                         pursuing continuous country dialogue and collaboration with international/ multilateral agencies and
                         donors to address these issues; (ii) performing sector analytic work and policy dialogue to promote
                         diversification away from cotton and mechanization of cotton harvesting; (iii) strengthening project-
                         level mitigation measures and binding provisions, including implementing a Third Party Monitoring
                         (TPM) and Feedback Mechanism (FBM) to help address child and/or forced labor issues in
                         connection with the project activities or within the project area; and (iv) promoting crop
                         diversification and intensification, and supporting agricultural mechanization through a number of
                         investment operations, including the Rural Enterprise Support Project (RESP)-I, RESP-II, AF-RESP-
                         II and the proposed Horticulture Development Project. This comprehensive effort to eliminate the
                         use of child and/or forced labor in cotton harvesting has received wide support and endorsement
                         from development partners and community based organizations.

                         The TPM will be financed through a separate trust fund, that will focus on child and/or forced labor
                         issues in connection with the project activities or within the project area and will be conducted during
                         the cotton harvesting season. Feedback will be collected from both project beneficiaries and other
                         stakeholders in connection with the project activities. A fully independent Feedback Mechanism
                         (FBM) will be established, dedicated to reports on potential evidence on the occurrence of child and/
                         or forced labor in connection with the project activities or within the project area. The TPM will be
                         implemented by a reputable consulting firm with experience in social auditing and during
                         implementation, the TPM consultant will work closely with civil society organizations (CSOs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activities under the TPM and FBM include, among other things: (i) capacity building and learning;
                         (ii) periodic unannounced site visits; and (iii) periodic assessment of local context and conditions. A
                         Joint Working Group, consisting of representatives from the government, Bank and TPM consultant,
                         will be established under the trust fund to discuss and resolve any differences during implementation
                         of the assignment.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The whole project area is located in South Karakalpakstan. Almost the entire drainage system of the
                         project area (100,000 ha) has been rehabilitated under DIWIP. The major change introduced by
                         DIWIP has been the suspension of Beruni and Kyzylkum pumping stations that once released saline
                         drainage water into the Amu Darya and Lake Ayazkala. All drainage water from the project area is
                         now drained via the former channel of the Janadarya to the Aral Sea. The newly constructed main
                         drain and the rehabilitated on-farm and inter-farm drainage system now flow by gravity; high water
                         table areas are considerably reduced; and some of the institutional issues have been addressed,
                         including establishment and strengthening of 21 WCAs, training of 1,250 farmers and water
                         management staff, and organization of 12 demonstrations. The gross value of production in the
                         project area almost doubled from Uzbek Soum (UZS) 99 billion (about US$50.1 million) to UZS
                         191.8 billion (about US$97.1 million). Cotton yield increased by 22 percent from 1.69 t/ha to 2.07 t/
                         ha, and salinity in the downstream parts of the Amu Darya declined from 1,270 mg/l to 800mg/l.


                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                         The project will not have a negative impact on the lower Amu Darya. The project will restore
                         irrigated areas that have been abandoned because the aging infrastructure can no longer serve these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas, and will improve agricultural productivity and crop diversification. In addition, the project will
                         improve overall irrigation efficiency from 32 percent to 47 percent, which will off-set the increase in
                         crop water use as a result of intensification and diversification. The post-project abstraction from the
                         Amu Darya River is estimated at 1,815 million cubic meters (MCM)/year, a reduction of 10 MCM/
                         year over the current abstraction of 1,825 MCM/year, which results from shifting from using
                         pumping stations to gravity irrigation. This shift eliminates the need to release water from the
                         Tuyumayun reservoir required for the pumping stations to operate when water levels in the river are
                         low. Reduced drainage flow as a result of efficiency gains will result in lower flows in the Janadarya
                         Canal. The project will not have a net negative impact on water quality in the Aral Sea, as
                         improvements in water quality in the lower Amu Darya (as a result of suspension of drainage into the
                         Amu Darya) will be off-set by saline drainage flows that are captured by the Janadarya canal, which
                         drains into the Aral Sea.

                         In addition, dismantling the Amu Darya pumping stations that are no longer needed once the gravity
                         off-take into the project area has been developed, may lead to better management of releases from
                         the Tuyamuyun reservoir, as these pumping stations need large releases from this reservoir to
                         maintain adequate water levels in the river. Dismantling of pumping stations as a result of the project
                         would allow Tuyamuyun managers to better schedule these releases and enhance their environmental
                         impact, because they would no longer be driven exclusively by irrigation considerations. The project
                         will closely monitor water abstractions from the Amu Darya into and escape flows from the project
                         area, as well as the environmental and social impact. Relevant data will be shared on a real-time
                         basis with the Amu Darya BVO. Agreements to release water into the Aral Sea would therefore not
                         be undermined as a result of the project.

                         The project area is located downstream of the Tuyamuyun Dam and the project will therefore address
                         important safety issues of the dam. A 2001 Tuyamuyun Dam Safety Inspection Report identified a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         number of dam safety issues, and a number of the proposed safety measures were implemented, as
                         confirmed by a dam safety review prepared in 2009. During project preparation, it was agreed to
                         include some of the pending measures in the project

                         Land acquisition and resettlement is anticipated in the rehabilitation works associated with the main
                         Buston Canal and secondary canals. The project activities are expected to affect over 400 ha of
                         agricultural land, some access roads, and residential and small commercial properties. An assessment
                         for resettlement associated with the development of the Bustan Canal estimated that about 83
                         properties will be affected. An RAP has been prepared for the resettlement associated with the
                         construction of the Bustan Canal. Additional land and properties are likely to be affected when
                         secondary canal designs are finalized, which is expected in the third year of project implementation.
                         In view of future resettlement needs associated with these secondary canals, the government also
                         prepared an RPF. A RAP for resettlement associated with secondary canals will be prepared on the
                         basis of the RPF. A redress mechanism will be established as part of the RAP. The RPF and the
                         Bustan RAP were approved on March 7, 2013 and disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop on
                         March 11, 2013. The government agreed that as many UNS staff, the agency responsible for
                         managing the pumping stations, as possible will be redeployed upon its abolishment, and this has
                         been reflected in a covenant. A Retrenchment Framework has been prepared as part of the
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) in the event no suitable alternative
                         employment can be fo und for some of the staff.

                                                                       Page 5 of 15
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mark C. Woodward (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (ECSEN)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (ECSSO)
                         Ekaterina Romanova (ECSSO)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The policy is triggered because the project
                         BP 4.01                                      implementation is associated with certain
                                                                      negative impacts (typical to irrigation
                                                                      development/rehabilitation projects) such as
                                                                      limited disruption of the ecosystem (e.g. removal
                                                                      of trees to enable developing the Bustan Canal),
                                                                      pollution of surface water during canal clearing,
                                                                      temporary disruption of water supply during the
                                                                      civil works, safety at the construction sites, and
                                                                      impacts associated with the use of cotton
                                                                      harvesting machinery, supplementary ginnery
                                                                      equipment, use of defoliants for field preparation.
                                                                      The anticipated impacts will be mitigated through
                                                                      the implementation of the EAMP (as updated
                                                                      April 9, 2014) and the Addendum to the EAMP
                                                                      under the responsibility of MAWR PMU. The
                                                                      project design does not seek to promote a
                                                                      horizontal expansion of irrigated agriculture, but
                                                                      seeks to restore previously irrigated areas and to
                                                                      improve production per hectare. Hence as a result
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      of improved water management, the project
                                                                      would have an overall positive impact on the
                                                                      lower Amu Darya basin and the environment,
                                                                      without undermining the water requirements of
                                                                      the riparians or the Aral Sea. The EAMP prepared
                                                                      for SKWRMIP was disclosed locally on February
                                                                      6, 2013 and in the Infoshop on March 7, 2013.
                                                                      The EAMP was updated to address the impacts
                                                                      related to the dismantling of pumping stations,
                                                                      and disclosed in-country on May 5, 2014, and in
                                                                      the Infoshop on May 6, 2014. The Addendum to
                                                                      the EAMP has been prepared to address the
                                                                      environmental concerns associated with the
                                                                      activities related to the support to the cotton
                                                                      harvest mechanization process. The Addendum to
                                                                      the EAMP providing an update related to the
                                                                      impact of cotton harvest mechanization was
                                                                      disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop on
                                                                      March 11, 2014. The Social Assessment was



                                                              Page 6 of 15
                                                                     officially approved on March 7, 2013, and
                                                                     disclosed locally on February 6, 2013, and in the
                                                                     Infoshop on February 10, 2014. The Annex to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Social Assessment was completed in March 2014
                                                                     and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop on
                                                                     May 5, 2014. Its scope included a focus on issues
                                                                     of child and forced labor to better understand the
                                                                     situation pertinent to such concerns in the project
                                                                     area. The TORs for the Feasibility Study and
                                                                     Bidding Documents for a follow-on investment
                                                                     operation under Component 3 of the project will
                                                                     ensure that these outputs will be consistent with
                                                                     the safeguard policies.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           This policy is triggered to ensure monitoring of
                                                                     the positive impact of SKWRMIP on the water-
                                                                     resource seasonal availability to the seasonally
                                                                     flooded Baday Tugay forest, which is a unique
                                                                     flood plain forest of the desert zone and a reserve.
                                                                     The canal needed for water supply to the forest
                                                                     has been developed under DIWIP; whereas one of
                                                                     the co-benefits of SKWRMIP (since it aims at
                                                                     raising water-use efficiency) is that it would help
                                                                     ensure the adequacy of the forest’s water
                                                                     resource.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           The policy is triggered because, while not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     supporting the purchase of pesticides, the project
                                                                     will stimulate agricultural activities in the project
                                                                     area and hence might lead to increased use of
                                                                     pesticides. In addition, cotton harvest
                                                                     mechanization requires use of defoliants. If not
                                                                     properly managed, this can cause pesticide
                                                                     residue build-up in the soil as well as in surface
                                                                     and ground water, can disrupt agro-ecosystems
                                                                     and undermine sustainable agricultural
                                                                     production, and can pose human health risks.
                                                                     Also, insufficient infrastructure for storage and
                                                                     disposal of pesticides and related wastes may
                                                                     pose environmental risks. The project will, as part
                                                                     of its capacity building activities under
                                                                     Component 2, support awareness raising activities
                                                                     and training programs targeted at WUAs and
                                                                     individual farmers. The training will promote
                                                                     application of biological control methods, cover
                                                                     the topics on optimal use of pesticides (preferable
                                                                     WHO class III) on the basis of economic


                                                             Page 7 of 15
                                                                         thresholds, determination of adequate amounts,
                                                                         proper storage (away from water bodies and other
                                                                         sensitive receptors) and disposal. The project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         EAMP duly addresses the environmental risks
                                                                         associated with the potential increase in the
                                                                         pesticide use. While the project will not support
                                                                         the purchase of defoliants, the cotton harvest
                                                                         mechanization will trigger an increased use of
                                                                         defoliants for field preparation. The Addendum to
                                                                         the EAMP addresses specifically the
                                                                         environmental and human health impacts of the
                                                                         use defoliants.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            This policy is not triggered as there are no project
                         BP 4.11                                         activities affecting cultural resources.
                                                                         Nevertheless, “chance find” provisions are
                                                                         incorporated into the EAMP and will be
                                                                         incorporated in the works bid documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           This policy is triggered in this project due to land
                         4.12                                            acquisition and resettlement anticipated in the
                                                                         rehabilitation works associated with the Bustan
                                                                         Canal and secondary canals. The project activities
                                                                         are expected to affect more than 400 ha of
                                                                         agricultural land, some access roads, and
                                                                         residential and small commercial properties. An
                                                                         assessment for resettlement associated with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         development of the Bustan Canal estimated that
                                                                         about 83 properties will be affected. An RAP has
                                                                         been prepared for the resettlement associated with
                                                                         the construction of the Bustan Canal. Additional
                                                                         land and properties are likely to be affected when
                                                                         secondary canal designs are finalized, which is
                                                                         expected in the third year of project
                                                                         implementation. In view of future resettlement
                                                                         needs associated with these secondary canals, the
                                                                         government also prepared an RPF. A RAP for
                                                                         resettlement associated with secondary canals will
                                                                         be prepared on the basis of the RPF. A redress
                                                                         mechanism will be established as part of the RAP.
                                                                         The RPF and the Bustan RAP were approved and
                                                                         disclosed in the country and in the Infoshop on
                                                                         March 11, 2013. The borrower will implement the
                                                                         RAPs for all project activities requiring land
                                                                         acquisition and/or resettlement.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes           The dam safety safeguards policy is triggered as



                                                                 Page 8 of 15
                                                                   the project will affect, and investments will
                                                                   depend on Tuyamuyun dam. The 2001
                                                                   Tuyamuyun Dam Safety Inspection Report
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   identified a number of dam safety issues, notably
                                                                   (i) safety of Sultansanjar Dam, (ii) rehabilitating
                                                                   the hydro-mechanical equipment; (iii) improving
                                                                   dam instrumentation; (iv) updating the O&M
                                                                   manual; and (v) preparing an Emergency
                                                                   Preparedness Plan (EPP). In 2009, the GOU
                                                                   undertook a “Dam Safety Assessment” of
                                                                   Tuyamuyun dam that clarified which of the
                                                                   proposed measures have already been
                                                                   implemented. On the basis of this report and the
                                                                   meetings with stakeholders, (i) a workshop was
                                                                   organized on site on March 15 using the
                                                                   guidelines elaborated by US Federal Energy
                                                                   Regulatory Commission (FERC) for conducting
                                                                   Potential Failure Mode Analysis (PFMA); and (ii)
                                                                   Gosvodkhoznadzor had conducted a diagnostic
                                                                   inspection, and will continues its safety inspection
                                                                   program by conducting another inspection during
                                                                   the last year of project implementation. Workshop
                                                                   and inspection were used to identify dam safety
                                                                   measures that will be implemented during the
                                                                   project, including (i) preparation of a dam safety
                                                                   plan; (ii) replacement of eight radial gates on the
                                                                   spillway; (iii) carrying out of routine maintenance
                                                                   works; (iv) carrying out of a bathymetric survey
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   of the reservoir; (iv) installation of a seismograph
                                                                   at the dam’s site; and (vii) carrying out of
                                                                   reinforcing works for the Sultansanjar
                                                                   embankment. With the exception of the first
                                                                   activity that will be financed by the project, all
                                                                   activities will be financed by the government.
                                                                   Implementation of the works will be done in
                                                                   accordance with the provisions and the timeline
                                                                   presented in the Project Operational Manual that
                                                                   will be prepared prior to project effectiveness.
                         Projects on International   Yes           The project area covers an irrigation network
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      which diverts water from the Aral Sea Basin.
                                                                   Thus the project triggers World Bank OP 7.50.
                                                                   On January 31, 2013, MAWR sent a riparian
                                                                   notification letter to the four riparian countries of
                                                                   the Aral Sea Basin that are member of the
                                                                   Interstate Commission for Water Coordination
                                                                   (ICWC), while on February 2, 2013, the Bank
                                                                   sent notification to the fifth riparian country,



                                                           Page 9 of 15
                                                                                 Afghanistan. In response to the riparian
                                                                                 notification, Turkmenistan has raised concerns
                                                                                 about the project impact on abstractions and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 monitoring thereof. In response to these concerns,
                                                                                 the Uzbek deputy Minister of MAWR, in the
                                                                                 presence of the Bank team, visited Turkmenistan
                                                                                 on two occasions and met with the Minister of
                                                                                 Water Economy of Turkmenistan and his team.
                                                                                 During these meetings, questions from
                                                                                 Turkmenistan about the project's impact on water
                                                                                 resources in the lower Amu Darya were
                                                                                 responded to. A final clarification was sent by
                                                                                 Uzbekistan to Turkmenistan in early September
                                                                                 2013. The Bank has carefully considered any
                                                                                 potential impacts of the project and is satisfied
                                                                                 that (i) the project will not cause appreciable
                                                                                 harm to any of the riparians in the Aral Sea basin;
                                                                                 and (ii) none of the project activities are expected
                                                                                 to have any adverse effects on the quantity or
                                                                                 quality of water flows to any riparian in the Aral
                                                                                 Sea basin. Further, the Bank is satisfied that all
                                                                                 concerns raised have been addressed in a
                                                                                 satisfactory manner. Two OP7.50 update memos
                                                                                 have been sent to the RVP.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              MAWR has conducted environmental and social assessments and prepared an ESAMP, consisting
                              of an Environmental Assessment and Management Plan (EAMP) that includes an Executive
                              Summary, the EAMP as updated April 9, 2014, and the Addendum to EAMP, and Social
                              Assessment that includes the Social Assessment and Annex to Social Assessment. The project
                              design does not seek to promote a horizontal expansion of irrigated agriculture, but seeks to
                              restore previously irrigated areas and improve productivity per hectare. Hence the EAMP
                              indicated that, due to improving water management in the project area, the project would have an
                              overall positive impact on the lower Amu Darya basin and the environment, without undermining
                              the water requirements of the riparians or the Aral Sea. The project interventions will not pose any
                              negative impact on the Aral Sea basin. As implied from the water balance, the project would lead
                              to a negligible improvement of the environmental flows in the downstream part of the Amu Darya
                              because of gains in irrigation efficiency. Data on abstractions would be shared with the Amu
                              Darya BVO, and the existing pumping stations would be dismantled. The likely negative impacts
                              (typical to irrigation development/rehabilitation projects) will be limited, such as limited
                              disruption of the ecosystem (e.g. removal of trees to enable developing the Bustan Canal),
                              resettlement, and safety at the construction sites. Negative impacts will all be monitored and


                                                                        Page 10 of 15
                           mitigated through the EAMP as updated April 9, 2014, budgeted at around US$10 million, under
                           the responsibility of MAWR and the civil-work contractors. In addition, the Addendum to the
                           EAMP has been developed to address the impacts of the use of cotton harvesting machinery,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           supplementary ginnery equipment, and use of defoliants. The impacts of those activities include
                           soil compaction, risks of air, soil and water contamination by fuel, lubricants and pesticide
                           residuals, and human health impacts if not properly applied.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long-term impacts include increased use of agro-chemicals (with associated potential increase in
                           environmental contamination and human exposure) associated with agricultural intensification,
                           and improved water management in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Five options have been considered for delivering gravity water supply to the project area, which is
                           the main investment under the project. Four of these supply water from the tail of the Right Bank
                           Canal to Ellikkala and Beruni Tumans by means of large gravity supply channels. The various
                           options take various routes and require various new reaches of canal. The fifth option considers
                           improving water supply to the project area via capital rehabilitation of the existing pumping
                           stations. The selected option - construction of a 68 kms Bustan Canal - minimizes negative
                           environmental and social impacts (including resettlement), and is among the least costly
                           alternatives that have been considered.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           MAWR will have overall responsibility for the EAMP as updated April 9, 2014, and the
                           Addendum to the EAMP. In view of the good experience during implementation of DIWIP, the
                           project will support MAWR in implementing the project through establishing a PIU that is
                           adequately staffed with needed specialists. The PIU will be assisted by national and international
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultants for project implementation, including the EAMP. An Environmental Officer will be
                           appointed/hired as part of the M&E team/consultants to follow up the application of the EAMP as
                           updated April 9, 2014, and the Addendum to the EAMP. At the design/tendering phase, this
                           Officer will ensure an early inclusion of the EAMP-related clauses in the NCB/ICB bid documents
                           and contracts. Thereafter, at the construction/operation phase, the Officer will ensure
                           implementation of the EAMP in terms of: mitigations (by MAWR and contractors), monitoring
                           (by MAWR), and training (by MAWR). To report on these EAMP activities, the Officer will
                           provide an EAMP chapter as part of the project-wide semi-annual M&E report. A specialist is
                           expected to be appointed/hired to oversee RAP implementation and monitoring. The specialist will
                           be assisted by a national and/or international consultant working with PIU. In addition, it is
                           expected that project monitoring consultant/firm will have clearly stipulated function for
                           monitoring of land acquisition and resettlement process and timely coordination with PIU.

                          The proposed project will implement several measures with the aim to fully eliminate the
                          occurrence of child and/or forced labor in the project area. There is an understanding with the
                          government that the project will be a pilot and that the lessons learned will be applied to the
                          preparation of a government strategy for agricultural diversification away from cotton and for
                          mechanization of the production that remains. These measures include:

                          (i) A covenant in the Financing Agreement (FA) that requires the government to comply with


                                                                    Page 11 of 15
                           national legislation that prohibit the use of child and/or forced labor, and measures to address
                           violations;
                           (ii) A clear land use strategy that eliminates incentives for using child and/or forced labor in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           entire project area of 100,000 ha, including crop diversification and cotton harvest mechanization;
                           (iii) Exemption from the state’s cotton procurement system for the 30,000 ha restored area, and
                           commitment from the government not to expand the area under cotton (currently 36,000 ha);
                           (iv) Training, awareness raising and outreach activities on labor legislation and the regulations on
                           child and/or forced labor;
                           (v) A TPM and FBM, financed through a separate trust fund and focused on child and/or forced
                           labor issues in connection with the project activities or within the project area, to be conducted
                           during the cotton harvesting season;
                           (vi) Additional covenants in the FA that require that local authorities fully collaborate with the
                           TPM and that actions to ensure compliance will be taken promptly;
                           (vii) Technical assistance (TA) to help the government develop a strategy for agricultural
                           diversification and to review arrangements for independent certification that Uzbek cotton
                           complies with child and/or forced labor regulations, in collaboration with the International Finance
                           Corporation (IFC) and the private sector.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During preparation of the EAMP, Social Assessment, and RPF and RAP, consultations with
                           affected stakeholders have been held. Affected stakeholders include in particular farmers in the
                           project area, namely land tenants (dekhkan households), leaseholders (farmer households), land
                           users (enterprises, organizations and institutions). Many of these will benefit from the reduced
                           costs of providing water to the project area in a gravity manner, which significantly reduces
                           operating costs. The EAMP/Social Assessment/RAP/RPF have been discussed at a public
                           consultation meeting held in Beruni in February, 2013. The records of the consultation meeting
                           have been enclosed to the EAMP. An updated EAMP was locally disclosed on May 5, 2014 and in
                           Infoshop on May 6, 2014. The Addendum to the EAMP underwent a separate round of public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultations on March 4, 2014. The Minutes of those public meetings were prepared by MAWR
                           and enclosed to the Addendum to the EAMP. The Bank disclosed this document in the Infoshop
                           on March 11, 2014. The Social Assessment was officially approved in March 2013 and disclosed
                           locally and in the Infoshop on February 6, 2013 and February 10, 2014, respectively. An update
                           related to child and forced labor was disclosed in-country in the Infoshop on May 5, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         07-Mar-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      07-Mar-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                    Page 12 of 15
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                        06-Feb-2013
                           Comments: This refers to the disclosure of the main EAMP. The Addendum to the EAMP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         addressing the issues of proposed cotton harvest mechanization and application of
                                         defoliants underwent a separate round of public consultations in the project area on
                                         March 4, 2014, and was also submitted to the Infoshop on March 11, 2014. An
                                         update to the EAMP was disclosed locally on May 5, 2014 and in Infoshop on May
                                         6, 2014.
                                         The Social Assessment was disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop on February 6
                                         and February 10, 2014, respectively. An update related to child and forced labor was
                                         disclosed in-country and in Infoshop on May 5, 2014.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       13-Feb-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Mar-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uzbekistan                                                        11-Mar-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?




                                                                    Page 13 of 15
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 14 of 15
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: IJsbrand Harko de Jong
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Esma Kreso (RSA)                             Date: 20-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Suzy H. Yoon-Yildiz (SM)                     Date: 20-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 15 of 15
