                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA3517
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                             Project ID:    P129408
                            Project Name:      Regional Pastoral Livelihoods Resilience Project (P129408)
                            Task Team          Stephane Forman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2013                        Estimated   18-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTA3                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Animal production (60%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (20%), Rural policies and institutions ( 20%), Regional
                                              integration (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     122.00           Total Bank Financing:                  122.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               122.00
                              Total                                                                                     122.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To enhance livelihood resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in cross-border drought
                           prone areas of selected countries and improve the capacity of the selected countries’ governments to
                           respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.


                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Natural Resources Management (US$52.6 million). This component aims at
                         enhancing the secure access of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities to sustainably managed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         natural resources with trans-boundary significance. This component will work with the World
                         Initiative for Sustainable Pastoralism (WISP) of the International Union for Conservation of Nature
                         (IUCN) to disseminate knowledge and train communities and decentralized staff from the Ministries
                         in sustainable Natural Resources Management.
                         (a)       Subcomponent 1.1 – Water Resources Development, The activities under this subcomponent
                         include the elaboration of a baseline study, high-definition maps and a database system of water
                         resources along cross-border routes; designing, building and rehabilitating water resources access
                         facilities (water pans, earth dams, boreholes, shallow wells), as well as identifying and promoting
                         appropriate water harvesting technologies; setting up and building capacity of communities and
                         Water User Associations in water management; and training operational and maintenance staff.
                         (b)       Subcomponent 1.2 – Sustainable Land Management in pastoral and agro-pastoral areas.
                         Under this subcomponent the RPLRP will support refinement of regional and national maps of
                         degraded rangelands and ecosystems with trans-boundary implications for animal movements; train
                         pastoralists and agro-pastoralists in rangeland rehabilitation and management techniques; reseed
                         degraded areas, clearing invasive species and supporting soil conservation, and build or rehabilitate
                         forage storage structures; and support harmonization of policies on rangeland management across the
                         RPLRP countries.
                         (c)       Subcomponent 1.3 – Securing access to natural resources, The activities under this
                         subcomponent include conducting a research on cross-border migration and mobility patterns, and
                         profiling key stakeholders for securing access to natural resources; sponsoring formal peace building
                         negotiations, information meetings, joint cross-border activities on civic education and peace
                         campaigns, and exposure visits of community members; building capacities of communities, local
                         governments and security officials to enforce the agreements signed on resource sharing; and
                         facilitating meetings to restore confidence of community stakeholders on traditional conflict
                         management mechanisms. Legal demarcation of the traditional livestock routes will also be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         promoted.
                         .Component 2: Market Access and Trade (US$38.2 million). This component aims at improving the
                         market access of the agro-pastoralists and pastoralists to the international and intra-regional markets
                         of livestock and livestock products.
                         (a)       Subcomponent 2.1 – Market Support Infrastructure and Information System. The component
                         will integrate the National Livestock Marketing Information System with the regional-level system,
                         provide appropriate equipment (hard- and software), and train stakeholders on interpreting and using
                         information from the system. Activities will include nation-wide dissemination of information
                         through media. Based on region-wide joint identification of investment needs, RPLRP will build,
                         rehabilitate and equip market infrastructures along trade routes (such as holding/auction grounds,
                         border check-points, regional and satellite laboratories), and build capacity of market staff and
                         officials on market management models, including inspections and certifications.
                         (b)       Subcomponent 2.2 – Livestock Value-chain support and Improving Livestock Mobility and
                         Trade, The project will finance and sponsor regional and national meetings and workshops to support
                         the review, ratification and implementation of regional animal marketing policies and protocols (such
                         as IGAD Livestock Policy Initiatives), tariffs, certification systems, Sanitary and Phyto-Sanitary
                         (SPS) standards, animal identification and traceability systems, and accordingly any necessary
                         amendments to the national policies and regulations. Support includes inputs such as identification
                         tools, radio frequency devices, and ear-tags; equipment to provide veterinary laboratory services
                         (including reagents, microscopes, centrifuges, and disposal facilities); publications and written


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         materials to disseminate policies, legal requirements and regulations; and capacity building activities
                         among livestock marketing and trade stakeholders (government officials, pastoralists, private sector).
                         The component will use disease-specific regional strategies and strengthen the quality of Veterinary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Services and collaboration between countries using the results from the World Organization for
                         Animal Health (OIE) evaluation of the performance of the Veterinary Services (PVS) pathway in
                         each country. On capacity building, pastoralists and other actors (exporters, abattoirs) will be trained
                         on cooperative management models, and marketing. Investments will aim to scale up grain storage
                         and warehouse receipt systems.

                         Component 3: Livelihood Support (US$38.0 million). This component aims at enhancing the
                         livelihoods of pastoralist and agro-pastoralist communities.
                         (a)      Subcomponent 3.1 - Livestock Production and Health, Under this subcomponent, RPLRP
                         will finance region-wide harmonized vaccination campaigns for priority diseases such as PPR, FMD,
                         CBPP, CCPP, RVF and Newcastle Disease (ND), equip national and county laboratories, enhance
                         disease control and surveillance in targeted areas, and identify gaps on private animal health service
                         provision. When available, vaccines will be sourced from vaccines banks recognized by International
                         Standard Setting Organization to ensure quality of the products. This is the case for the Botswana
                         Vaccine Institute for PPR recognized by the OIE. RPLRP will support the development and
                         harmonization of breeding strategies in the ASALs, and the provision of equipment and capacity
                         building of breeding centers (including 2 germplasm multiplication centres) and community breeding
                         groups. To enhance animal health services, the project will train Veterinary and Para Veterinary
                         Officers, Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWs), kraal leaders, and butchery workers on
                         disease detection and reporting. In addition, it will establish pastoral field schools (PFS) and other
                         learning-by-doing methodologies to carry out on-field demonstrations, training master trainers and
                         PFS facilitators.
                         (b)      Subcomponent 3.2 – Food and Feed Production, RPLRP will support improvements in
                         fodder bulking and conservation, establishing irrigation schemes and training water users
                         associations; undertake adaptive research and introduce drought tolerant fodder species in agro-
                         pastoral areas; and build and rehabilitate storage and post-harvest facilities adapted to pastoral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conditions and agricultural production. Capacity building activities will use community-based
                         activities through field demonstrations and pastoral groups, and provide training and equipment
                         aimed at fodder bulking and conservation, and management of storage facilities.
                         (c)      Subcomponent 3.3 – Livelihoods Diversification, by identifying and strengthening
                         alternative livelihood opportunities. To that end, RPLRP will finance prospective activities to
                         identify markets and develop value chains for livestock-related products, and will help share
                         information about livelihood alternatives, with special attention to gender mainstreaming
                         .
                         Component 4: Pastoral Risk Management (US$13.7 million). This component aims at enhancing
                         drought-related hazards preparedness, prevention and response at the national and regional levels. It
                         has three sub-components:
                         (a)      Subcomponent 4.1 – Pastoral Risk Early Warning and Response System: IGAD-coordinated
                         workshops will help harmonize methodologies for risk profiling, and establish and operationalize a
                         region- and nation-wide Early Warning Systems (EWS). These systems will be instrumental to
                         collect, analyze and disseminate early warning reports and information to decision makers, and to
                         develop contingency plans and guidelines . Investments will focus on expanding and rehabilitating
                         sentinel sites to cover the project areas, procure equipment for the counties (GPS, ICT platforms,
                         vehicle, motorcycles, and computer hardware), and establish clusters of cross-border PRM
                         committees. Region-, nation-, and county-level training activities will target officers and stakeholders
                         to undertake risk profiling, formulate and disseminate contingency plans, and identify gaps in

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         response capacity..
                         (b)      Subcomponent 4.2 - Drought Disaster Risk Management: The activities under this
                         component include region-, nation-, and county-level training and capacity building activities on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DDRM-related key guidelines, such as Livestock Emergency Guidelines and Standards (LEGS) and
                         Community Managed Disaster Risk Reduction (CMDRR). RPLRP will help build fiduciary and
                         administrative capacities, elaborate guidelines for receiving and disbursing contingency funds,
                         explore prospects, and pilot financial risk transfers mechanisms (agricultural insurance scheme) in
                         the project areas. To raise awareness among nation- and county-wide policy makers, the project will
                         support the design of a communication strategy for EWS and implementation strategies for PRM.
                         (c)      Subcomponent 4.3 - Contingency Emergency Response: Following an adverse natural event
                         that causes a major disaster affecting the livelihood of pastoral and agro-pastoral communities in the
                         project areas, the Government of Kenya, Ethiopia and Uganda may request the World Bank to re-
                         allocate project funds to support mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction. This component
                         would draw resources from unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the affected country to
                         request the World Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other components to partially
                         cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could also be used to channel
                         additional funds, should they become available as a result of an eligible emergency. Disbursements
                         would be made against a positive list of goods, works, and services required to support mitigation,
                         response, recovery and reconstruction needs. All expenditures under this component, should it be
                         triggered, will be in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00 Investment Project Financing and
                         will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the World Bank before any disbursement is
                         made. Eligible operating costs would include incremental expenses incurred for efforts arising as a
                         result of the natural disaster. This subcomponent will also be used to channel resources from rapid
                         restructuring of the project to finance emergency response expenditures and meet crisis and
                         emergency needs under an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM)...

                         Component 5: Project Management and Institutional Support (US$29.4 million). This component
                         would focus on all aspects related to overall project management and institutional strengthening at
                         national and regional levels for drought resilience.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      Subcomponent 5.1 – Project Management, M&E, Learning, Knowledge Management and
                         Communication. The Ministries in charge of implementing the project in the three countries will host
                         each national project coordination unit. This sub-component will support staff salaries, operating
                         costs and key studies aiming at preparing or documenting project’s interventions. M&E activities
                         will include regular monitoring of implementation performance and results, annual outcome
                         evaluations, annual thematic studies, technical audit of infrastructures, and case studies. The M&E
                         activities will provide the basis to disseminate the lessons learned of the project at the local, national
                         and regional level. At the three levels, learning activities will include cross-country learning
                         activities supported by IGAD.
                         (b)      Subcomponent 5.2 – Regional and National Institutional Support. It will provide technical
                         and investment support to enhance provision of services by relevant national and regional institutions
                         on drought resilience. This sub-component will build capacities in IGAD and its specialized
                         agencies, such as the CEWARN, and support a greater engagement of the three countries into the
                         IGAD relevant decision- and policy-making processes on dry lands and pastoral areas. The sub-
                         component will also promote inter-ministerial collaboration, be it among the three countries or within
                         each country , and among IGAD, the Governments and non-public organizations (i.e. livestock
                         traders, pastoralists unions) in order to build these organizations’ capacities. In Uganda, the program
                         will use a Competitive Grant on a demand-driven basis to create that capacity.




                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Kenya and Uganda. Project field activities will focus on arid and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         semi-arid lands (ASALs), especially 12 districts in Karamoja region in Uganda and 14 counties from
                         Northern Kenya. The exact project sites are not yet known and will be determined during project
                         implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
                         Edward Felix Dwumfour (AFTN3)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         Svetlana Khvostova (AFTSG)
                         Herbert Oule (AFTN3)
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The program will support local and community
                          BP 4.01                                            investments, including some with trans-border
                                                                             dimensions, which might have environmental and
                                                                             social impacts: construction of new and
                                                                             rehabilitation of existing water facilities,
                                                                             rangeland/field demonstration plots, watershed
                                                                             rehabilitation activities, livestock markets and
                                                                             laboratories, storage facilities, among others.
                                                                             Specific project investments and sub-project
                                                                             locations cannot be defined at the time of
                                                                             appraisal, and will be designed during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             implementation. The countries have prepared
                                                                             Environmental and Social Management
                                                                             Frameworks (ESMFs). The two ESMFs are
                                                                             country-specific volumes, describing the process
                                                                             of environmental and social assessment, which
                                                                             will help the implementing agencies identify,
                                                                             assess and avoid or mitigate the potential negative
                                                                             impacts of the proposed interventions. The
                                                                             ESMFs define uniform screening mechanisms
                                                                             and monitoring procedures for identification and
                                                                             management of potential adverse environmental
                                                                             and social impacts. The Project will collaborate
                                                                             with the local authorities to assist the project in
                                                                             monitoring project activities in the vicinity of any
                                                                             natural habitats in the sub-project areas. The
                                                                             ESMF reports also provide Grievance Redress
                                                                             Mechanism with guidance on the reception,
                                                                             recording, handling, and reporting of complaints
                                                                             that may be encountered during project



                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                                                                     implementation. During project implementation
                                                                     and based on the environmental and social
                                                                     screening process provided in the ESMF, ESIAs/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     ESMPs shall be developed and relevant
                                                                     environmental assessments undertaken where
                                                                     necessary. Monitoring and reporting formats have
                                                                     been provided in the ESMF reports and shall be
                                                                     customized to the respective sub-projects in each
                                                                     identified subproject. The three ESMF reports
                                                                     have gone through public consultations during
                                                                     their preparation and were disclosed locally and
                                                                     in the Bank Info Shop prior to project appraisal in
                                                                     November 2013.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The program activities might border or operate in
                                                                     natural habitats or protected areas. Pastoral
                                                                     livestock movements are sometimes conflicting
                                                                     with borders of protected areas. Some sub-
                                                                     projects may involve management and use of
                                                                     natural resources such as wetlands, protected
                                                                     areas for communal grazing. The project does not
                                                                     anticipate conversion or destruction of natural
                                                                     habitats. No forests are expected to be affected by
                                                                     the proposed activities. The ESMFs include
                                                                     measures for minimizing impacts on natural
                                                                     habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            The policy is not triggered as project activities do
                                                                     not have any direct impacts on the health and
                                                                     quality of forests; people who depend on forests;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     nor is there an aim to change the management,
                                                                     protection, or utilization of forests. The ESMF
                                                                     will provide mechanism of screening to identify
                                                                     potential impacts of the project on forests and
                                                                     protected areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           The promotion of livestock and crop agriculture
                                                                     productivity increase may indirectly incentivize
                                                                     the pesticide use. Project funds might be used to
                                                                     purchase veterinary and anti-parasites drugs.
                                                                     Overall, the project is neither expected to have
                                                                     significant pest management issues, nor finance
                                                                     substantial quantities of pesticides. However, to
                                                                     guide the project in procurement, management
                                                                     and disposal of these chemicals, country-specific
                                                                     Integrated Pest Management Frameworks
                                                                     (IPMFs) were prepared and publicly disclosed.
                                                                     The IPMFs will help manage the chemical use,
                                                                     guide their safe handling, storage and disposal,



                                                             Page 6 of 13
                                                                         and include training and capacity building
                                                                         activities for farmers.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           Project activities do not involve major civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                         works, and thus are unlikely to affect physical
                                                                         cultural resources in the project areas. However,
                                                                         ESMFs include a procedure to handle “chance
                                                                         finds”.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           Various screening in the proposed project areas
                                                                         has indicated presence of Vulnerable and
                                                                         Marginalized Groups. For Kenya and Uganda a
                                                                         Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework
                                                                         and a Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                                                                         have been developed in line with the World Bank
                                                                         OP 4.10 since the sub projects are not yet known.
                                                                         During project implementation, action plans will
                                                                         be developed guided by these Frameworks.
                                                                         Preparation of these instruments involved free,
                                                                         prior and informed consultations with identified
                                                                         vulnerable and marginalized groups. The Social
                                                                         Assessment, the VMGF and the IPPF for Kenya
                                                                         and Uganda have been disclosed in country and in
                                                                         InfoShop on November 29, 2013. Plans will be
                                                                         prepared as and when necessary during project
                                                                         implementation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The RPLRP interventions are likely to require a
                         4.12                                            very limited land acquisition (if any). Decision
                                                                         regarding location of community livelihood sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         projects will be made in consultation with
                                                                         communities within the framework of
                                                                         participatory planning. To cover aspects of
                                                                         potential land loss, loss of livelihood, and
                                                                         displacement of land use as well as any loss of
                                                                         access to natural resources and public parks arise,
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPFs) have
                                                                         been prepared to provide guidance during
                                                                         implementation (and prior to any civil works) for
                                                                         determining the necessity of RAPs for sub-
                                                                         projects and the procedures for their preparation,
                                                                         including consultations with potentially affected
                                                                         individuals and households in the target of project
                                                                         areas. The RPFs were disclosed in-country on
                                                                         November 28, 2013 and at InfoShop on
                                                                         November 29, 2013.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No            The project will not finance large dams, however
                                                                         the project ESMFs include provisions for small
                                                                         dam safety management: Uganda has developed



                                                                 Page 7 of 13
                                                                                 national level small dam safety guidelines, while
                                                                                 Kenya will utilize the FAO Guidelines referenced
                                                                                 in the ESMF. These guidelines will assist the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 project team in implementation of the small dam
                                                                                 sub-projects.
                            Projects on International            No              During preparation, this policy was triggered in
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 Ethiopia only because the program may finance
                                                                                 activities such as small scale / community-based
                                                                                 irrigation schemes in shared international waters
                                                                                 basins, although they are not expected to
                                                                                 significantly diminish the water quantity and/or
                                                                                 reduce the quality through pollution. However,
                                                                                 Ethiopia will not join the first phase of the
                                                                                 project.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  This policy is not triggered because the program
                            7.60                                                 will not finance any activity in disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Overall, the project will have significant socio-economic benefits to communities in the project
                              area and will promote sustainable use of resources in the target project areas. The Project is
                              classified as Environment Assessment (EA) Category B because the anticipated environmental
                              impacts are not major, mostly site specific and can easily be avoided and/or managed. RPLRP
                              triggers OP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment, as the program will support local and community
                              investments, including some with trans-border dimensions, which might have environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              social impacts: construction of new and rehabilitation of existing water facilities, rangeland/field
                              demonstration plots, watershed rehabilitation activities, livestock markets and laboratories, storage
                              facilities, among others.
                              The project triggers the following Policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Natural Habitats
                              (OP 4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Involuntary
                              Resettlement (OP 4.12), and Indigenous Peoples (OP 4.10). The project takes a framework
                              approach to safeguards, since the specific activities have not been identified during the project
                              preparation.
                              The important environmental issues are associated with among others the following proposed
                              project activities: designing, building and rehabilitating water resources access facilities (water
                              pans, earth dams, boreholes, shallow wells), as well as identifying and promoting appropriate
                              water harvesting technologies; development and rehabilitation of pasture land; construction/
                              rehabilitation of the Livestock markets, border checkpoints, holding/auction grounds, slaughter
                              facilities, rehabilitation and construction of veterinary laboratories; building and rehabilitation of
                              storage and post-harvest facilities adapted to pastoral conditions and agricultural production and
                              region-wide harmonized vaccination campaigns for priority diseases such as PPR, FMD, CBPP,
                              CCPP, RVF and Newcastle Disease (ND). RPLRP is expected to have a positive impact on
                              environment by enhancing the capacities of relevant stakeholders to sustainably manage natural
                              resources, especially rangelands and water, and by rehabilitating or developing water and pasture
                              related infrastructure and ecosystems.

                                                                         Page 8 of 13
                           The project is expected to benefit many communities that live on the margins through extending
                           social benefits that go directly to improving their livelihoods. Their participation is however very
                           critical particularly among those that are considered as vulnerable and marginalized. The RPLRP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           demand driven approach will therefore enable priority setting by communities and responses to
                           communities’ needs.
                           Activities planned under the RPLP Project will vary in scale. Consequently, the significance of the
                           direct negative environmental and social impacts is likely to be moderate. The RPLRP country
                           level implementation teams will oversee the design of subprojects on a national scale and the
                           appropriate environmental assessment process, including mitigation measures and coordination
                           among the relevant stakeholders during subproject preparation and implementation. At the
                           regional level, Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) Secretariat will set up a
                           Djibouti-based RPLRP Coordination Unit within the IDDRSI Regional Platform Coordination
                           Unit.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long-term impacts are anticipated. Generally, RPLRP is expected to have positive impacts on
                           the environment by enhancing the capacities of relevant stakeholders to sustainably manage
                           natural resources, especially rangelands and water, and by rehabilitating or developing water and
                           pasture related infrastructure and ecosystems.
                           Furthermore, RPLRP activities will contribute to building the resilience of pastoral and agro-
                           pastoral communities in the ASALs regions of Kenya and Uganda by addressing some of the
                           factors that undermine households resilience through impacting on livestock assets, incomes and
                           diversifying income sources
                           Indirect impacts may include increased use of pesticides in the project areas of intervention. Such
                           impacts will be mitigated by implementation of integrated pest management solutions presented in
                           the project ESMFs/PMPs.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Each subproject, which would require development of an ESIA will analyze the project
                           alternatives as part of subproject preparation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project national teams developed a set of safeguards instruments to guide preparation of
                           mitigation measures for sub-projects once they are identified. These are two country-specific
                           ESMFs, IPMFs, RPFs and Social Assessments, an IPPF for Uganda, and a VMGF for Kenya.
                           Environmental safeguards: To satisfy the requirements of OP 4.01, the countries have prepared
                           Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMFs). The 2 ESMFs are country-specific
                           volumes, describing the process of environmental and social assessment, which will help the
                           implementing agencies identify, assess and avoid or mitigate the potential negative impacts of the
                           proposed interventions. The ESMFs define uniform screening mechanisms and monitoring
                           procedures for identification and management of potential adverse environmental and social
                           impacts. The Project will collaborate with the local authorities to assist the project in monitoring
                           project activities in the vicinity of any natural habitats in the sub-project areas. The ESMF reports
                           provide Grievance Redress Mechanism with guidance on the reception, recording, handling, and
                           reporting of complaints that may be encountered during project implementation. The IPMFs
                           developed for each country will help screen the pesticide use, guide their safe handling, storage
                           and disposal, and include training and capacity building activities for farmers and other


                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                         stakeholders. The IPMFs were prepared, and consulted upon and publicly disclosed in-country and
                         on Infoshop. The ESMFs include a chance find procedure, which will be used by the project team
                         during subprojects that involve civil works and will be included into contracts as a requirement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         During project implementation and based on the environmental and social screening process
                         provided in the ESMF, ESIAs/ESMPs shall be developed and relevant environmental assessments
                         undertaken where necessary. Monitoring and reporting formats have been provided in the ESMF
                         reports and shall be customized to the respective sub-projects in each identified subproject. The
                         two ESMF reports have gone through public consultations during their preparation and were
                         disclosed locally and in the Bank Info Shop prior to project appraisal in November 2013.
                         Social safeguards: The project has prepared country specific Resettlement Policy Frameworks
                         (RPFs), which will provide guidance during implementation (and prior to any civil works) for
                         determining the necessity of RAPs for sub-projects and the procedures for their preparation,
                         including consultations with potentially affected individuals and households in the target of project
                         areas.

                         To satisfy the requirements of OP 4.10, Kenya team has developed a Vulnerable and Marginalized
                         Groups Framework (VMGF) and Uganda – the Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF).
                         These safeguards instruments were prepared to clarify principles, mitigation measures, and the
                         appropriate organizational arrangements for each implementation agency that would ensure that
                         those affected by implementation of the project positively or negatively, have a voice and a
                         mechanism of influencing project outcomes in line with World Bank safeguard policies.
                         The project will have substantial positive social impact livelihoods of communities in the project
                         areas. The project design includes mechanisms for ensuring that participation of communities in
                         management of resources, particularly natural resources, is enhanced. Social Assessment process
                         identified the main social issues that the project needs to address; it also suggested approaches to
                         project community engagement. Previous Bank-funded projects in similar areas and communities
                         have helped the anticipation of the project social impacts, especially in regard to vulnerable and
                         marginalized groups, women and young people. The RPLRP’s demand driven approach will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         therefore enable priority setting by communities and respond to communities’ needs.

                         Capacity Building: This regional coordination unit is placed under IGAD Steering Committee and
                         the Committee of Directors. The core functions of this Platform include: coordination of resources
                         mobilization, regional programming and M&E services, regional knowledge management, and
                         regional capacity development. The RPLRP Unit will coordinate the implementation of the cross-
                         boundary interventions; provide a platform for technical assistance, and support policy dialogue
                         with countries.
                         At the country level, the project will be implemented:
                         In Kenya – by Ministry of Devolution and Planning and the new Ministry of Agriculture,
                         Livestock and Fisheries (MoALF);
                         In Uganda – by Ministry of Karamoja Affairs (MKA) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal
                         Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF); and

                         Currently, the capacity for implementation of safeguards related issues remains limited among the
                         implementing agencies of RPLRP. However, the country-level project teams have committed to
                         hiring dedicated staff to manage the environmental and social aspects of project implementation.
                         These staff, together with other project stakeholders will benefit from the comprehensive capacity
                         building and training programs presented in the ESMFs.



                                                                   Page 10 of 13
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Communities in Kenya and Uganda and their local level institutions are the key project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stakeholders. They have been involved in the project preparation and consulted on environmental
                           and social documentation for the key safeguard policies applicable to this project. Consultations
                           with Vulnerable and Marginalized groups were conducted in the free, prior and informed manner.
                           The project stakeholders will be an integral part of development of Action Plans during
                           implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       19-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    29-Nov-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                             26-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                           Uganda                                                            29-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       13-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    29-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                             28-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                           Uganda                                                            29-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       13-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    29-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                             28-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                           Uganda                                                            29-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    No
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Jan-2014




                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            22-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Uganda                                                           23-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or SM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Stephane Forman
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                       Date: 12-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Tijan M. Sallah (SM)                              Date: 14-Feb-2014




                                                                       Page 13 of 13
