                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA9016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jul-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jul-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Dominican Republic                 Project ID:    P147213
                            Project Name:       INTEGRATED SOCIAL PROTECTION AND PROMOTION PROJECT
                                                (P147213)
                            Task Team           Carine Clert
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       07-Jul-2014                            Estimated   12-Nov-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSPDR                                   Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Other social services (80%), Public administration- Other social services (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (40%), Social safety nets (40%),
                                              Urban services and housing for the poor (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      70.00           Total Bank Financing:                     70.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                        0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                          70.00
                              Total                                                                                          70.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed PDO is to improve access of poor Dominican citizens to an integrated package of
                           social protection and promotion opportunities in selected provinces.

                           In the context of this Project, “promotion” broadly refers to a set of services and opportunities that

                                                                         Page 1 of 6
                         contribute to increase the human capital of the poor and their livelihood opportunities, including:
                         bridging CCT coverage gaps to increase investments in health and education, enhancing CCT users’
                         employability and/or access to self-employment/small entrepreneurship programs, and/or providing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         eligible CCT users with basic housing improvements.
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed Project would have three components:

                         Component 1. Integrated Area-Based Social Protection and Pro-poor Service Delivery. Building on
                         the PROSOLI Progresando Unidos initiative, this Component aims at improving access of poor
                         citizens of selected provinces to an integrated package of social protection and promotion
                         opportunities by: (i) bridging CCT coverage gaps for eligible extremely poor households; (ii)
                         increasing access of extremely poor CCT users to housing improvements; and (iii) increasing access
                         of extremely and moderately poor to productive opportunities, with a priority on enhancing the
                         employability of young women and men from CCT households.

                         Component 2. Strengthening PROSOLI and Support to Targeted Households. To ensure the success
                         of the integrated area-based strategy based on the CCT Program described in Component 1, this
                         Component will strengthen PROSOLI’s operative processes and its capacity to effectively link
                         targeted households to newly available opportunities and services in selected provinces.

                         Component 3. Enhancing Equity and Results-orientation. This Component would complement
                         targeted interventions at the territorial level with institutional strengthening at the national policy
                         level to sustain progress in building blocks of the social protection system. To this end, the
                         Component would finance activities to: (i) strengthen the SIUBEN as the primary targeting
                         instrument; and (ii) improve evidence-based policy making by the Social Cabinet and citizen
                         oversight.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Given its integrated area-based service delivery approach, this Project is building on the
                         Government’s Progresando Unidos strategy by selecting the following 14 provinces for
                         implementation: ten where at least 20 percent of households have been categorized by SIUBEN as
                         extremely poor (ICV I), and four with the highest levels of households in extreme poverty in terms of
                         absolute numbers. The prioritized provinces are: Elias Pina, San Juan, Distrito Nacional, Bahoruco,
                         Barahona, independencia, Pedernales, El Seibo, Santiago, Monte Cristi, Santo Domingo, Monte
                         Plata, San Cristobal, and San Jose de Ocoa.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Galina Y. Sotirova (LCC3C)
                         Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The Project has a housing component (increasing
                          BP 4.01                                               access of extremely poor CCT users to housing
                                                                                improvements, through the financing of a pilot
                                                                                housing improvement scheme) that involves
                                                                                rehabilitation of existing housing structures,



                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                                                                               which are small, simple structures. No new
                                                                               construction will be financed. If any negative
                                                                               environmental impacts occur they will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               minimal. Standard measures to prevent or
                                                                               mitigate any minor environmental or social
                                                                               impacts that could be caused by Project activities
                                                                               will be included in the Operational Manual and
                                                                               will be monitored as part of overall supervision.
                                                                               Thus the Project environmental assessment
                                                                               category is C.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No              The Project will not involve any works that will
                                                                               have significant impacts on natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No              The Project does not involve forests or significant
                                                                               impacts on forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No              The Project will not involve the purchase or use
                                                                               of any significant quantities of pesticides.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No              The Project will not involve works or activities
                            BP 4.11                                            that would have significant impacts on physical
                                                                               cultural resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No              The Project will not trigger this safeguard policy
                                                                               since there are no indigenous peoples that fulfill
                                                                               the characteristics of the policy in the Project
                                                                               areas.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No              OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered
                            4.12                                               as the rehabilitation of housing structures will not
                                                                               require any land acquisition or cause any
                                                                               involuntary resettlement as defined by the Policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No              The Project will not support the construction or
                                                                               rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
                                                                               investments which rely on the services of existing
                                                                               dams.
                            Projects on International        No                Project activities will not affect international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                The Project will not be implemented in areas
                            7.60                                               known to involve disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              This Project does not entail new construction, land purchase, or resettlement; therefore, the
                              Involuntary Resettlement safeguard is not triggered. Housing improvements under Sub-component
                              1.2 focus on the replacement of dirt floors with reinforced cement floors, and eligible CCT
                              beneficiary households must own the land or be located on public land. The housing improvement
                              subcomponent (1.3) involves rehabilitation of existing homes, which are small, simple structures.


                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                           The addition of new puntos solidarios under subcomponent 2.2 involves the rehabilitation and
                           upgrading of existing public spaces, which are also simple structures. No new construction will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financed. If any negative environmental impacts occur they will be minimal. Standard measures to
                           prevent or mitigate any minor environmental or social impacts that could be caused by the
                           proposed Project’s activities will be included in the Operational Manual and implemented as part
                           of good construction practices, and will be monitored as part of overall supervision.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No negative indirect and/or long term impacts are expected. The following examples summarizes
                           how inclusiveness permeates the proposed Project’s objectives and expected impacts on the target
                           population; and the Project’s implementation arrangements to address exclusion risks based on
                           poverty and/or gender; monitoring and evaluation; and, voice and accountability.
                           •        The Project’s Objectives stress the explicit focus on poor citizens and expected social
                           impacts are expected to be very positive as per the evidence presented in the economic analysis:
                           increased incentives for eligible, extremely-poor families to keep children in school longer and
                           improve health care behaviors; improved household health and living conditions linked to
                           replacement of floors; enhanced employability for young women and men, and overall expected
                           decrease in youth idleness.
                           •        Potential target groups. The proposed Project will use the Government’s Single
                           Beneficiary Selection System (known as SIUBEN) to target beneficiaries and sub-component 3.1
                           will work on strengthening the accuracy of the instrument as a continuous process. The targeted
                           provinces are those with the highest percentages and absolute numbers of households categorized
                           as extremely poor. Women are expected to benefit disproportionately from expected benefits: as of
                           May 2014, approximately 21,000 extremely-poor households would be eligible to join the CCT
                           program in the 14 selected provinces and of these approximately 17,000 are headed by women.
                           •        Inclusive arrangements and/or measures were agreed to address the key potential barriers
                           linked to income and gender that were identified during preparation. With regard to housing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           improvements (subcomponent 1.2), the requirement that beneficiary households participate in
                           construction activities will be calibrated to promote women’s participation, by not requiring any
                           hard physical labor (e.g., activities would include preparation of the site for construction, cleaning
                           after work is completed, removing waste, and painting walls). It is noteworthy that unlike in other
                           countries, land titling did not appear as key obstacle for female-headed households to benefit from
                           this sub-component: 70 percent of eligible households (living on own land or public land) are
                           headed by women according to a desk base review of the SIUBEN database. With regard to the
                           PROSOLI Youth Employment Promotion Program, trainers’ curricula will adapt to the potentially
                           low level of skills of this low-income target group. Similarly, stipends will be provided to address
                           opportunity, including transportation, and child-care costs for low-income female participants with
                           small children 0-5 years. PROSOLI will also encourage synergies with PROSOLI childcare
                           centers’ activities (Centros Esperanza in some PROSOLI’s Training centers and financed outside
                           of this project) and of forthcoming Early Childhood Education spaces of the Ministry of Education
                           (Quisqueya Crece Contigo Initiative).
                           •        The Monitoring and Evaluation System for this Project will track gender-disaggregated
                           data and key reports will be made accessible to the public.
                           •        In addition, users of the CCT and potential opportunities will be able to engage in
                           monitoring the delivery of Project’s opportunities through the Community Report Cards and the
                           mechanisms of grievance and redress set up in the Puntos Solidarios, which will be improved and
                           scaled up as part of subcomponents 2.2. In terms of voice, it is noteworthy that all CCT PROSOLI


                                                                      Page 4 of 6
                           households are organized in small nuclei (of about 40 households) to enhance social capital and
                           that it is largely women who are heading these nuclei.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           Given the description of social issues above, and since social inclusion and poverty reduction are
                           integral to this Project’s objective, the decision was made at concept stage to treat social
                           assessment (including its gender component) as an iterative approach within project design and
                           implementation, versus carrying out a stand-alone social assessment.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           No safeguards are triggered. The Social Cabinet would be responsible for coordination and
                           execution of the proposed Project, through its Projects Technical Unit or Unidad Técnica de
                           Proyectos (UTP). The UTP will manage fiduciary and safeguard issues if they would arise during
                           implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Not applicable. However, one can note the following. Project design and inclusive (including
                           gender-friendly) arrangements have been informed by three analyses and consultations : (i) a
                           review of secondary evidence (Regional UNDP Poverty Maps, WBG Equity Report, Gender
                           USAID analysis, UNDP-sponsored CCT Gender Assessment, a review of Gender Issues in
                           Housing, Key Issues highlighted in Community Scorecards reports; Impact Evaluations of the
                           CCT Solidaridad, and the Youth Employment Project); (ii) broad-based consultations (including
                           with Women NGOs) informing the forthcoming CPS in which this Project is included; and, (iii)
                           project-specific consultations by the Client and Bank teams with National NGOs and regional
                           Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) in the provinces targeted by the Progresando Unidos initiative.
                           Furthermore, the Social Cabinet’s contribution to poverty reduction has led to the creation of the
                           Poverty Alliance Network, which includes relevant sectoral ministries (i.e., Women, Agriculture,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Education, Health) and NGOs).
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         N/A
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Carine Clert
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Rafael P. Rofman (SM)                       Date: 08-Jul-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
