                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA6532
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                              Project ID:    P133069
                            Project Name:      Shaanxi Small Towns Infrastructure Project (P133069)
                            Task Team          Guangming Yan
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          24-Mar-2014                        Estimated   25-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     EASCS                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Rural and Inter-
                                              Urban Roads and Highways (60%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Water resource
                                              management (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     256.90           Total Bank Financing:                  150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   106.90
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      150.00
                              Total                                                                                      256.90
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the infrastructure service delivery in selected small
                           and medium towns in Shaanxi Province.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         The Shaanxi Province and Bank agreed that project formulation will be guided by the following
                         principles: (i) support Shaanxi’s efforts of promoting the urban development of county seats (third
                         tier cites defined in Guan-Tian Economic Zone Development Plan ) and selected key towns of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provincial level, which perform critical roles and have great potential for facilitating rural-to-urban
                         migration from vast rural area in Shaanxi; (ii) address gaps of basic urban infrastructure services in
                         existing built-up area with high priority, supplemented by support to prioritized infrastructure
                         investments in town’ expansion area being developed; (iii) give high priority for urban
                         infrastructures shared by multiple towns to encourage integration of infrastructure, facilitate efficient
                         operations, and improve the financial and operational performance; and (iv) give higher priority for
                         construction of urban infrastructures that have added-value of facilitating job creation or industrial
                         development in project towns.

                         The following components (Total cost US$ 256.9 million) have been selected for preparation, but are
                         subject to refinement and amendment as project preparation proceeds:

                         (a) Component 1: Infrastructure and Service Upgrading (Base cost US$ 206.3 million): The
                         component includes two subcomponents: (i) Infrastructure Improvement, including new construction
                         and upgrading of urban roads and missing links in project counties/districts; and (ii) Infrastructure
                         Rehabilitation, including rehabilitation and expansion of water supply source development and
                         distribution networks; wastewater collection networks; storm drainage networks; and associated road
                         pavement improvements.

                         (b) Component 2: Town Management Improvement and Implementation Support (Base Cost US$ 3.0
                         million). The component includes: (i) town management improvements in project counties/ districts
                         through introduction of asset management practices comprising: improved Operation and
                         Maintenance plans and budgets, infrastructure mapping, preparation of asset registers, and provision
                         of training, study tours and office equipment; (ii) policy advisory studies on Shaanxi’s small town
                         development initiative to assist Shaanxi Province to strengthen policies and planning practices
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conforming to the New Urbanization Agenda; and (iii) implementation support for project
                         management, design reviews, monitoring, evaluation, and reporting, etc.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         An inland province along the middle reaches of the Yellow River and a gateway to northwest China,
                         Shaanxi links the west with the east and connects the north with the south. It borders Ningxia, Inner
                         Mongolia, Shanxi, Henan, Hubei, Sichuan and Gansu provinces, covering an area of 205,600 sq km.
                         Total population is about 37 million.

                         The province has three distinctive landforms from north to south. The Loess Plateau in the north
                         (Shaanbei Region) has an elevation of 800-1,300 meters, and accounts for 45% of the total area of
                         the province. The Central Shaanxi Plain (Guanzhong Region) in the middle averages an elevation of
                         520 meters. The Qinling and Daba mountainous areas in the south (Shaannan Region) include the
                         Qinling Mountains, Daba Mountains, and Hanjiang River Valley, accounting for 36% of the total
                         area of the province. The Qinling Mountains and the Daba Mountains in the southernmost of the
                         province measure 1,000-3,000 meters and 1,500-2,000 meters in elevation, respectively.

                         The proposed components would support 12 county seats and/or key towns (average population
                         about 35,000 and built-up area around 3-5 km2) in nine project counties/districts across seven
                         municipalities: Xi’an, Xianyang, Baoji, Tongchuan, Weinan, Hanzhong and Ankang.


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                           Geographically, Yanliang District (District Seat and Wutun Town), Chengcheng County ( County
                           Seat), Wugong County (Wugong Town), Chunhua County (Run Town), Xunyi County (County Seat
                           and Zhitian Town), Chencang District (District Seat) and Yintai District (District Seat and Chenlu
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Town) are within the Guanzhong-Tianshui Economic Zone, and Hanyin County (County Seat) and
                           Hantai District (Pu Town) locate in Shaannan Region (southern part of Shannxi) .
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                           Zhefu Liu (EASCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09            No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/    Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social safeguards:
                              The project has significant social benefits. It supports the improvement of infrastructure service
                              delivery in selected small and medium towns in 9 counties/districts of 7 municipalities in Shaanxi
                              Province by addressing accumulated maintenance backlog, completing service coverage,
                              upgrading and construction of urban infrastructure.
                              The Bank Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered. A Resettlement Action Plan
                              (RAP) was prepared. The RAP provided details on resettlement policy procedures and
                              requirements that will have to be followed during project implementation, including compensation
                              rates, mitigation measures to restore livelihoods, and institutional and monitoring arrangements.


                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                           The RAP has been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on March 3, 2014.
                           The proposed project will support 12 county seats and/or key towns in nine counties/districts in
                           Shaanxi Province. The project will require the permanent acquisition of 109.9 hectares of land,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including 96.3 hectares of cultivated land, 10.6 hectares of housing lots and 3 hectares of
                           constructed land. The dominant current land use is growing wheat and corns. The project will
                           require 71,527 square meters of structures, including 58,248 square meters of concrete and brick
                           houses, 6,805 square meters of brick and wood houses, 3,659 square meters of muddy and wood
                           houses, and 2,815 simple houses. As the result, the project will impact 568 families with 2223
                           persons by land acquisition and 334 families with 1,252 persons by housing demolition.
                           The task team conducted due diligence reviews to the local projects, that link to the Bank
                           supported project components, implemented two years prior to the project identification;. The task
                           team identified that (i)Shuibei water treatment plant in Yanliang District, and (ii) waste water
                           treatment plant in Hanying county are linked to the Bank supported pipelines. The due diligence
                           review confirmed Chinese land law, Shaanxi provincial land administrative management
                           regulation and local regulation have been followed and the affected villagers received their
                           compensation.
                           Environmental Safeguards
                           Environmental Assessment: The Bank policy OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered and
                           the project has been classified as Category B. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an
                           environmental management plan (EMP) were carried out to determine the key environmental
                           impacts, the mitigation measures and environmental monitoring program and necessary
                           institutional arrangement as well as capacity building development. The documents have been
                           prepared on the basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental protection, master
                           plans and environmental plans as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies and Bank group’s
                           Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines.
                           Through preparation of safeguard documentation, there was no any potential large scale,
                           significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. From proposed components,
                           following benefits are expected: improve key infrastructure, including road network, water supply
                           and increase/improve wastewater collection and drainage systems in the selected project towns.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In the PCN stage ISDS, safeguard policies of OP4.11 Physical Cultural Resources were indicated
                           as TBD. Through the EA process, it was determined that the policy was triggered as there is a
                           Chenghuang Temple (provincial level relics) right next to the proposed road component in
                           Wugong Town where is used as a venue for important events and activities by local residents.
                           Therefore, it is confirmed that OP 4.11is triggered. "Chance-Find" procedure therefore has been
                           proposed in the EMP. And the chance-find procedure and relevant clauses described in the EMP
                           (in the Generic Environmental Codes of Practice) will be included in the bidding documents and
                           contracts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           As designed, the proposed project will improve key infrastructure and public utility facilities in the
                           project areas, including road network, water supply, and increased/improved wastewater collection
                           and drainage systems.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Social: Alternative study was considered at the resettlement action plan, e.g. narrow down partial
                           road alignment and technical options to the project component selections. Comprehensive
                           comparisons were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental
                           and social factors.

                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                           Environmental: Alternatives were considered during the project feasibility study and EIA
                           preparation for more technical details, e.g., technical options, and with and without project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis. Comprehensive comparisons were analyzed with consideration of technical, economic,
                           as well as environmental and social factors.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Social: The provincial PMO contracted experienced social institute to guide the social safeguards
                           documentation and set up resettlement implementation offices in the engaged counties/districts.
                           The relevant agencies to be engaged into the project implementation participated into the project
                           preparation. The staffs from the PMOs and agencies are getting familiar to the Bank requirement,
                           specific to the safeguards requirement.

                          A RAP covering the key resettlement information in project counties/districts was approached.
                          The social consultants worked with the design institute in charge of project feasibility study on the
                          selections of the subproject locations. The analytical works were undertaken and the project
                          negative impacts were minimized, and the mitigation measures were developed according to the
                          Bank requirement.

                          Public consultation was the key element to inform the public and receive their feedbacks. The
                          public consultations were undertaken by the consulting institute and the project entities in the
                          project counties/districts to address the importance of the safeguards policy based on the stages of
                          the project preparation. The project preparation was a well-done process to disseminate the Bank
                          requirement on social safeguards and incorporated people’s concerns into the RAPs and also an
                          important process to provide on-job training courses to the engaged agencies in project counties/
                          districts.

                          An experienced monitoring consulting firm, independent to the PMO and the project agencies, will
Public Disclosure Copy




                          be contracted to monitoring the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed
                          by the Bank twice a year as requested.

                          Environmental:

                          The EA report, prepared by the client and their EA consultants, thoroughly addressed the potential
                          environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate measures in
                          the EMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts. The
                          preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines, as
                          well as Bank’s safeguards policies and environmental health and safety (EHS) guidelines.

                          The major negative environmental impacts are expected short term mainly during project
                          construction phase, including dust, noise, traffic interruption, etc. A stand-alone EMP has been
                          prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP summarized the key environmental
                          impacts and detailed the environmental management and supervision organizations and
                          responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP
                          implementation. It includes sets of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) for contractors,
                          which will be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective
                          implementation.



                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Social: The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and the adjacent areas. The project stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the
                           engaged counties and districts. The affected people considered the project will give them
                           opportunities to have better living environment and develop their businesses.

                           During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
                           were conducted and will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the engaged counties and
                           districts and also the independent monitoring agency, and the project information were
                           disseminated to the displaced families for refining the project design, selections of the subprojects
                           and the locations of the subprojects.

                           The RAP, resettlement policy framework in the engaged counties/districts were disclosed and sent
                           to Infoshop on March 3, 2014.

                           Environmental:

                           Two rounds of public consultations were carried out during the EA process. The technique used
                           for the public consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused group
                           discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some project affected
                           persons. The issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in the EIA and EMP.
                           Furthermore, feedbacks to the concerns and issues collected in public consultation have been
                           provided to the concerned groups and documented in the EA. The EIA and EMP documents and
                           other project related documents have been disclosed locally through various means (e.g., websites,
                           newspapers, etc.), as required by national and Bank's policies. The English language EIA and
                           EMP have been disclosed through Bank’s InfoShop on Feb 27, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  29-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               27-Feb-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                        22-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  29-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               03-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                        28-Feb-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:       Name: Guangming Yan


                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Approved By
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (SM)   Date: 17-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 8 of 8
