                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8352
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Nigeria                            Project ID:    P130840
                            Project Name:     Ibadan Urban Flood Management Project (P130840)
                            Task Team         Sateh Chafic El-Arnaout
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         07-Apr-2014                        Estimated   17-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTU2                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Flood protection (80%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       220.00           Total Bank Financing:  200.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        20.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              200.00
                              Total                                                                                    220.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the capacity of Oyo State to effectively manage
                           flood risk in the city of Ibadan.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component-1: Flood Risk Identification, Prevention and Preparedness Measures (Total Costs US

                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         $43.0 million equivalent, IDA US$43.0 million): The objective of this component is to assess flood
                         risk in the city of Ibadan, plan risk reduction measures, and finance preventive structural and non-
                         structural measures to enhance flood preparedness. This will be achieved through a number of sector-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specific and specialized Master Plan studies, and by designing and establishing an integrated flood
                         early warning and response system. This component consists of the following four sub-components:

                         Sub-Component-1.1: Ibadan's Flood Risk Management Investment Program (Total US$22.0 million
                         equivalent, IDA US$22.0 million equivalent) will finance: (a) the preparation of a flood risk
                         management investment program building on three key city Masterplans namely: (i) Integrated
                         Physical Master Plan, (ii) Solid Waste Management Master Plan, and (iii) Integrated Flood Risk
                         Management Master Plan; (b) carrying out feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs and
                         construction supervision services for works to be carried out under Component 2 of the Project; (c)
                         preparation of emergency preparedness plan for Eleyele dam as well as ESIAs and ESMPs.
                         Sub-Component-1.2: Ibadan’s Long-Term Flood Resilience Strategy (Total US$1.0 million
                         equivalent, IDA US$1.0 million equivalent) will support the preparation of a long-term Flood
                         Resilience Strategy for Oyo State, which will provide detailed recommendations on potential source
                         of investment financing and appropriate tools on the policy, regulatory and institutional reforms
                         required so as to clarify the legal and institutional mandates of the various stakeholders and MDAs
                         with regards to flood risk management in the city of Ibadan.

                         Sub-Component-1.3: Ibadan's Flood Early Warning and Response System: (Total US$7.0 million
                         equivalent, IDA US$7.0 million equivalent) will finance: (i) the design of an Integrated Flood Early
                         Warning and Response System for the city of Ibadan to improve flood forecasting to communities
                         and government for response; (ii) the establishment of a flood forecasting and early warning weather
                         forecast radar system , and software for development of hydraulic and hydrological modeling in
                         strengthening collaboration between the National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) and the
                         Oyo State Emergency Management Agency (OSEMA); and (iii) community based contingency
                         planning and awareness, by organizing training workshops in targeted communities and Community
                         Development Associations (CDAs) living in high risk areas of Ibadan, using the community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         platforms of the Bank-funded Community and Social Development Project (CSDP) in Oyo State.
                         Support from the local media will be sought and will build on the communications strategy
                         developed under project preparation.

                         Sub-Component-1.4: Contingency Component (US$13.0 million equivalent, IDA US$13.0 million
                         equivalent): Following an adverse natural event that causes a major disaster, and after an official
                         declaration of a state of Emergency by either the President of the Republic of Nigeria or the Oyo
                         State Governor, the state government may request the Bank to approve access to project funds under
                         this component to support mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction. This component would
                         draw on the resources to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. Disbursements
                         would be made against a positive list of goods, works, and services that are required to support
                         mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction needs.

                         Component-2: Flood Risk Reduction - (Total costs US$149.0 million equivalent, IDA US$149.0
                         million): The objective of this component is to ensure flood risk mitigation through structural
                         measures by financing public infrastructure investments for flood mitigation and drainage
                         improvements. This component consists of the following two sub-components:

                         Sub-Component-2.1: Priority Infrastructure Improvement Program in “Priority Sites” (Total US$20.9
                         million, IDA US$20.9 million equivalent): This sub-component will finance both critical

                                                                     Page 2 of 10
                         infrastructure improvements in priority secondary and tertiary sub-catchments involving 14 pre-
                         identified priority sites for rehabilitation of drainage culverts, drains, roads, including the necessary
                         works needed to restore the flood damaged Eleyele dam for safety. The “Priority Sites” selection
Public Disclosure Copy




                         criteria include areas in the city of Ibadan where reconstruction would offer a no-regret solution and
                         that presented an opportunity to: (i) reduce localized flood risks; (ii) reconstruct flood-damaged
                         infrastructure and (iii) re-establish or improve community connectivity.

                         Sub-Component-2.2: Long-term Integrated Flood Risk Mitigation Measures (Total US$128.1
                         million, IDA US$128.1 million equivalent): This sub-component will be based on the
                         recommendations of the Integrated Flood Risk Management Master Plan (initiated under Sub-
                         Component-1.1), and will finance the rehabilitation and construction of robust infrastructure in
                         “Targeted Project Sites” (see Appendix 2 table 2.2) that are divided into:

                         (i)      “Critical Socio-Economic Sites” by developing contingency plans and undertaking structural
                         improvements to critical public assets such as hospitals, airport, public buildings, including ensuring
                         access/egress and functionality. Both the nature and the location of the infrastructure works under
                         this sub-component will be guided by the recommendations of the Integrated Flood Risk
                         Management Master Plan and based upon clear technical, environmental, social, economic and
                         financial criteria. Investments under this sub-component will require the prior approval of the World
                         Bank based on joint program formulated by both the Oyo State Government and the respective
                         LGAs.

                         (ii)     “Urban Drainage Sites” are “Targeted Sites ” provided they comply with the criteria for the
                         IUFMP investment decision support filter. These include: (i) strengthening flood resilience of key
                         socio-economic assets within the city of Ibadan; (ii) cost-effectiveness; (iii) alignment with the
                         recommendations of the Ibadan's Physical Masterplan and Ibadan’s Integrated Flood Risk
                         Management Masterplan; (iv) maximizing the level of risk mitigation to human lives and socio-
                         economic economic assets; (v) securing the explicit prior consent of LGAs; (vi) prepared according
                         to the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) with complete cost-benefit analysis, social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental assessments, etc.

                         Component-3: Project Administration and Management Support (Total costs US$28.0 million
                         equivalent, IDA US$8.0 million equivalent) will finance incremental operation costs due to
                         implementation of the project for goods, equipment, staff, travel, and Project Management Unit’s
                         consultant services as described below:

                         Sub-component-3.1: Project Administration (Total US$24.0 million equivalent, IDA US$4.0 million
                         equivalent) will finance the procurement of office supplies and furniture, ICT equipment, transport
                         vehicles for the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), and procuring a comprehensive set of Project
                         maps (geospatial, soil, topography, etc.); (ii) office running costs (PIU staff salaries, office rent,
                         electricity, water, internet, telephone, fuel, stationary, ICT items, etc.); (iii) the hiring of external
                         Financial and Technical Audits which will monitor the project execution periodically and reporting
                         directly to PIU/Steering Committee; (iv) PIU yearly allowances paid from the counterpart funding,
                         and Fiduciary and Safeguard Training including hiring of External Auditors (at End of Project Year 2
                         and 4 and End of Project); and (v) preparation and implementation of ARAPs and RAPs.

                         Sub-component-3.2: Project Management Support (Total US$4.0 million equivalent IDA US$4.0
                         million equivalent): This subcomponent will finance the procurement of Project Management
                         Consultancy for a period of four years (US$4.0 million equivalent). The scope of this activity

                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         involves supporting the PIU in project management activities and providing technical support for
                         project implementation and advising the PIU on fiduciary and safeguards related matters.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located in Ibadan, Oyo state in South west Nigeria. Specific locations and
                         investments are not known in sufficient details, hence salient physical characteristics relevant to the
                         safeguards analysis will be assessed in more detail once the locations are identified.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Knut Opsal (AFTCS)
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Joseph Ese Akpokodje (AFTN1)
                         Michael Gboyega Ilesanmi (AFTCS)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will involve the rehabilitation,
                          BP 4.01                                             reconstruction of vital physical infrastructure
                                                                              assets such as damaged roads, bridges, storm
                                                                              water networks, public water supply, drainage
                                                                              systems, river banks/embankments, damaged
                                                                              spillway and stilling basin to improve dam safety,
                                                                              removing vegetation to exposed concrete
                                                                              surfaces, making access, and installation of safety
                                                                              monitoring equipment in main dam body, such as
                                                                              piezometers, seepage gauges, settlement gauge,
                                                                              and water level gauges;. Due to the anticipated
                                                                              potential environmental and social impacts that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              may result from the implementation of the above
                                                                              project activities, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered.
                                                                              However, the exact locations and the full set of
                                                                              schemes in which the project will be intervening
                                                                              are not known in sufficient details at the time of
                                                                              project preparation.The client has prepared an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF), which has been reviewed
                                                                              and found acceptable to the Bank. In addition, the
                                                                              approved ESMF has been publicly disclosed
                                                                              countrywide in Nigeria and at the World Bank
                                                                              InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         Yes             The rehabilitation and operation of dam and
                                                                              drainage systems could affect downstream rivers,
                                                                              floodplains, wetlands and other fragile ecological
                                                                              systems thereby triggering OP4.04. The project
                                                                              will also include interventions in upstream
                                                                              catchments. The ESMF and subsequent sub-
                                                                              project ESIAs/ESMPs will contain sections



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                                                                         detailing the mitigation measures for eliminating
                                                                         or minimizing potential sub-project activities
                                                                         impacts on the natural habitat of the catchment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         area of the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The project will not finance the development of
                                                                         forests and therefore will not envision any
                                                                         significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                         forest areas. The area in which this project would
                                                                         be implemented will not have impacts on the
                                                                         health and quality of forests or the rights and
                                                                         welfare of people and their level of dependence
                                                                         upon or interaction with forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            The project will not raise potential pest
                                                                         management issues or finance the development
                                                                         the procurement of pesticides, pesticide
                                                                         application equipment or the use of pest
                                                                         management practices.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The project will carry out earthworks that may
                         BP 4.11                                         impact on some physical cultural resources along
                                                                         the river drainages system. To mitigate this risk,
                                                                         specific procedures (such as chance find
                                                                         procedures) will be included in the ESMF and
                                                                         subsequent ESIAs as required.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no indigenous peoples in the project
                                                                         area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           The project interventions will avoid where
                         4.12                                            possible adverse impacts on people, land and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         other economic resources and livelihoods. In
                                                                         situations where this cannot be avoided, the
                                                                         borrower will, based upon the principles and
                                                                         objectives spelt out in the Resettlement Policy
                                                                         Framework (RPF), prepare site specific
                                                                         Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to address the
                                                                         needs of persons who will be affected by loss of
                                                                         economic activities, land acquisition and/or
                                                                         relocation. The preparation of these safeguards
                                                                         documents will be inclusive and participatory,
                                                                         promoting community ownership and social
                                                                         accountability. The RPF has been prepared
                                                                         consulted upon and disclosed. RAPs will be
                                                                         prepared, consulted upon, cleared and disclosed
                                                                         during project implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes           The project will not be directly involved in the
                                                                         construction of new dams. However, component
                                                                         2 may include rehabilitation of damaged spillway
                                                                         and stilling basin to improve dam safety. A



                                                                 Page 5 of 10
                                                                                 framework for addressing dam safety has been
                                                                                 prepared.
                            Projects on International            No              The project will not trigger this policy because
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 the rivers Ona, Ogbere and Ogunpa in which this
                                                                                 project is involved are not trans boundary.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  N/A
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is categorized A because of the potential adverse environmental and social impacts of
                              the civil works activities related to rehabilitation of priority infrastructure; undertaking structural
                              improvements for critical public assets such as hospitals, airport, public buildings; and
                              rehabilitation of the damaged spillway and stilling basin to improve dam safety, major
                              rehabilitation of bridges and CDC, cleaning of river channels on main three rivers, and restoring or
                              establishing natural flood retention ponds may have significant adverse impacts that are sensitive,
                              diverse, cumulative, irreversible or unprecedented. Five safeguard policies are triggered:
                              Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12), Natural Habitats (OP/
                              BP 4.04), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), and Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37).

                               The flood management interventions will take into account the existing settlements and be
                              designed/selected in order to minimize the resettlement of inhabitants, mainly those people living
                              in vulnerable communities and residents of newly rehabilitated and reconstructed infrastructure
                              will be direct beneficiaries of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The environmental and social impacts associated with rehabilitation and restoration of drains,
                              bridges and culverts on critical secondary and tertiary sub-catchment areas across the city of
                              Ibadan; undertaking flood plain management activities and structural improvements of critical
                              public assets such as hospitals, public buildings are expected to have site-specific and moderate
                              impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No long term or cumulative negative environmental and social impacts of sub-projects are
                              envisaged. However, the combination of multiple impacts from existing projects, the proposed
                              project, and/or anticipated future projects may result in significant negative and/or positive
                              environmental and social impacts that would not be expected in case of a standalone project.

                              The cumulative impacts of the floods infrastructures may potentially affect other areas of the city
                              but the mitigation measure for this risk is that in depth technical and spatial analysis will be
                              conducted to model the impact of the proposed interventions and thus limit the risks.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              In the ESMF sections on “Analysis of Alternatives” concluded that the “do nothing” scenario
                              would worsen the present situation in the proposed government infrastructure.


                                                                         Page 6 of 10
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Two instruments have been prepared: (i) An Environmental Management Framework (ESMF )
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and a (ii) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)

                          (a) Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01): Safeguards policy OP 4.01 is triggered, in
                          component 2 and since the exact locations and impacts of the sub-projects have not been
                          identified; an ESMF is prepared. The ESMF ensures that the principles and procedures for the
                          development of in-country capacity and compliance with local regulations are established and it
                          serves as the basis for environmental assessment of all sub-projects to be carried out under the
                          IUFMP. The ESMF also provides guidance for preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs, and environmental
                          audits. It includes a screening process that is consistent with both World Bank operational policies
                          and Nigeria Environmental regulations, and a chapter on project processing that describes the
                          responsibilities

                          Most of the sub-projects in the IUFMP are not expected to result in major losses or acquisition of
                          land or in restrictions to sources of livelihoods. However, given the possibility that some of the
                          sub-projects may involve land acquisition and involuntary resettlement, an RPF has also been
                          prepared.

                          (b) Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12): This policy is trigged because most of the sub-projects
                          could involve land acquisition and or restriction of access to usual means of livelihood as most of
                          the sub-projects will largely be rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. However, some of the
                          projects may involve significant land acquisition and displacement of affected people. As part of
                          the safeguards due diligence, an RPF was prepared. The RPF outlines the resettlement process in
                          terms of procedures for preparing and approving Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs); likely
                          categories of affected people, eligibility criteria and categories, compensations rates, methods of
                          valuing affected assets, community participation and information dissemination, Grievance
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Redress Mechanism and effective monitoring .

                          (c)Natural Habitats (OP/PB 4.04) is triggered because some project activities may take place near
                          to critical natural habitats (forests, wetlands, mangroves, etc.) or environmentally sensitive areas
                          and some mitigation measures may be necessary to minimize any adverse environmental and
                          social impacts. The project is not being implemented in any area with critical natural habitats, nor
                          does it involve the significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats.

                          (d) Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) is triggered because some activities in components
                          2 may include civil works that could expose chance finds. These chance find sites may include
                          sacred shrines and burial sites. The environmental and Social Screening Checklist and the Generic
                          Environmental and Social Mitigation Measures Checklist that are annexed to the ESMF will
                          address the Physical Cultural Resource (PCR), and the ESMF includes provisions for addressing
                          such cultural heritage chance finds.

                          Consultation Process: Stakeholders consultation were carried out during project preparation,
                          however, additional consultations and a more detailed social assessment will be carried out as
                          needed in the course of the selection of specific project sites.

                          These safeguards instruments (ESMF and RPF) were both prepared by the Borrower according to


                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                           National and World Bank policies and were disclosed in-country in Nigeria and in the World
                           Bank’s InfoShop on January 24th, 2014.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are the Oyo state ministries of Environment and Habitat; Water Resources;
                           Urban Development and Physical Planning; Works; Emergency management Agency; the 11
                           LGAs; local communities, NGOs and other relevant institutions.

                           All the relevant stakeholders have been adequately informed of the project. The key concern raised
                           during the consultation include Land degradation & land use; Water pollution and drainage
                           systems; Solid management; Waste Water Management; Floods; man induced issues; Labour and
                           socio-economic issues; Public Health (Especially HIV/AIDs; Water-borne diseases & Choleras;
                           STIs; Malaria; etc).

                           Public consultation will be an on-going activity taking place throughout the entire project process.
                           Public participation and consultation would take place through meetings, radio programs, requests
                           for written proposals/comments, filling in of questionnaires, explanations of project to the locals,
                           making public documents available at the state and local levels. At the local level, suitable
                           locations will include the residents at the flood risk areas. These measures would take into account
                           the low literacy levels prevalent in these rural communities by allowing enough time for responses
                           and feedback.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      22-May-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          22-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nigeria                                                          22-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Sateh Chafic El-Arnaout
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                  Date: 09-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (SM)                   Date: 13-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
