                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6394

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mali                            Project ID:     P145861
                            Project Name:      Skills Development and Youth Employment Project (P145861)
                            Task Team          Emanuela Di Gropello
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Mar-2014                     Estimated       28-Aug-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTEW                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Adult literacy/non-formal education (25%), Vocational training (25%), SME
                                               Finance (50%)
                            Theme(s):          Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (50%), Education for the
                                               knowledge economy (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                    Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
                              Total                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           With the overarching objective of supporting youth employability in Mali, the development objective
                           of the proposed project is to support skills for employability and job opportunities for youth in
                           priority sectors.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will support a two pronged strategy to promote jobs/employment creation and
                         develop skills for Malian youth. Job creation interventions will target the private sector through
                         support to entrepreneurship and key measures to promote the development and job creation potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of SMEs and micro-enterprises. Skills development interventions will focus on both the formal and
                         informal education and training sector, with emphasis on supporting more relevant and efficient
                         technical tracks from upper secondary to tertiary education, revamping the apprenticeship program
                         and creating new and more relevant opportunities of short term skills development for youth. To
                         maximize impact while avoiding spreading too thinly support will be focused on two or three
                         economic sectors and value-chains. Potential sectors are: agriculture and livestock (including all
                         steps from initial production to processing and sales), building and public works, mining and
                         auxiliary services, and small-scale craft industry (artisanat). Key sub-sectors in agriculture and
                         livestock are fruits and vegetables and the production and processing of animal products (including
                         meat, milk and skin derived products); in building and public works all occupations related to
                         building construction and maintenance and larger public works; in mining all core mining
                         occupations as well as occupations needed in upstream and downstream support services; and in the
                         crafts industry all sectors of activity at the cottage industry level. Sector diagnostics have confirmed
                         that these are sectors with the potential to create over 400,000 jobs distributed in the whole country
                         in the short to longer-term if the right skills and incentives to create jobs are in place.

                         The project will be divided into three components.

                         Component I: Education and Training for Employability

                         Sub-component I.1: Strengthening technical and vocational education and training

                         This sub-component will improve skills for employability by supporting more effective and efficient
                         technical and vocational education. With less than 10% of students enrolled in technical and
                         vocational streams, and the higher potential for employability but also important challenges of this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         education and training track, the sub-component will support a higher quality and more demand-
                         driven cost-effective technical and vocational education to improve youth employability. The target
                         group will be the 15 to 29 years old in school youth enrolled in public and private technical and
                         vocational institutions at secondary and tertiary level in the whole country.

                         The project will support the development and application of the competency based approach; a
                         partnership framework with the productive sector and performance framework with public and
                         private providers; the design of entrepreneurship modules to be integrated within the formal
                         curriculum; school to work transition mechanisms; and the training of trainers, all in the secondary
                         and tertiary technical and vocational tracks covering the four or five key sectors identified above. A
                         key aim is to develop a partnership model with the productive sector which can lead to dual-training
                         in several institutions, while involving the productive sector in key steps of TVET delivery from
                         curriculum design, to participating in the teaching process through sharing practitioners and in the
                         management of the institution and skills certification, following the example of successful TVET
                         systems in the world.

                         In terms of specific institutions, the project will support the implementation of the above mentioned
                         transversal activities in a limited sample of both public and private institutions. This would require
                         some classroom rehabilitation as needed, equipment, teacher training, and capacity building to apply
                         the competency based and public-private partnership approach. Both public and private institutions
                         would be held accountable to the government for their results through performance contracts, whose
                         implementation would therefore also require some support. Given their rather limited number, public
                         institutions would be pre-selected with priority given to the support of institutions with potential to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         become national or regional poles in one of the key priority sectors/value-chains, possibly in an
                         integrated fashion – from CAP to DUT and covering all key sector related occupations. On the other
                         hand, private institutions would be selected competitively. Overall, while the private sector has
                         strong potential, including being more efficient, more attuned to local labor market needs and
                         accountable to parents than the public sector, the complementarity between the public and private
                         sector has not worked well, with a private sector stifled of resources specializing in low cost low
                         relevance tertiary sector fields and used as a low quality “demand-absorbing” sector. To address this
                         issue the project will provide matching grants to competitively selected private institutions to deliver
                         technical and vocational programs in the key identified sectors/value-chains. It is expected that
                         private institutions would be led to specialize in the high demand fields under provided by the public
                         sector, becoming more relevant and diversified, while being spurred to become higher quality
                         through performance contracts.

                         Initial implementation arrangements: While specific implementation arrangements are still under
                         discussion, this sub-component would be implemented through the Project Implementation Unit
                         (PIU) in close coordination with the Ministry of Education through the Direction Nationale de
                         l’Enseignement Technique et Professionnel and Ministry of Tertiary Education through the Direction
                         Nationale de l’Enseignement Superieur. Options of managing the competitive funding for private
                         sector institutions through FAFPA are also being explored. Procurement and financial flows would
                         be overall managed by the PIU on the basis of yearly work programs prepared by the above
                         mentioned Technical Departments and approved by the project Steering Committee.

                         Sub-component I.2: Strengthening skills development for out of school youth

                         This sub-component will improve skills for employability by supporting skills development for out
                         of school youth. The project will support a scaling-up of the dual-apprenticeship program and a fully
Public Disclosure Copy




                         revamped decentralized training program.

                         Dual-apprenticeship program:
                         Dual apprenticeship programs combining formal training to confer cognitive and technical skills
                         (1/3 of the time) and apprenticeship (accounting for 2/3 of the time) spent in a formal or informal
                         organization have been shown to be an effective and high impact form of apprenticeship . A recent
                         evaluation of the SwissContact program, which closed in 2011 and which from 2005 to 2009
                         benefited about 8,000 youth, showed a placement rate of 95% of the apprentices in the labor market.

                         Building on the lessons of the first phase supported by SwissContact, the project will support an
                         expansion of the program, while also upgrading it by: (a) opening it up to the non-craft industry
                         sector, including enterprises from the formal sector, and to inactive, unemployed and under-
                         employed youth (youth already employed in a craft industry will not be eligible anymore); (b)
                         strengthening technical and numeracy and literacy skills of the master apprentices, as well as limited
                         additional equipment if needed; (c) improving youth skills certification and placement (suivi)
                         mechanisms; (d) adding entrepreneurship training at the end of the program to further enhance the
                         potential for job creation; and (e) providing institutional strengthening of the professional
                         associations involved, while supporting the further decentralization of the program and an improved
                         legal framework . Apprenticeships, whose average time would need to be determined but would
                         likely vary by occupation, would include, as in the first phase, 80% of time in the workplace and
                         20% of time in training at a public or private training center. The project would largely support the
                         training in the centers, as well as the TA, capacity building and training needed to upgrade the
                         program along the above directions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Youth non formal skills training program:
                         The international evidence on the effectiveness of informal education and training is mixed. Some of
                         the key factors of success coming out from rigorous reviews and impact evaluations of programs in
                         Africa, Latina America and elsewhere appear to be the: flexibility in the delivery mode (using
                         varying types of providers, including community centers and local practitioners) to reach out broadly
                         but also recognizing that work is a part of youth lives in many regions; decentralized management of
                         the program with strong community involvement combined with central support ; use of local
                         facilitators responsible for community mobilization, coordination, program monitoring; combination
                         of technical with literacy, numeracy and life skills; and interventions to facilitate transition to work,
                         with focus on entrepreneurship training and provision of seed money to start an activity, because non
                         formal training programs must consider that most youth will be self-employed or work for a small,
                         informal en terprise.

                         The project will support a decentralized non formal vocational education and training program for
                         out of school youth , with features that allows it to reach the most vulnerable out of school youth in
                         both urban and rural areas and post-conflict areas, while satisfying local demand for skills. The
                         program would also reach out to the rural and hard to reach areas by providing training in a very
                         flexible way to reflect local conditions and needs in terms of length, on-the-job/in-class education
                         and training mix, delivery mode, and priority sub-sectors/occupations. To take into account the local
                         dimension, the program would be managed in a decentralized way through the regional assemblies
                         (Conseils Regionaux) in coordination with local community associations and with the technical
                         support of the MFPE central and deconcentrated offices. Depending on local conditions and sub-
                         sectors, three main types of delivery modes could be envisaged: (a) the few ministries’ public
                         training centers and private training centers (selected competitively); (b) NGOs, and community
                         organizations/centers; and (c) the workplace/local practitioner. Facilitators would be hired and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         trained to help with the implementation of options (b) and (c). The training part would follow as
                         much as possible a competency based approach, whose completion in the four or five key priority
                         sectors will be supported by the project, with programs’ teaching schedules flexible to accommodate
                         local needs. All programs would include core literacy and numeracy and some entrepreneurship
                         training provided according to modules also developed through the project, which could be combined
                         with start-up kits, and lead to skills certification.

                         Initial implementation arrangements: The dual-apprenticeship program would be implemented by
                         FAFPA as lead public organization for the funding and implementation of apprenticeships and short
                         term in-service training programs in Mali, in partnership with the Federation of Craftsmen
                         (Federation des Artisans du Mali, FNAM), other industrial associations, and training providers called
                         upon to deliver complementary training modules. FAFPA would be strengthened under Component
                         III. The non-formal skills training program would be implemented largely through the PIU by the
                         Direction Nationale de la Formation Professionnelle (DNFP) of the MFPE and its deconcentrated
                         agencies, and the Regional Assemblies. The specific roles and responsibilities of each of these bodies
                         would need to be defined based on an institutional and fiduciary assessment. All bodies would
                         receive institutional strengthening under Component III. As needed, program agreements/contracts
                         would be signed between private sector institutions and NGOs and the Regional Assemblies (or the
                         deconcentrated agencies of the DNFP) to deliver the training programs.
                         Component II: Jobs for Youth

                         Component II will aim to support the establishment of conditions for jobs creation for young people
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through self - employment but also through the recovery and development of micro-enterprises and
                         SMEs. This will require close collaboration between private sector organizations and public agencies
                         in charge of investment promotion. The project will be anchored on the Government’s Private Sector
                         Development vision, and will complement ongoing initiatives (e.g. IDA’s own PCDA and the
                         PACEPEP program funded by the Embassy of Denmark). The design of the component will
                         consider successful experiences developed in other countries, which could be useful to the Mali’s
                         case (e.g. Nigeria YouWin and Côte d'Ivoire Technoserve programs).

                         Sub -component II.1: Entrepreneurship for the Youth

                         This sub-component will support the employability of youth through entrepreneurship development.
                         Most youth are likely to be self-employed in Mali making it imperative to address the key constraints
                         to self-employment in a comprehensive way. While component I will support the development of
                         some entrepreneurship skills in formal and informal education and training, this sub-component will
                         bring the support much further by accompanying young would-be entrepreneurs all the way from
                         initial conception of the project to its launch through a business plan competition, coaching and seed
                         funds. The sub-component will target young Malians, 15-25 (or 29) years, educated or not, whether
                         they are in school, or dropped out of school.

                         More specifically, the sub-component will support the creation of new MSMEs through the
                         organization of a business plan competition to identify and nurture young talent, and by providing
                         training and coaching, and start-up funds to launch projects in high potential sectors (agriculture,
                         livestock, construction and public works, services such as ITC, health, etc.). The private sector will
                         be closely involved in the management of this program. The specific design of the sub-component
                         will build on the lessons of African and international cases relevant to the case of Mali.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Initial implementation arrangements: The specific implementation arrangements of this sub-
                         component still have to be worked out. It is envisaged that, under the broader coordination of the
                         Government, the sub-component will be outsourced to a private entity still to be defined.

                         Sub -component II.2 : Support to Enterprises

                         The project will support enterprises in targeted sectors through the following instruments:

                         (a)     Matching grants to help high potential local SMEs (e.g. rice importers in Office du Niger,
                         small and medium size mango and papaya producers in Sikasso) improve their productivity,
                         production processes, processing and/or marketing, by facilitating their access to finance, value chain
                         development and just in time specific skills, and developing partnerships with good practice
                         investors. The matching grant will be designed building on international experience with regard to
                         management and targeting, focusing on priority sectors/value chains and including effective M&E
                         frameworks and impact evaluation mechanisms. They will finance TA and equipment.

                         (b)     Technical assistance to selected banks to help them provide medium term finance to
                         successful SMEs (targeting priority value-chains) in close collaboration with IFC.

                         (c)     Support to the establishment of the investment and guarantee funds being created by the
                           government that would provide long term financing to SMEs in selected value-chains (along the line
                           of matching grants).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project will also leverage IFC’s strategic directions and operations so as to strengthen impact
                           and delivery effectiveness, with a particular focus on value-chain financing instruments.

                           Initial implementation arrangements: The specific implementation arrangements of this sub-
                           component also still have to be worked out. As for sub-component II.1, it is envisaged that this sub-
                           component will be outsourced to a private entity still to be determined (under the general
                           coordination of the Government). The involvement of local authorities (Regional Councils) at an
                           early stage may also be considered through a decentralization of the intervention, which may have
                           the advantage of retaining young people and support them in their cities.

                           Component III: Institutional Strengthening and Pro ject Management

                           This component would support: (a) a more coherent skills certification and employment promotion
                           framework and effective data collection and processing on employment for the country, including
                           capacity building for a more effective labor market observatory; (b) a more effective communication
                           and multi-sector consultation framework; (c) the institutional strengthening of the technical
                           departments and agencies in charge of the implementation of Components I and II; (d) technical
                           support to national organizations in charge of the private sector promotion such as API Mali, CNPM,
                           and OPI, chamber of commerce, Club des InvestisseursFrancais, REAO; and (e) project management
                           activities, including capacity building, fiduciary processes and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) at
                           PIU level.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Although the project will start in a limited number of regions to test these new innovative
                           experiences for Mali, it may be extended to the whole country.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be put in place and a staff will have the responsibility to
                           prepare the ESMP (and if necessary the RPF) when the sites are identified and monitor it. However,
                           since the PIU hasn't been set up yet, it is impossible to assess the institutional capacity for safeguards
                           policy.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Salamata Bal (AFTCS)
                           Maman-Sani Issa (AFTN2)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Under Component I, the project will finance the
                           BP 4.01                                                rehabilitation of classrooms in existing schools
                                                                                  (within existing school premises). Most schools
                                                                                  will be identified during implementation. Since
                                                                                  these will be simple civil works, simple ESMPs
                                                                                  based on the scope of activities will be prepared
                                                                                                                                 during implementation when all sites are
                                                                                                                                 identified. These ESMPs will be reviewed by
                                                                                                                                 the World Bank safeguards specialist during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 implementation. In addition, under Component
                                                                                                                                 II, it is envisaged that the project will finance
                                                                                                                                 matching grants. An ESMF will be prepared in
                                                                                                                                 order to mitigate the unlikely risk that the
                                                                                                                                 activities financed by the matching grants (TA
                                                                                                                                 and equipment) may have a negative social or
                                                                                                                                 environmental impact. The ESMSF would be
                                                                                                                                 approved and disclosed (in country and through
                                                                                                                                 the World Bank Infoshop).
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No                            The project will not finance any activities close
                                                                                                                                 to protected natural habitats, or that could lead
                                                                                                                                 to significant conversion of natural habitats.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No                            The project will not have impacts on the health
                                                                                                                                 and quality of forests; or affect the rights and
                                                                                                                                 welfare of people who depend upon forests. The
                                                                                                                                 project does not aim to bring about changes in
                                                                                                                                 the management, protection, or utilization of
                                                                                                                                 natural forests or plantations.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No                            The project may finance fertilizers but will not
                                                                                                                                 finance agricultural entrants such as pesticides
                                                                                                                                 (negative lists will be prepared).
                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No                            The project will not affect physical cultural
                                 BP 4.11                                                                                         resources.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            There are no indigenous people in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    TBD                           The project is unlikely to involve involuntary
                                 4.12                                                                                            resettlement and land acquisition, but this will
                                                                                                                                 be confirmed during project preparation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not operate close to any dam.

                                 Projects on International        No                                                             The project will not affect international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project will not intervene in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 06-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared and disclosed if
                                      possible prior to negotiations (tentatively scheduled for July 2014). If a Resettlement Policy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Framework is necessary, it will be prepared and disclosed during the first year of implementation.
                             Mali being a fragile state, there is no requirement of disclosure prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Emanuela Di Gropello

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                          Date: 05-May-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Kaliope Azzi-Huck (SM)                             Date: 05-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
