                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC5838

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Myanmar                           Project ID:       P146482
                            Project Name:       Ayeyarwady Integrated River Basin Management Project (P146482)
                            Task Team           Julia M. Fraser
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           01-Jul-2014                       Estimated         11-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      EASTS                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Flood protection
                                                (25%), Ports, waterways and shipping (25%), Public adm inistration- Water,
                                                sanitation and flood protection (10%)
                            Theme(s):           Water resource management (60%), Natural disaster management (20%),
                                                Environmental policies and institutions (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    100.00                       Total Bank Financing:         100.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     100.00
                              Total                                                                           100.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The objective of the program (the Series of Projects) will be to strengthen integrated, climate resilient
                           management and development of the Ayeyarwady River Basin and national water resources.

                           The objective of this first phase project is to develop the institutions and tools needed to implement
                         integrated river basin management, and deliver related livelihoods benefits from enhanced navigation
                         and hydromet warning and advisory services.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A multi-phased approach (Series of Projects) is proposed that will focus, in the first phase, on
                         developing the institutions and tools needed to enable informed decision making and implement
                         integrated river basin management on the Ayeyarwady, while immediately enhancing the river’s
                         productivity with “no/low regrets” investments in the hydro-meteorological observation system and
                         services (to support agricultural productivity and water-related disaster risk management) and in
                         navigation enhancements (to promote transport) on the Ayeyarwady. The project design includes
                         three inter-related investment components.

                         Component 1: Water Resource Management Institutions, Decision Support Systems & Capacity
                         Building

                         1.1     Institutional Development

                         This sub-component will help to (a) establish and deliver the mandates of the newly created NWRC
                         Secretariat, Hydro-Informatics Center and Expert Group, (b) undertake institutional, legal and
                         regulatory reviews and reform, (c) create a stakeholder forum and promote communications and
                         outreach, and (d) support capacity building.

                         1.2     Ayeyarwady Integrated River Basin Planning Framework

                         This sub-component will provide immediate guidance on investment options while also developing
                         the tools and processes needed to ensure the government has ongoing capacity to plan and manage its
                         water resources. The sub-component will include (i) strategic basin-wide analyses (i.e., groundwater
                         and sediment) to ensure adequate information is available on key river basin resources, constraints
                         and dynamics, (ii) development of a set of analytic tools to support decision making, (iii) a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consultative process to ensure that the planning exercise leverages knowledge in the stakeholder
                         community and responds to stakeholders concerns, and (iv) an integrated river basin master planning
                         framework report that will include inter alia a strategic environmental and social assessment, and
                         deliver analysis and recommendations on a range of investment scenarios (proposed investments
                         would still require detailed project level environmental and social assessments) as well as proposed
                         institutional arrangements for ongoing basin planning and management in Myanmar. The sub-
                         component will also include resources to prepare potential investments for financing under a second
                         phase of the program.

                         Component 2. Hydromet Observation and Information Systems Modernization

                         2.1 Institutional and regulatory strengthening, capacity building and implementation support of
                         DMH

                         To design and operate a modernized hydromet system and deliver high quality services to users, the
                         Department of Meteorology and Hydrology (DMH) will require technical assistance in systems
                         design and integration, institutional development, capacity building and training.

                         2.2     Modernization of the Observation Infrastructure, Data Management Systems and Forecasting
                         The number of observation stations in Myanmar is significantly below WMO recommendations for
                         all types of observations, and observation systems, communications, forecasting capabilities and data
                         management systems are in general rudimentary, unreliable and fragmented. These systems will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         expanded and upgraded, and a sustainable water quality monitoring system will be designed and
                         piloted.

                         2.3     Enhancement of the Service Delivery System of DMH

                         Traditionally, departments of meteorology and hydrology have focused on data gathering rather than
                         delivering information services to users. This sub-component will support DMH in strengthening its
                         service orientation in order to ensure the benefits of the project’s investment are realized across the
                         range of stakeholders. This will likely include (a) introduction of a Public Weather and Hydrological
                         Service, (b) support for DRM operations including expansion of "end-to-end" early warning systems,
                         (c) improvement of service delivery to communities including introduction of mobile applications,
                         and
                         (d) the creation of the National Framework of Climate Services.

                         Component 3. Navigation Enhancement on the Ayeyarwady River

                         3.1     Navigation Aids

                         Existing navigation aids are rudimentary and useful only for daytime navigation. Providing modern
                         navigation aids and night navigation aids on the Ayeyarwady River from Mandalay to Yangon will
                         enhance safety and facilitate both inland water transport and river tourism. This sub-component will
                         include design and installation of navigation aids as well as related training, communications and
                         awareness raising.

                         3.2     Channel Improvements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Channel improvements will be undertaken to ensure transport safety and efficiency along the busiest
                         stretch of the Ayeyarwady system which lies between Mandalay and Nyaung-U. The present draught
                         restriction during the dry seasons is just 1.5 meters. Draught improvements will allow vessels to pass
                         and to be loaded more heavily during dry seasons, increasing the efficiency of passenger and cargo
                         transport.

                         3.3     Ayeyarwady River Navigation Strategy

                         To explore the potential for appropriate river training works from Mandalay to Yangon, a channel
                         design study will be undertaken. The study will model the morphology and sediment transport and
                         address environmental and social implications.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located primarily within the Ayeyarwady River Basin. The basin is home to an
                         extraordinary range of ecosystems, and flora and fauna, including the charismatic and endangered
                         species such as elephants, tigers, leopards, sea turtles, crocodiles, waterfowl and migratory birds, and
                         the Irrawaddy dolphins. It is also home to diverse groups of ethnic minorities who are dependent on
                         the river for livelihoods and subsistence.
                           The Ayeyarwady River is an international river shared between China, India and Myanmar. It is fed
                           by two tributaries, the Daying and the Jiang, both originating from China, with the latter tributary fed
                           by a sub-tributary originating within India. The river bisects Myanmar from north to south, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           empties through a nine-armed delta into the Bay of Bengal. Over 90% of the basin land area and
                           population are located within Myanmar. While the Ayeyarwady tributaries host a number of
                           multipurpose dams, the mainstream has no significant structures on it.

                           The project impact area is expected to encompass the Ayeyarwady Basin where water resources
                           management will be strengthened. Works that will be carried out to modernize Myanmar’s hydromet
                           observation and information systems (Component 2) are expected to be confined to improvements of
                           existing stations and facilities. Civil works to enhance the channel capacity of the Ayeyarwady
                           (Component 3) are expected to be confined to the river bed.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           None of the implementing agencies have experience with the WBG safeguard policies and
                           procedures, nor do they appear to have the capacity to implement and monitor them. In order to
                           appropriately address the capacity challenges, a capacity assessment of the existing structure and
                           systems will be carried out during project preparation. If needed, consultants will be hired under the
                           project to support the implementation and monitoring of safeguard policies and procedures.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (EASTS)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (EASER)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (EASTS)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project supports a diverse set of activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01                                               related to sustainable environmental
                                                                                 management in Myanmar, including building a
                                                                                 water resources information management
                                                                                 system, strengthening the collection and
                                                                                 analysis of hydro-meteorological data,
                                                                                 designing and piloting a water quality
                                                                                 monitoring system, building institutional
                                                                                 capacity for water resources management,
                                                                                 undertaking strategic studies and planning, and
                                                                                 strengthening project management and
                                                                                 emergency response.

                                                                                 The project will also support the establishment
                                                                                 of a Decisions Support System to provide the
                                                                                 newly formed National Water Resources
                                                                                 Committee with the information needed to
                                                                                 better assess the complex impacts (including
                                                                                 environment and social aspects) and tradeoffs of
                                                                                 proposed developments on the Ayeyarwady
                         River.

                         The project may support the preparation of (pre)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         feasibility studies for investments that could be
                         financed in future phases of the proposed series
                         of projects. These potential future investments
                         (i.e., in irrigation, hydropower, navigation, delta
                         management, municipal water supply or
                         wastewater management systems) could have
                         adverse environmental and social impacts. The
                         Terms of References (TORs) of these studies
                         will require consideration of environmental and
                         social safeguards provisions in line with
                         relevant World Bank operational policies. In
                         case the river basin planning process identifies
                         priority investments for which feasibility studies
                         and/or designs will be supported by the project,
                         ESIAs will also be prepared for such
                         investments according to the ESMF.

                         River channel enhancement works are planned
                         under the project to increase the 'least available
                         depth' of the river during the low flow season;
                         currently only small or lightly loaded vessels are
                         able to pass through several sections of the
                         busiest stretch of the Ayeyarwady (from
                         Mandalay to Nyaung Oo) during the low flow
                         season. The work is likely to involve the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         construction of small groins within the riverbed
                         that will serve to concentrate the dry season
                         flow into a narrower and hence deeper section
                         of the river bed in order to facilitate safe ship
                         passage. The impact from the construction is
                         thus expected to be confined to the river bed.
                         Access to the river and patterns of seasonal
                         flooding should not be affected. Unexploded
                         ordinance (UXO) clearance works are not
                         expected, however, if required they will be
                         implemented in line with specific international
                         standards of operations. During
                         implementation, before channel enhancements
                         begin, a final feasibility design and ESIA will
                         be carried out (see activity 3.2).

                         The Project is proposed as category A for
                         Environmental Assessment due to its spatial
                         extent, its focus on river basin planning and
                         civil works to be carried out under Components
                         2 and 3. To enhance the project benefits and to
                         address the potential environment and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts, the following measures will be taken:

                         1. During project preparation, the government
                         will develop an Environment and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF) including an
                         Environmental Management Plan Framework
                         that will guide the screening and assessment of
                         environment and social impacts of various
                         activities including the feasibility studies of
                         priority investments (Component 1), the
                         upgrading of hydromet stations (Component 2),
                         and the channel enhancement works
                         (Component 3). Also, an SA will be developed
                         as part of project preparation to identify and
                         explain both potential positive and negative
                         impacts of the project and to provide input into
                         the project design.

                         The ESMF will specify the type, level and depth
                         of environmental and social impact assessments
                         (ESIAs or EMPs) required for each of the
                         project activities based on the results of the
                         screening and the relevant impacts. The ESMF
                         and the SA will meet the Bank’s requirements
                         for public consultation (minimum two meetings)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and disclosure before project appraisal in
                         country in local language and through the
                         InfoShop in English.

                         2. During implementation, the TORs for
                         proposed investments will include detailed
                         guidelines for ESIAs/EMPs preparation to
                         ensure safeguard issues and measures are
                         mainstreamed into the activity design. In
                         addition, any future investment projects
                         identified during the course of the basin
                         planning framework exercises (Component 1)
                         will also integrate ESIA and relevant safeguards
                         tools into their designs and TORs. All TORs
                         will be shared with the Regional Safeguards
                         Secretariat for review and inputs to ensure
                         timely and efficient advice that is consistent
                         with the Bank’s safeguard policies.
                                                                 3. Also during implementation, a Strategic
                                                                 Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA)
                                                                 will be prepared to support the development of a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 long-term basin-wide perspective and
                                                                 institutional assessment. The ToRs for this
                                                                 SESA will include environmental and social
                                                                 safeguard provisions and will be cleared by
                                                                 RSS.

                                                                 4. Finally, during implementation the safeguard
                                                                 capacity of the institutions involved in river
                                                                 basin management will be enhanced through
                                                                 trainings and learning-by-doing activities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes   This policy is triggered primarily because of the
                                                                 positive impact that is anticipated as a
                                                                 consequence of better management of the river’s
                                                                 water resources. At the same time, however,
                                                                 some project activities may have negative
                                                                 impacts on natural habitats, for example channel
                                                                 enhancement works or works associated with
                                                                 the upgrading of the hydromet system could
                                                                 potentially affect aquatic and riparian habitats.

                                                                 The ESMF will be used to screen potential
                                                                 project impacts and provide guidance on how
                                                                 they should be addressed.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This policy is not triggered because no activities
                                                                 are anticipated in forest areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project activities are not expected to use
                                                                 pesticides, nor to lead to increased usage of
                                                                 pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   The project will carry out minor civil works
                         BP 4.11                                 under the channel enhancements and hydromet
                                                                 modernization sub-components. The channel
                                                                 enhancement activities will be carried out
                                                                 within the river bed and hydromet
                                                                 modernization activities will upgrade existing
                                                                 facilities. As a consequence, no PCRs impacts
                                                                 are anticipated. Nonetheless, given Myanmar’s
                                                                 rich cultural heritage there is a possibility that
                                                                 PCRs could be unearthed or affected. Thus, this
                                                                 policy is triggered.

                                                                 During preparation, the ESMF will include a
                                                                 PCRs assessment and mitigation guidelines
                                                                 including “Chance Finds Procedures”. If
                                                                appropriate, a PCRs Management Plan will be
                                                                developed to provide detailed mitigation
                                                                measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes   The Ayeyarwady basin is home to diverse
                                                                groups of ethnic minorities who are dependent
                                                                on the river for livelihoods and subsistence.
                                                                Overall, the project is expected to generate a net
                                                                positive impact on livelihoods. However, some
                                                                activities associated with the river channel
                                                                enhancement work (Component 3) could
                                                                temporarily disrupt livelihoods activities along
                                                                the banks of the Ayeyarwady River. Thus, this
                                                                policy is triggered.

                                                                During preparation, an ESMF will be developed
                                                                to ensure protections for ethnic minorities and
                                                                project affected people, as well as to outline
                                                                steps to conduct free, prior and informed
                                                                consultations. An Indigenous Peoples Policy
                                                                Framework will be developed as part of the
                                                                ESMF to guide the design of mitigation
                                                                measures in the event that project activities
                                                                affect ethnic minorities. The project preparation
                                                                process will involve consultations with a sample
                                                                of ethnic minorities and/or ethnic minority
                                                                organizations as part of the SA and to inform
                                                                the preparation of the IPPF embedded in the
                                                                ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                During implementation, Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Plans (IPP) will be developed for all relevant
                                                                project activities. In addition during
                                                                implementation, as mentioned above, a basin-
                                                                wide SESA will be conducted which will
                                                                contribute to the project’s efforts to create
                                                                stakeholder forums and promote
                                                                communications and outreach.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   As mentioned, the overall project impact is
                         4.12                                   expected to be positive. However, during
                                                                construction of the channel enhancements some
                                                                people who use the Ayeyarwady River banks
                                                                may temporarily be affected. Further, under the
                                                                potential investments to be prepared (Sub-
                                                                component 1.2) there could be future land and
                                                                other property loss. This policy is therefore
                                                                triggered.
                                                                                                                                 During preparation, an ESMF will be developed
                                                                                                                                 and will include a simple Resettlement Policy
                                                                                                                                 Framework (RPF) which can be used to address
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 any land acquisition and voluntary land
                                                                                                                                 donation issues that may arise.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The Project will not finance any activities
                                                                                                                                 related to the construction of dams nor affect
                                                                                                                                 operations of existing dams or affiliated
                                                                                                                                 reservoirs.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           The policy is triggered as the proposed project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            investments are located in the Ayeyarwady
                                                                                                                                 River Basin. The Ayeyarwady River is an
                                                                                                                                 international waterway, fed by two tributaries
                                                                                                                                 originating within China and India, and flowing
                                                                                                                                 into the Andaman Sea which is connected to the
                                                                                                                                 Indian Ocean. However, the planned
                                                                                                                                 investments will not involve any adverse
                                                                                                                                 impacts on the quality and quantity of waters in
                                                                                                                                 the Ayeyarwady River. Thus, the proposed
                                                                                                                                 project falls within the exception to the riparian
                                                                                                                                 notification requirement. A Memo to RVP
                                                                                                                                 requesting agreement on the exception to this
                                                                                                                                 notification requirement will be prepared by the
                                                                                                                                 team by project appraisal.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No activities are planned in any disputed areas.
                                 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-May-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An ESMF will be produced before project appraisal. A minimum of two public consultations will
                                      take place, one at the level of ToRs development and another one when a draft ESMF is available
                                      for discussions. The ESMF will include an Environmental and Social Management Plan
                                      Framework, an RPF and a IPPF.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Julia M. Fraser

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 11-Apr-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julia M. Fraser (SM)                                                                                                 Date: 12-Apr-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
