                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC14862

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                            Project ID:       P153493
                            Project Name:      Promoting Biogas as Sustainable Clean Cooking Fuel for Rural Households in
                                               Kenya (P153493)
                            Task Team          Edward Felix Dwumfour,Juha Antti Kalevi Seppala
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated      09-Nov-2015
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN07

                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         7.00             Total Bank Financing:                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                    7.00
                              Total                                                                          7.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           Reduction of GHG emissions from improved access to biogas energy as a clean cooking fuel in
                           livestock-owning rural households in Kenya.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project's objective would be to promote the use of biogas as clean cooking fuel in livestock-
                           owning rural households in Kenya. The program has set up hub offices in Nakuru, Eldoret and
                         Karatina to be possibly followed by Central, North and South Rift areas. Hub offices serve an area
                         with a radius of 50 km. These distribution points are selected close to dairy farmers, which are a
                         main target group. Thus, the biodigesters will be made available to households in a coordinated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fashion to ensure there is access to maintenance hubs within 50 km of the installation location.

                         With a funding amount of US$7.0 million, the project proposes to reach out to about 6,000-8,000
                         HHs every year between 2015 and 2024. The project would have multiple development benefits
                         resulting from substitution of firewood for cooking by clean biogas. These multiple benefits would
                         include reduced forest degradation and desertification, improved indoor air quality (from reduced
                         indoor smoke exposure), improved health and reduced hardship for women and children who are
                         primarily engaged in the collection of firewood in rural areas, increased income and social welfare
                         improvement for rural HHs, creation of small scale business enterprises, along with contribution to
                         climate change mitigation.

                         The proposed project is part of the National Biogas Promotion Program KENDBIP (Kenyan
                         Domestic Biogas Programme), which in turn is part of the larger Africa Biogas Partnership
                         Programme (ABPP). ABPP has a target of 100,000 systems installed in Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania,
                         Uganda, and Burkina Faso and providing half a million people access to a sustainable source of
                         energy by the year 2017. The KENDBIP program was initiated in Kenya in 2009 with an overall goal
                         of developing a commercially viable biogas sector in Kenya. Since 2009 to 2013 the program has
                         managed to install over 11,000 biogas plants of the traditional brick-laid design. The second phase of
                         the program runs from 2014 to 2017 with a target of installing 27,500 digesters of both traditional
                         and advanced innovative designs, such as the one promoted by this proposed program.

                         Biogas systems convert manure and/or organic household waste into methane gas. This gas can be
                         directly used for cooking. The technology is well-known in Sub-Saharan Africa and Asia, but
                         traditional brick-laid designs are challenging for large scale implementation. Initially, two types of
                         biogas systems—the float-drum type and the fixed dome type have been promoted. Although these
                         systems have been successful elsewhere, adoption in Kenya has been minimal because of expensive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         installation costs. SimGas, a private company, has pioneered a new and innovative design for a
                         biogas system unlike the traditional designs implemented elsewhere in Africa and the developing
                         world. Unlike traditional biogas systems targeting households, the SimGas system is an innovative
                         in design, is easy to install and can be mass produced to meet the consumer demand quickly. Also,
                         the system is made of recycled molded plastic that makes it affordable to users which should also
                         allow for a longer operating life than traditional brick laid designs. SimGas has developed two
                         proprietary designs of biogas systems: GesiShamba and GesiSafi. GesiShamba is for rural
                         households and GesiSafi for urban users. The rural Gesi Shamba system is modular and scalable in
                         1m3 segments from the minimum size of 2m3 even after installation, should the need or opportunity
                         to produce more biogas arise in a household.

                         SimGas is the Coordinating/Managing Entity (C/ME), which has developed the Clean Development
                         Mechanism (CDM) Program of Activities (PoA) “SimGas Biogas Programme of Activities”,
                         registered under the UNFCCC on December 21, 2012. The first CDM Project Activity (CPA)
                         covering 4,000 rural digesters and 6,000 urban digesters is already being implemented. Additional
                         CPAs would be included in the PoA once all digesters under the first CPA have been installed. The
                         project is already generating emission reductions from the biodigesters installed after the registration
                         of the PoA

                         Through a carbon finance transaction, the World Bank as Trustee of the Carbon Initiative for
                           Development (Ci-Dev) intends to purchase carbon credits (Certified Emission Reductions, CERs)
                           from the CME which are generated by individual households’ biogas units under the CDM-PoA.
                           Carbon payments allow SimGas to sell biogas systems at a discount to consumers and offer a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           warranty during the lifetime of the CDM PoA, supporting the expansion of access to biogas energy
                           in rural Kenya.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The households throughout Kenya have an opportunity to participate in the program.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Minor negative environmental or social impacts are anticipated during project implementation. The
                           training materials produced for the household level will include safety and waste management
                           information. The training on use of the technology will be conducted in Swahili and English with an
                           emphasis to women to ensure their full participation in the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes            The project will have small scale, site specific
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     environmental impacts related to safety of the
                                                                          biodigesters operation and sludge management.
                                                                          SimGas will produce an EMF/EMP checklist to
                                                                          ensure that appropriate mitigation measures are
                                                                          incorporated into the training materials to be used at
                                                                          the household level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     No

                           Forests OP/BP 4.36              No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09         No

                           Physical Cultural Resources     No
                           OP/BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP        No             The participation of the households is demand
                           4.10                                           driven, however, SimGas will ensure that the
                                                                          biodigester use materials are available to all ethnic
                                                                          groups that express interest in participating in the
                                                                          program (e.g. means and language of delivering the
                                                                          project information).
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/    No
                           BP 4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No
                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Apr-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      SimGas will produce an EMF/EMP checklist to ensure that appropriate mitigation measures are
                                      incorporated into the training materials to be used at the household level.The EMF/EMP checklist
                                      will include a set of public consultations and will be disclosed in Kenya and in the World Bank
                                      InfoShop.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Edward Felix Dwumfour,Juha Antti Kalevi Seppala
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 13-Aug-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                       Date: 03-Sep-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
