                    INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATASHEET
                            APPRAISAL STAGE

I. Basic Information
Date prepared/updated: 09/10/2014                                     Report No.: AC7143
1. Basic Project Data
Country: Afghanistan                          Project ID: P132944
Project Name: Naghlu Hydropower Rehabilitation Project
Task Team Leader: Abedalrazq F. Khalil
Estimated Appraisal Date: March 16, 2015 Estimated Board Date: February 15, 2013
Managing Unit: GEEDR                          Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                              Financing
Sector: Hydropower (100%)
Theme: Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%);Other environment
and natural resources management (5%);Other social development (5%)
SPF Amount (US$m):               0
GEF Amount (US$m.):              0
PCF Amount (US$m.):              0
Other financing amounts by source:
         Borrower                                                       0.00
         Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                         85.00
         Financing Gap                                                  0.00
                                                                       85.00
Environmental Category: A - Full Assessment
Simplified Processing                         Simple []          Repeater []
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery)
                                                                   Yes [ ]    No [X]
or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)

2. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve dam safety and to increase the supply
of domestically-generated hydroelectricity to the Afghan power system.

3. Project Description
The proposed Naghlu Hydropower Rehabilitation Project (Naghlu) is estimated to cost a
total of US$83.0 million, and is comprised of six main components:1) Mechanical,
Electrical and Electromechanical Work; 2) Dam Safety Improvement; 3) Optimization of
Power Generation; 4) Environmental and Social Sustainability; 5: Project Management
Support; and 6) Capacity Development and Scale-up. The description of each of these
components is summarized below:

 Component 1: Mechanical, Electrical and Electromechanical Work (ATRF $20.5
million). This component aims at finishing the rehabilitation of the electrical and
electromechanical parts of the plant and ensuring their sustainable operation. It consists
of three sub-components as follows:
 1(a): Rehabilitation of Unit 1 and balance of plant. This includes completion of ongoing
electromechanical rehabilitation work focused on Unit 1, particularly: i) testing, of the
existing bent rotor shaft, followed by repair if possible or replacement if not; ii)
completion of existing plant rehabilitation. This will also finance the rehabilitation of the
Mahipar switchyard.

 1(b): Spare parts and consumables. Purchase of 3-years supply of spare parts and
consumables to ensure the sustainable operation of the existing plant.
 1(c): Additional training for plant staff. This will ensure the capacity for the safe and
sustained operation of the existing plant.

 Component 2: Dam Safety Improvement(ATRF $28 million). This aims at ensuring the
safe operation of the dam and consist of three subcomponents as follows:

 2(a): Dam safety audit. This includes (i) audit of the dam's structural and operational
safety; (ii) preparation of plans and bidding documents for civil works to improve safety
to acceptable standards, focused on reactivating the bottom outlet, adequacy of auxiliary
power and other systems, improvements to the headgates closing system, installation of
instrumentation and clearance of unexploded ordnance from the dam structure; (iii)
studies on structural and operational safety considering updated hydrological and seismic
data and following relevant international/national standards/guidelines; and (iv) flood
routing through Naghlu Dam until Surobi Dam, including adequacy of its spilling
arrangements.

  2(b): Non-structural measures. This includes consultants to support DABS in
introducing modern dam safety measures that do not entail structural or other works,
particularly: (i) setting up a procedure and staffing for independent dam safety
inspections; (ii) preparation of dam safety plans including operations, maintenance and
surveillance manuals for civil works, emergency preparedness plans, and post-earthquake
response plans; (iii) revision of operating manuals for the electrical and
electromechanical works; (iv) detailed maintenance planning for equipment ; and v)
training for dam staff.

 2(c): Structural and other works. This includes works based on the findings of the safety
audit to bring the dam to acceptable safety standards, particularly: (i) reactivation of the
low level outlet; (ii) introduction of independent operation of the power intake gates; (iii)
installation of standby generator for emergency opening of the spillway gates and closing
of the power intake gates; and (iv) installation of essential instrumentation.

 Component 3: Optimization of Power Generation(ARTF $15 million). This component
aims at examining the potential for increasing power generation at Naghlu Dam
Hydropower Plant. It consists of two subcomponents as follows:

 3(a): Feasibility study. This examines the feasibility of various options to increase
power generation including but not limited to: (i) appropriate dam operation and better
management; (ii) additional storage upstream the dam; (iii) additional siphon spillway/
floating barge mechanism for controlled flushing of sediments; (iv) raising the dam crest;
(v) catchment area treatment; and a combination thereof.

 3(b): Detail design. This supports the preparation of detailed designs should the
feasibility study return a positive result, and will be based on the findings of ESIA,
resettlement and livelihoods restoration, environment management, health, and other
action plans.

 Component 4: Environmental and Social Sustainability (ARTF $7 million). This
component aims at ensuring the environmental and social sustainability of the dam. It
consists of three subcomponents as follows:

 4(a): Addressing legacy issues. Partly in response to old and long contested local issues,
this will support: (i) electrification in the project area, and (ii) improved access to skills
and training to enable local people to gain employment at the plant.

 4(b): Environmental management. This subcomponent will support (i) the monitoring of
the existing environment management plan for component 1; and (ii) the preparation
implementation and independent monitoring of an environment management plan for the
structural and other works subcomponent of Component 2.

 4(c): Resettlement and livelihoods restoration. This will support (i) the preparation,
implementation and independent monitoring of a resettlement and (ii) livelihoods
development plan for the structural and other works subcomponent of Component 2.

 Component 5: Project Management Support (ARTF $7.5 million). This subcomponent
aims at ensuring that DABS receives advice on good international practice. It will consist
of (a) the consulting services needed to support implementation of the project by DABS;
and (b) financing support for (i) an Environmental and Social Advisory Panel, which will
embrace the requirements of OP4.01 and an independent environment panel of experts;
and (ii) an Engineering Advisory Panel that will embrace the requirements of the dam
safety review panel as set out in OP 4.37.

 Component 6: Capacity Development and Scale-up (ARTF $5.0 million). This
subcomponent aims at supporting early actions needed to develop the Kunar River
hydropower cascade, including studies on: (a) hydropower cascade analysis and
optimization; (b) planning and implementation for social development; environment and
health management; (c) alternatives and mitigation measures; (d) hydrological,
geological, geotechnical, seismic and dam safety; (e) project preparation and
management; and (f) preparation of financial and economic documents.

4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis
The project is located on the confluence of the Panjshir and Kabul Rivers in Kabul
Provinces approximately 70 kilometers east of Kabul. The dam was originally
constructed with Soviet assistance, and was completed in 1967. The dam is served by an
access road from the main Kabul to Jalalabad highway, and there is also a road that runs
up the eastern side of the reservoir which may have been part of the original construction
work. Six villages were resettled at the time of construction to various areas including
Jalalabad, Kabul and some new sites near to the dam. There remain a number of
communities in the project area (reservoir and downstream). There is some agricultural
production in the project area, and some pastoral activity. There are no protected areas in
the vicinity of the project and no known areas of cultural property or heritage.
Approximately six kilometers downstream of the dam, the tail of the reservoir for the
Surobi dam starts, with the dam a further two kilometers further downstream from that.

 The plant occupies a significant area immediately downstream of the dam on the right
bank, formerly used as a lay-down area, for the concrete batching plant and other
purposes during the original construction of the dam. It is currently partially occupied by
an existing encampment housing the police who guard the dam, and a workers' camp
housing the staff of the contractor undertaking the rehabilitation of the mechanical,
electrical and electromechanical parts of the plant.

5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
   Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)
   Mr Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)

6. Safeguard Policies Triggered                               Yes         No
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                          X
Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                       X
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                                  X
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                       X
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                            X
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                          X
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                    X
Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)               X
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                    X

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area:
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize
adverse impacts.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide
an assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and
disclosure on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.




B. Disclosure Requirements Date
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure                             02/19/2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                              03/11/2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
Pest Management Plan:
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
  Date of receipt by the Bank
  Date of "in-country" disclosure
  Date of submission to InfoShop
* If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources,
the respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental
Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please
explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the
ISDS is finalized by the project decision meeting)

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector Manager (SM)
review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential
adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Sector
Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts
(POE) been reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements
been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the notification
requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal Department, and the memo
to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's       Yes
Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a       Yes
form and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected
groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities
been prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard
policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
  documents?


  D. Approvals

Signed and submitted by:                                Name     Date
Task Team Leader:                   Mr Abedalrazq F. Khalil    09/10/2014
Environmental Specialist:           Mr Obaidullah Hidayat
Social Development Specialist       Mr Mohammad Yasin Noori
Additional Environmental and/or
Social Development Specialist(s):

Approved by:
Regional Safeguards Coordinator:    Mr Francis V. Fragano
  Comments:
Sector Manager:                     Ms Julia Bucknall
  Comments:
