                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC6285

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Moldova                        Project ID:      P144103
                            Project Name:      MD Competitiveness Enhancement Project II (P144103)
                            Task Team          Melissa Rekas
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          12-May-2014                    Estimated        29-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSPF                          Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Industry and trade (34%), SME Finance (33%), General
                                               industry and trade sector (33%)
                            Theme(s):          Regulation and competition policy (34%), Other Financial Sector Development
                                               (33%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (33%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     45.00                    Total Bank Financing:        45.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                15.00
                              Total                                                                      45.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           20.     The project will help increase the competitiveness of Moldovan enterprises, in particular
                           small and medium enterprises by increasing their linkages with markets, improving their ability to
                           access medium to long-term finance, and improving the business enabling environment in a way that
                           reduces transaction costs.
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will help increase the competitiveness of Moldovan enterprises, in particular small and
                         medium enterprises by increasing their linkages with markets, improving their ability to access
Public Disclosure Copy




                         medium to long-term finance, and improving the business enabling environment in a way that
                         reduces transaction costs.

                         The proposed project will have three main components: regulatory reform, SME development, and
                         access to finance.

                         Regulatory Reform Component – The objective of this component will be to strengthen
                         accountability and capacity for the implementation of priority reforms1 It will include activities
                         focusing on implementation of monitoring and public-private dialogue activities (such as
                         strengthening RIA Secretariat, establishing a system of accountability mechanisms on intra-and inter-
                         government level, and advancing methodologies to score the performance of public institutions), as
                         well as capacity and awareness-building of public sector authorities related to business enabling
                         environment reform. The loan will also provide a technical assistance facility for the implementation
                         of priority reforms (per the definition in footnote 1). MoE, through its Project Implementation Unit,
                         will manage a pool of funds that can be used by a range of public authorities to implement reforms
                         that are considered critical, require additional funds, and which other donors do not plan to fund.
                         Authorities that can access these funds will likely include, but not be limited to: state control bodies,
                         Licensing Chamber, State Tax Service, Customs Service, and the Competition Council. Specific
                         reforms to be funded will be agreed upon between MoE and the World Bank through the
                         development of the project’s annual procurement plans.

                         SME Development Component – The objective of this component will be to strengthen SMEs’ links
                         to markets and ability to compete in those markets, by improving the effectiveness of government
                         institutions that provide public goods in support of this objective, and by providing additional,
                         targeted assistance to specific SMEs. As part of this component, the project will work with ODIMM
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the MIEPO, strengthening these institutions’ capacity to contribute to the development of a
                         vibrant and economically sustainable SME sector. The loan will also provide a technical assistance
                         facility for exporters (matching grant, voucher, or other structure to be determined) to help
                         enterprises implement activities that will have a specific and direct impact on their export
                         competitiveness. The enterprises that apply must make a business case for how the activity will
                         directly increase their export competitiveness. The list of eligible activities will be broad, and may
                         include: complex consulting services (business process re-engineering, process re-engineering, etc.),
                         identification and capacity-building for the implementation of new technologies, quality
                         certifications (ISO, HACCP, ISO for environmental management, etc.), market studies, and others.
                         The loan team will consult to ensure that support provided to exporters is consistent with WTO rules
                         on export subsidies and Moldova’s new Law on State Aid.

                         Access to Finance Component – The objective of this component will be to improve access to
                         medium to long-term finance for export-oriented enterprises, reduce barriers to finance due to high
                         collateral requirements, and improve banks’ credit risk assessment methodologies for SME
                         financing. This component will have three sub-components:
                         i.        Line of credit (LOC) to be extended through eligible participating financial intermediaries
                         (PFIs) to private sector exporters for working capital and investment projects, based on specific
                         eligibility criteria. Typical beneficiaries will be export oriented enterprises in agriculture, agro-
                         processing, manufacturing or other economic sectors that provides goods or services directly related
                         to generation of foreign exchange export revenues. The interest rates to enterprises will be market-
                         based and the PFIs will on-lend the funds to export oriented enterprises based on their own credit
                         assessment and risk of the borrower The World Bank team will undertake due diligence of PFIs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         during project preparation to ascertain their compliance with the World Bank eligibility criteria for
                         PFIs (including financial indicators and corporate governance) under OP 10.
                         ii.      Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) to facilitate greater SME lending by reducing the risks that
                         commercial banks face in expanding in this segment. The purpose of the guarantee facility would be
                         to backstop commercial banks losses in cases of defaults by eligible SME borrowers. It is expected
                         that SMEs from all sectors will benefit from this facility.
                         iii.     Capacity enhancement for lending institutions. In partnership with the IFC and other
                         development partners the project would provide technical assistance on a matching basis to the
                         commercial banks benefitting from the credit line or Risk Sharing Facility, in order to help build
                         their capacity to provide lending services to SMEs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented countrywide.

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be implemented by the MoE which has been a counterpart of World Bank
                         investment loans focusing on private sector development for over a decade. This includes the
                         2006-2013 CEP I project as well as prior private sector development projects. It has implemented
                         projects using Project Implementation Units (PIUs), established as separate legal entities under MoE,
                         and staffed with professionals who know how to apply Bank procurement, financial management,
                         safeguards and other rules. Implementation of CEP II, including its fiduciary aspects, will be
                         managed by the same PIU that managed CEP I project activities. Under component 3 the
                         implementation of line of credit sub-component will be done by Ministry of Finance Credit Line
                         Directorate. The Credit Line Directorate will remain the same as within CEP I and has extensive
                         expertise in application of Bank Safeguard policies (outside of CEP II it has managed several other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         line of credits financed under World Bank’s Sector Rural Investment and Services Project), and
                         received adequate training to conduct screening of sub-loan applications for compliance with
                         safeguards procedures). For risk sharing facility sub-component, the implementation arrangements
                         will be determined during project preparation. The SME development agency ODIMM is one
                         possible candidate to implement this sub-component provided it meets certain criteria. ODIMM is a
                         new institution and doesn't have necessary EA expertise and staff responsible for EA issues. It was
                         agreed with the MoE that for all implementing agencies EA capacity will be assessed and capacity
                         building would be provided if needed. Such capacity building activities will be provided by a full
                         time Environmental Consultant to be hired in the PIU which should have good knowledge and
                         experience in applying WB environmental safeguards. Based on WB implementation support
                         missions the result of safeguards implementation of the CEP I is overall positive. The missions
                         concluded the EMF was implemented successfully - all submitted subprojects have been preliminary
                         assessed from environmental point of view, providing them an environmental category as well as
                         requiring relevant environmental authorizations, licenses and permits. Furthermore, all approved
                         subprojects have relevant supporting EA documents – Environmental Screening Checklist and/or
                         simple Environmental Management Plan as well as if needed per national legislation – approvals
                         from local environmental authorities and from the State Ecological Expertise (SEE) along with the
                         environmental permits and licenses.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (ECSEN)
                           Klavdiya Maksymenko (ECSSO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies             Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes          This policy is triggered as project activities
                           BP 4.01                                     under second and third component would
                                                                       generate a series of direct and indirect
                                                                       environmental and social impacts. While
                                                                       component 2 will include consultant services to
                                                                       advise SMEs on developing physical
                                                                       investments which can have indirect impacts,
                                                                       the third component that would provide
                                                                       financing for existing or proposed new facilities
                                                                       might have direct environmental and social
                                                                       impacts. To address these impacts per OP 4.01
                                                                       requirements it is necessary to prepare an
                                                                       Environmental Management (EMF) that would
                                                                       guide the EA process. With regard to
                                                                       component 2 the EMF will provide guidance for
                                                                       Terms of Reference for consultancies to be
                                                                       provided to the SMEs, i.e. that they should
                                                                       assess any potential negative environmental or
                                                                       social impacts as well as looking for
                                                                       opportunities to recommend environmentally
                                                                       and/or socially positive options (e.g. energy
                                                                       efficiency, recycling and reducing waste
                                                                       generation, etc.). With regard to physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       investments the EMF will outline EA
                                                                       procedures and mitigation requirements for the
                                                                       subprojects to be supported under component 3.
                                                                       It should provide in particular details on
                                                                       procedures, criteria and responsibilities for
                                                                       subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal,
                                                                       implementing and monitoring. The EMF will
                                                                       also include Environmental Guidelines for
                                                                       different types of proposed subprojects
                                                                       providing analysis of potential impacts and
                                                                       generic mitigation measures to be undertaken
                                                                       for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
                                                                       processing and manufacturing sectors at all
                                                                       stages - from identification and selection,
                                                                       through the design and implementation phase, to
                                                                       the monitoring and evaluation of results. A
                                                                       special section of the Guidelines will provide
                                                                       environmental due diligence procedures for
                                                                       existing enterprises which might receive
                                                                financial support or guarantee. Furthermore, the
                                                                EMF should also provide a monitoring plan
                                                                format which considers monitoring indicators,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                timing, methods, institutional responsibilities,
                                                                etc. in all phases of subprojects’
                                                                implementation. As the CEP II will generally
                                                                support same type of activities like the initial
                                                                project, it is proposed to update the EMF
                                                                prepared for phase I of the project. Per WB and
                                                                National EA rules the updated EMF will be
                                                                disclosed and consulted in the country. The
                                                                EMF will also stipulate no Category A projects
                                                                will be financed under the CEP II.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No   No. The project will not support any projects
                                                                that would have impacts on important wildlife
                                                                and wildlife habitats. The proposed investments
                                                                will be screened and in the case such habitats
                                                                might be directly or indirectly affected will be
                                                                not supported by the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   No. The credit line will not support any
                                                                investments related to wood harvesting.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   No. The project will not support purchasing
                                                                pesticides and its activities will not lead to their
                                                                increased usage.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   No. It is expected there will be no physical
                         BP 4.11                                cultural resources in the vicinity of the CEP
                                                                projects. The proposed investments will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                screened and in the case such resources might
                                                                be directly or indirectly affected will be not
                                                                supported by the project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   N/A

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   The project will support construction of new
                         4.12                                   buildings only in the case when land acquisition
                                                                is not necessary and there are no physical or
                                                                economic displacement issues related to the
                                                                construction. For such cases the investor should
                                                                have the landownership title as well as has to
                                                                prove that the land at the moment of sub-
                                                                projects application is not occupied or used even
                                                                unofficially as a shelter or source of livelihoods.
                                                                This will be done during the initial screening of
                                                                the projects to be supported under the CEPII.
                                                                The Operational Manual with the screening and
                                                                eligibility criteria, specifying in particular
                                                                criteria related to physical or economic
                                                                                                                                 displacement will be prepared as a key
                                                                                                                                 deliverable of the Grant.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            N/A
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                         No                            No. The new project will not finance any
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            activities that might trigger this policy and in
                                                                                                                                 particular: irrigation projects; projects involving
                                                                                                                                 discharging waste waters directly in the
                                                                                                                                 international waterways; abstraction or
                                                                                                                                 diversion of international waters; projects
                                                                                                                                 related to discharging waste materials in a
                                                                                                                                 location that could impact on international
                                                                                                                                 waters; construction of any dams that might
                                                                                                                                 affect international waters hydrological regime,
                                                                                                                                 etc.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Mar-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The updated EMF will be prepared by February 20, 2014. Before appraisal the draft document will
                                      be disclosed and consulted in the country and disclosed in the WB Infoshop. In accordance with
                                      the EMF, EIAs/EMPs will be prepared as needed for subprojects during project implementation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Melissa Rekas

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                                                                                                  Date: 26-Dec-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Paloma Anos Casero (SM)                                                                                              Date: 28-Dec-2013




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
