                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8639
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2014, 14-Jan-2014, 16-Jan-2014, 29-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                          Project ID:    P130891
                            Project Name:      MN: SMART Government (P130891)
                            Task Team          Tenzin Dolma Norbhu
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          03-Oct-2013                       Estimated   06-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     TWICT                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Information and communications (70%), General
                                              information and communications sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):         e-Government (80%), Other accountability/anti-corruption (10%), Regulation
                                              and competition policy (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:                 19.40
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.60
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               19.40
                              Total                                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                            The development objective of the project is to use information and communication technologies to
                            improve accessibility, transparency, and efficiency of public service in Mongolia.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The project is structured along four areas: (a) enhancing civic engagement and citizen feedback
                         mechanisms, (b) enabling foundations for SMART government, (c) enabling open data, and (d)
                         project management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Enhance civic engagement and citizen feedback mechanisms ($1.1 million) to
                         enhance civic engagement and citizen feedback mechanisms through ICT would make a significant
                         impact on the lives of the Mongolian citizens. Through a well-structured contact center, citizens
                         would be able to conveniently seek information and conduct transactions with the government,
                         through the channel of their choice. Having citizen feedback mechanisms will facilitate means of
                         promoting a responsive Government that listens, understands and provides for its citizen’s needs.
                         These initiatives, supported by an underlining business analytics program will empower the
                         Mongolian Government to analyze the ever growing transactional and social data, to develop timely
                         insights for policy design, service improvements and resource optimization. Component 1
                         comprises:

                         (a) Technical assistance ($0.1 million) consulting support for the integration of the central 11-11
                         center and the Ulaanbaatar city’s 1200 – 1234 systems to increase efficiency and reduce citizen
                         confusion.

                         (b)       Investment support ($0.5 million) to: (i) expand the 11-11 center to the Aimag centers. This
                         will include replication of the 11-11 center at Ulaanbaatar to aimag capitals; (ii) migrate the data
                         structures of the 11-11 system to the Open 311 standard; (iii) develop a citizen facing dashboard that
                         aggregates incoming messages and displays the information in meaningful ways for citizens; (iv)
                         develop the citizen dashboard to allow for exploration of the data, allowing citizens to mash up data
                         sets, drill into data delimited by keyword or geography, and disaggregate data by any existing
                         demographic information (i.e., gender, age, etc.); (v) open source the code base (software) and
                         invest in community and documentation of the code so that the code base can be reused by other
                         countries positioning Mongolia as a leader in the space; (vi) design improved accountability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures for complaints in the system; and (vii) improve and strengthen workflows and responses
                         from Ministries to resolvie issues in order to enhance the overall performance of the system. This
                         component will enable enhanced accessibility to information and services for citizens of all income
                         groups across the country.

                         (c) Support government to develop a business analytics (BA) program ($0.5 million) consisting of
                         the applications, tools and best practices that enable analysis of data to improve and optimize policy
                         and program decisions and performance. The core components of BA include business intelligence,
                         performance management, predictive analytics, analytical decision making, and risk management.
                         Intended key areas for BA deployments could include citizen services analytics where public sector
                         agency can deliver citizen services when and where they are most needed. Public officers could
                         predict and target the needs of citizens more accurately, and match programs and resources to meet
                         the highest-priority citizen needs. In addition, public agencies could position resources to focus on
                         high-priority service areas, and then automate processes for more efficient and effective service
                         delivery.

                         Component 2: Enabling Foundations for SMART Government ($10.9 million) to establish the right
                         enabling SMART Government ICT foundations will enable the public agencies to set in place a
                         robust framework for service delivery, benefit from economies of scale on ICT infrastructure, and
                         expedite the pace of eService delivery in response to citizens' needs. Four key projects are identified


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         to form the basis for SMART Government foundations are (1) National Enterprise Architecture to
                         enhance interoperability, to eliminate overlapping projects, and to support reuse, (2) Government
                         Cloud, will serve as a whole-of-government infrastructure to achieve cost efficiency on technology
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments, improve accessibility and flexibility, (3) Public sector platform as a service (PaaS),
                         which is a key software infrastructure within the Government Cloud. The public sector PaaS would
                         significantly reduce the cost and time to implement eService based on the “built once and reuse
                         always” principle of developing common enablers, and (4) digitization of property registration
                         certificates to support reforms.. The details for the four projects in Component 2 are described below:

                         (a) Investment and technical assistance ($2.1 million) to design, develop, deploy and use the NEA
                         and interoperability (e-GIF) for better strategies, processes, plans, structures, technologies and
                         systems across the government. The NEA and interoperability framework will be used to better
                         tailor information systems for government agencies to achieve key Government objectives and
                         outcomes and achieve increased data sharing, better asset management, reduced risk and lower costs
                         of IT procurement. This subcomponent will be developed in a participative manner, ensuring buy-in
                         by various line agencies and facilitating implementation that will contribute to business process
                         changes.

                         (b) Investment support ($5 million) to upgrade the National Data Center and transition it into a
                         national data exchange and cloud computing infrastructure for the Government. The primary focus
                         of this subcomponent will be the establishment of a government cloud computing infrastructure in
                         order to enable government agencies to deliver electronic services faster and more efficiently. The
                         Government cloud will be eventually shared by all ministries and agencies of the Government. It
                         will incorporate a Mobile delivery system, to enable people that do not have access to the Internet to
                         get services through mobile phones.

                         (c) Investment support to establish an Innovation Support Program ($0.5 million) to finance an
                         innovation grants program as a mechanism to quickly identify, test, and deploy simple open data and
                         mobile applications in support of specific government objectives in priority sectors. The program
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will take the form of a grants competition that will fund the most innovative tools that address
                         specific development ‘innovation challenges’ in priority areas identified by various ministries and
                         agencies of the Government. The program will be hardwired to deliver pro-poor applications and
                         solutions. It will also support increased female targeted solutions and increased female participation
                         in the apps competition.

                         (d) e-Property Registration System (ePRS) ($3.0 million) to support the scale-up the digitization of
                         property registration and establishment of an ePRS that is currently being implemented in five
                         districts of Ulaanbaatar and eight provinces to all nine districts and 21 provinces in Mongolia. The
                         initial work on ePRS was financed by the Millennium Challenge Corporation and funding for the
                         program closes on September 30, 2013. This will enable citizens and business to use a more accurate
                         and user-friendly registration system to document property purchases, sales and other economic
                         transactions. It will allow banks to have better information about prospective borrowers, enabling
                         decrease in borrowing costs and improved commercial lending. This subcomponent will facilitate
                         the goal of shared prosperity for all.

                         (e) Capacity development support to the ITPTA CS ($0.3 million) to strengthen its ability to
                         support various government agencies on ICT initiatives ($0.5 million) to build capacity through
                         workshops and training events, so that the ITPTA and its aligned agency, the National IT Park can
                         better function as an e-Government resource center to support other line agencies on the design and

                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                         development of specifications for systems and solutions, contract management, quality assurance and
                         testing among others.deliver on the SMART Government program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Enabling Open Data ($6 million) to help develop a vibrant open data ecosystem
                         defined by a sustainable pipeline of high-quality data, continuous engagement with user communities
                         and demand-driven, innovative co-creation. The support will enable the GoM to invest in both the
                         supply and reuse of open data in a comprehensive manner. This Component will have two main
                         subcomponents: (1) Design and implementation of an Open Data Initiative; and (2) support through
                         investment to implement the statistics production system at the NSO.

                         (a) Design and implementation of an open data initiative ($0.6 million) will focus on four main areas,
                         each contributing to a dynamic, sustainable open data ecosystem. (i) Open Data Readiness
                         Assessment: Open data in Mongolia will need to operate on both a national and subnational level
                         (UB City), especially since 50 percent of the population lives in the capitol city. Jointly conducting a
                         proper assessment of readiness that has as its major output a targeted, client-specific open data action
                         plan is essential for identifying the high-impact entry points for initial investments in open data, both
                         on the supply and demand sides; (ii)        Policy/legal/institutional frameworks: Activities will seek
                         to ensure that the policy and legal environment serves the needs of an open data in Mongolia. It will
                         aim to strengthen the institutional structures critical for their management and coordination; (iii)
                         Supply of open data: Ensuring the release of diverse, high-quality data sets in areas that are
                         important to Mongolian is the primary objective of this pillar. It is important that open data link to
                         priority initiatives of the Government—at the federal level this includes the “11-11” center and at the
                         municipal level includes the priority areas of cadaster, construction licensing, plans to develop UB
                         City as a “smart” city and the city’s health and safety indexes; and (iv) Demand-driven reuse and
                         co-creation: A steady pipeline of open data must be matched with sustained co-creation efforts to
                         produce visualizations and applications that make Mongolia’s open data more accessible to the
                         public and specific user communities. This requires attention to the demand side of open data, and
                         active engagement with data suppliers and users. Training and awareness-raising are equally
                         important for the demand side of open data.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b) Data production capabilities of the National Statistics Office ($5 million) to provide investment
                         and technical assistance support to the NSO in connection with its data production functions.
                         Resources will support the development or redesign of the NSO’s data production infrastructure in a
                         way that improves internal data management and complies with standards and requirements of a
                         NEA. It is important to ensure that the NSO’s data management system has the ability both to
                         release open data and smoothly interoperate with the systems of other Government agencies (e.g., a
                         National GIS portal) and an open data portal (whether it is based on an open source or commercial
                         platform). Technical assistance will also be provided for enhancing NSO’s capacity to produce good
                         quality data more frequently.

                         Project Implementation Support ($1.8 million) to establish the Project Implementation Unit. Project
                         funds will be used to hire the Project Director, a Financial Management Specialist, and Procurement
                         support which will include a procurement/implementation specialist to interact with the beneficiary
                         agencies and provide assistance to the General Procurement Agency and other required support staff
                         including translators, communications specialists, Monitoring and Evaluation Officer. Funds will be
                         used to procure required infrastructure and services to support the functioning of the PIU as needed,
                         including office equipment. Operational costs of the project will be met from this allocation. The
                         Government’s in-kind contribution to the project will include office space and the cost of key



                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                         technical officers at the ITPTA office. The PIU will be dissolved at project closing, with the
                         technical skills for long-term sustainability of operations developed and residing at the line agencies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be located in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia's capital city and Aimag centers for Component
                         1. The project will support capacity building; technical assistance; an innovation support program;
                         investment support in IT systems and statistical production system. The project will not finance any
                         physical interventions: neither civil works nor resettlement.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chongwu Sun (EASCS)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (EASDE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The proposed project will not affect the
                          BP 4.01                                              environment.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               The proposed project will not affect natural
                                                                               habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               The proposed project will not affect forests.

                          Pest Management OP 4.09             No               The proposed project will not procure pesticides,
                                                                               nor will it increase the use of pesticides.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               The proposed project will not affect physical or
                          BP 4.11                                              cultural resources.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes              The Indigenous People Policy is triggered
                                                                               because ethnic minorities are or may be project
                                                                               beneficiaries. However, specific safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               instruments are not required. Relevant elements
                                                                               of the Indigenous People Policy will be directly
                                                                               integrated into the project design such as: the
                                                                               inclusion of indigenous people in project
                                                                               activities through free and informed consultations
                                                                               during implementation; ensuring the provision of
                                                                               culturally appropriate project benefits by using
                                                                               the indigenous peoples' languages in the provision
                                                                               of services; establishing the estimated number of
                                                                               indigenous people in the selected project areas
                                                                               and the proportion of indigenous people likely to
                                                                               have access to service and information.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               The proposed project does not contain plans for
                          4.12                                                 resettlement (involuntary, or otherwise).
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The proposed project will not finance
                                                                               construction or rehabilitation of dams as defined
                                                                               under the policy.
                                                              No



                                                                       Page 5 of 7
                            Projects on International                            The proposed project is not being implemented on
                            Waterways
                            Projects    OP/BP 7.50
                                     in Disputed  Areas OP/BP No                 an
                                                                                 Theinternational waterway
                                                                                      proposed project will not be implemented on
                            7.60                                                 disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Ethnic minorities are or may be project beneficiaries. The project will not have nationality- or
                              group-differentiated benefits. There are no large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. The
                              Indigenous People (IP) Policy is triggered. However, specific safeguards instruments are not
                              required.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The team and clients to ensure that energy efficient resources with minimum negative
                              environmental impact are used.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Borrower has already implemented an ICT project and are familiar with safeguard policy
                              issues and mitigation plans.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Key stakeholders include Cabinet Secretariat, Information Technology, Post and
                              Telecommunications Authority, National Statistics Office, and General Authority of State
                              Registration.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Jan-2014
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Jan-2014
                            "In country" Disclosure

                              Comments:
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            As advised by the Regional Safeguards Secretariat, specific safeguards instruments are not required.
                            Relevant elements of the IP Policy have been incorporated into the project design as described in the
                            PAD. As such, the date on which the PAD is finalized is listed as the Date of Receipt by the Bank.


                                                                         Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Tenzin Dolma Norbhu
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Randeep Sudan (SM)                          Date: 29-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
