INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO72
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Myanmar                    Project ID:   P152936
Project Name:    National Electrification Project (P 152936)
Task Team        Dejan R. Ostojic
Leader(s):
Estimated        13-Apr-2015                Estimated     27-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     550.00             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               50.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     300.00
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)               200.00
Total                                                           550.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
19.    The project development objective is to help increase access to electricity in Myanmar.
C. Project Description
The expected results of the Project will include new household connections in urban and rural areas
across the country. Also, the project will help establish and support a coordinated sector-wide
institutional framework for the implementation of national electrification program, and strengthen


﻿institutional capacity of implementing agencies, including both public and private sector active in the
grid rollout and off-grid pre-electrification.
The proposed grid roll-out program will not only improve the well-being of the affected population
O
by better lighting, telecommunications and entertainment, but also enable income-generation
opportunities and enhanced productivity. Importantly, the program will prioritize connections for
health clinics and schools, particularly in poor and vulnerable areas, to maximize developmental
impacts.
The project will include an off-grid pre-electrification program to directly benefit the poor and
vulnerable households by targeting those who reside outside the realm of power grid and are
expected to receive grid-based electricity services more than 10 years after the first phase of NEP.
The project will also include a Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) to allow a
rapid response and quick support for emergency recovery and reconstruction in case of an adverse
natural disaster event.
Many of these project benefits will occur over time and will continue to accrue many years after the
project is completed. An impact evaluation to establish the baseline and assess these benefits in a
timely and systematic manner will be initiated along with the proposed project.
Achievement of the project development objective will be measured by the core sector indicator
(CSI): People provided with access to electricity under the project by household connections.
As a part of CSI monitoring, the project will also measure (i) number of new household customers
connected to national grid; (ii) number of new household customers with access to electricity
services from off-grid systems; and (iii) number of direct female beneficiaries out of people provided
with access to electricity by household connections to the grid and off-grid solutions.
Intermediate result indicators will include (i) amount of investment financing from the private sector,
development partners and the government's budget leveraged for the electrification; (ii) permanent
national electrification executive secretariat (NEES) established, adequately staffed and functional in
line with its mandate; (iii) number of NEES and other agency staff trained; and (iv) number of
a       qualified private sector operators/ village cooperatives participating in the grid and off-grid
electrification program.
The proposed project has three main components.
Component 1: Grid rollout [IDA US$ 200 million]. The grid component will support the extension
of distribution networks currently operated by Yangon Electricity Supply Board (YESB) and
Electricity Supply Enterprise (ESE) and connections of villages and households which are identified
in NEP as closest to the existing national grid and, thus, on the least-cost path for the grid rollout.
This component will include (i) expansion of existing Medium Voltage (MV) substations and
construction of new MV substations, (ii) construction of new MV lines, Low Voltage (LV) lines and
MV/LV transformers; and (iii) household connections and meters. It is expected that the primary
distribution MV parts (above 11 kV) will be implemented by ESE and YESB, while the 11 kV and
LV components (including household connections) will be implemented through a public private
partnership or direct private investments.


﻿The Bank financing for the grid rollout will include two modalities. First, IDA will finance
procurement of MV goods (transformers, poles, conductors, insulators, switchgear, materials etc.)
which will be installed by ESE and YESB to expand the primary distribution network (above 11 kV).
Second, IDA and IFC will use part of the IDA funds to support the private sector participation in the
O
expansion of secondary distribution network (11kV and 0.4 kV). The joint WBG team will develop
and put in place a 'Menu of Options' for private sector participation. This could include (a) IDA
funds to buy down the capital cost of assets and services; (b) Output Based Aid (OBA) scheme,
whereby IDA funds would pay to the (private) service provider the difference in tariff between what
the consumers are able to pay, and the tariff level that would deliver to the service provider an
adequate (regulated) return; and (c) IDA support to selected concessioners in carrying out
distribution activities in franchise areas of YESB and ESE. The above 'Menu of Options" is not
exclusive and will be modified and adapted to the evolving conditions in the distribution sector
during the project preparation.
Component 2: Off-grid pre-electrification [IDA US$ 80 million]. The off-grid component will target
households which are located outside the realm of the existing national grid and, thus, unlikely to
receive grid-based access in the next 10 years. The pre-electrification will be based on application of
mini-grids and household energy systems, including solar photovoltaic (PV) systems, mini-
hydropower (not expected to exceed 1 MW), wind, diesel and hybrid systems (e.g. diesel/solar).
Currently, MFLRD is responsible for the off-grid rural electrification through its local DRD
(Department for Rural Development) offices. The implementation modalities for the off-grid
electrification, including IDA and IFC support to the private sector, will be developed during the
project preparation.
Component 3: Capacity building and technical assistance (TA) [IDA US$ 20 million]. This
component will provide TA and advisory support to GoM agencies responsible for the planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation of the national electrification program. The capacity
building will cover all institutional levels (union, state/ region, and district) involved in the NEP
planning and implementation, including technical design, economic and financial analysis,
environmental and social impact management, as well as procurement and financial management.
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response [US$ 0 million]. The objective of this "zero
component" is to allow a rapid reallocation of IDA credit proceeds from other components to provide
o emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an adverse natural disaster event. This
component would finance public and private sector expenditures on a positive list of goods and/or
specific works, goods, services and emergency operation costs required for Myanmar's emergency
recovery. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) Operational Manual will apply
to this component, detailing financial management, procurement, safeguard and any other necessary
implementation arrangements.
The proposed project will establish the basis for a sustained engagement of the WBG in supporting
public and private sector investments needed to achieve universal access to electricity in Myanmar
by 2030, as well as to strengthen institutional capacity of GoM. It is expected that the programmatic
engagement will comprise three phases with the first phase covering 2015-2019. In addition to
working with the public and private sector investors, the joint WBG energy team will work closely
with all development partners (DPs) active in the power sector (ADB, JICA, KfW, DFID, Norway,
Australia, etc.) and the NEP will be designed as an open platform which DPs can also use in
supporting the electrification in Myanmar. Such a coordinated, sector-wide approach is considered
the most effective in delivering benefits of electrification and working together with the GoM, DPs


﻿and the private sector towards twin goals of reducing extreme poverty and increasing shared
prosperity in Myanmar.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Q       Electrification investments or any intervention under the Project will for now not be restricted to
certain areas or specific sites in Myanmar. It is expected that the project implementation will
eventually include all 64 districts covering all Regions and States in Myanmar.
Using a least-cost approach, NEP has identified initial target areas for both the grid and off-grid
components. Based on the initial lists, the district engineers of MOEP and MLFRD (District PMOs)
have started identifying priority investments needed in each district. In addition to the least cost
principle, the proposed priorities at the district level will take into account other criteria, such as
imminent risk of power shortage in the district and potential congestion of the upstream substation in
supplying more residential customers, and environmental and social criteria such as the inclusion of
the ethnic minorities, vulnerable and poor people through explicit selection criteria. These criteria
will be developed based on findings from a Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) carried
out during project preparation. The priority investments by district will be aggregated at the Union
level after consultations with the district and the state/ regional authorities to ensure a strong support
and ownership of the electrification program at all levels.
Working with the selection criteria and procedures established during project preparation,
subsequently specific investment proposals for funding from the Project will be submitted, screened
and designed during project implementation. As a commitment in relation to the Thaton Power
Station supported by the Bank-financed Myanmar Electric Power Project, Thaton District and the
three villages near the power station will be prioritized for rural electrification under the NEP.
However, the upgrading of the power station will not be completed until 2017 and the design of the
rural electrification investments in the area will not be prepared until during implementation of NEP.
The site will be included in the PSIA and consultation process for preparation of NEP, but since site-
specific information for Thaton and all other sites will only become available with the investment
proposals during project implementation site-specific safeguards instruments will not be prepared
until project implementation. Instead an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be prepared during project preparation with provisions for screening sub-projects and
preparing site-specific safeguards instruments.
The social impacts will be assessed through the PSIA which is taking place in two phases. The first
phase (PSIAl) focused on generating an overall understanding of access to electricity (barriers to
access in rural and urban areas and for poor and marginalized households in particular), uses of
electricity, quality of service and affordability of new tariffs of April 2014. The PSIA phase 1 report
was finalized in December 2014. The second phase (PSIA2) which will take place from January to
May 2015 aims to provide more in depth inputs to the design of subsidy schemes/tariff structure and
additional information to inform the design of the Myanmar National Electrification Project. The
ESMF and project design will integrate the data, analysis of potential project impacts and mitigations
measures of the PSIA phase 2 report which will be available by project appraisal.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Following the NEP recommendations, the government has established a National Electrification
Executive Committee (NEEC) under the patronage of the Vice President through a decree (August
27, 2014). NEEC is chaired by the minister of MOEP and co-chaired by the minister of MLFRD.


﻿Also, a permanent NEEC Secretariat has been established in MOEP and MLFRD, overseeing Project
Management Offices (PMOs) which are responsible for the technical activities carried out by ESE,
YESB and DRD. Detailed TORs are under development for each entity and will be incorporated in
the project Operational Manual (OM).
0
The institutional capacity in MOEP and MLFRD is low for all aspects of the electrification program,
including capacity to implement and monitor safeguard requirements. Also, ESE (and to a less
degree YESB) will require significant institutional strengthening in order to cope with the required
doubling of electrification rate envisaged under the project. Particular attention is required for
capacity building at the state/ regional/ district levels which will have important roles in project
implementation. Currently, government offices at these levels have no capacity to coordinate
electrification activities and have no experience concerning safeguards.
As part of Project preparation, the Bank team will carry out an assessment of required capacities of
the PMOs, including for safeguards requirements and provide the necessary training and support
during preparation, appraisal and implementation. This will build on the training which the Bank
already is providing to MOEP and MLFRD (on geospatial and investment planning). Also, the
capacity building will draw lessons from the on-going Bank projects in MOEP (Myanmar Electric
Power Project) and MLFRD (CDD project). The Project will include a comprehensive capacity
building program that includes the creation of capabilities, both at the implementing institutions as
well as directly with the PMOs, for screening, implementing and monitoring of safeguard
requirements.
An important part of the project preparation and implementation will be consultations with the local
authorities, Civil Society Organizations (CSOs), private sector and the general public in areas
included in the electrification program. This is necessary to mitigate risks associated with the
environmental and social aspects of the electrification program, as well as to take into consideration
affordability, social inclusion and other factors which can affect the achievement of project
objectives at the village and household levels. The results of the PSIA and consultations will be fully
integrated in the project design in order to mitigate any negative impacts on the poor and vulnerable
households during the project implementation. The PSIA will review issues such as accessibility,
affordability, vulnerability, poverty, gender, productive uses and benefits related to electricity and
potential social impacts and risks from project proposed interventions.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Frank Van Woerden (GENDR)
Patricia Maria Fernandes (GSURR)
Peter Leonard (OPSOR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will invest substantially in grid roll-out
OP/BP 4.01                              through the purchase of equipment including for
MV-substations (expansion of existing substations
and to be built), MV/LV transformers, MV and LV
lines, household connections, meters, and off-grid
systems including solar PV systems, mini-


﻿hydropower, wind, diesel and hybrid systems.
Environmental impacts for grid extensions are
related to works at substations and the installation of
power lines, which for instance may require safe
disposal of construction and other waste. These
substations are small and impacts are expected to be
limited. Off-grid investments could include systems
based on diesel generators, wind turbines and small
scale hydropower expected not to exceed 1 MW.
Possible impacts related for instance to fuel usage
and installation of turbines in water streams would
require environmental control measures but
investments will not go beyond village level schemes
(in principle less than 1 MW) and potential impacts
are expected to be limited. In view of this, the project
has been given a Category B classification under
OP4.0 1. During project preparation, the modalities
for selection and implementing sub-projects will be
determined. Arguably, the single type of projects that
could challenge the Category B classification could
be the off-grid mini hydro-systems. Given that these
systems remain below 1 MW, which would use
around 10% or less of the available water course
flow for power generation, without a need for
building significant reservoirs or land-take, it is not
expected that these systems would require a different
categorization, but this will be further investigated
and substantiated during project preparation.
Project preparation will focus on building the
capacity with the Project counterparts, to implement
the Project with dedicated staff, capacity and strong
mechanisms and procedures in place to screen,
assess, plan and monitor the implementation of sub-
projects. This capacity will also be required to
support applicants with the efficient preparation of
proposals for sub-projects. The implementation stage
of the Project will also include the design of sub-
projects based on approved application for sub-
projects. Given this need to establish institutional
arrangements and build implementation capacity
first, all sub-projects and equipment purchases will
be determined during project implementation and
thus framework arrangements are required and will
be prepared and agreed during project preparation for
the modalities of selection and implementation of
equipment purchases and implementation of


﻿subprojects. These framework arrangements will
include an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), including a Resettlement Policy
Framework and an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework, that will be prepared and adopted during
project preparation. The ESMF will also include
guidance on health and safety issues to be followed
during project implementation based on the World
Bank Group's Environmental, Health and Safety
(EHS) Guidelines for Power Transmission and
Distribution and including provisions for
beneficiaries and worker health and safety. The
ESMF will provide guidelines for screening of all
subprojects and all project activities including
procurement of goods that would result in
investments, determination of requirements for
assessment and preparation of further documentation
in accordance with the World Bank safeguards
policies including site-specific environmental and
social management plans (ESMPs) and the
implementation and monitoring of these ESMPs. If
needed, the ESMPs will include a Resettlement
Action Plan and Indigenous Peoples Plan as
described below.
As indicated previously, the social impacts will be
assessed through the PSIA which is taking place in
two phases. The first phase (PSIAl) focused on
generating an overall understanding of access to
electricity (barriers to access in rural and urban areas
and for poor and marginalized households in
particular), uses of electricity, quality of service and
affordability of new tariffs of April 2014. The PSIA
phase 1 report was finalized in December 2014. The
second phase (PSIA2) which will take place from
January to May 2015 aims to provide more in depth
inputs to the design of subsidy schemes/tariff
structure and additional informati on to inform the
design of the Myanmar National Electrification
Project. The ESMF and project design will integrate
the data, analysis of potential project impacts and
mitigations measures of the PSIA phase 2 report
which will be available by project appraisal.
Given the current lack of capacity with the
implementing agencies and other parties that are
expected to implement the project and investments in


﻿sub-projects, a comprehensive safeguards capacity
building program will be required to prepare
designated PMO staff and others for project
implementation. This training program will be
designed and start in January 2015 to prepare project
counterparts and staff already during project
implementation.
In addition to sub-projects that are implemented by
ESE and YESB, it is expected that part of the sub-
projects' investments to be funded by the Project will
be implemented by private investors / operators and
local communities. The ESMF will identify and
include procedures for screening, impact
assessments, planning, implementation and
monitoring that differentiate for the various
categories of implementing entities. Since the Project
in principle will only finance the purchase of goods,
the ESMF procedures will consider that these
investments will be matched with funding from
investors and local communities, as applicable, e.g.
in-kind contributions to implement the project. It is
envisaged that all project funded activities, including
the sub-project that are implemented by private
parties will be fully complying with the World Bank
Safeguard Policies. Diversion of safeguarding
responsibilities to investors under OP 4.03 is not
foreseen at this stage of project preparation as the
capacity concerning safeguards is not expected to be
in place, but will be further investigated prior to
appraisal.
The Project is proposed to be classified as Category
'B' as per OP 4.01 as the safeguard impacts of the
type of subprojects supported are site-specific, few
are irreversible and mitigation measures can be
designed as part of the ESMF to minimize and
mitigate impacts during project implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD          Impacts on natural habitats are not expected, but
cannot be fully excluded at this stage. This will be
determined with the preparation of the ESMF. If
needed, provisions for screening investments for this
policy under project implementation with
requirements as part of environmental assessment
and ESMP, will be included in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            TBD          This policy is not expected to be triggered, which
will be further verified during project preparation.


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD          This policy is not expected to be triggered, which
will be further verified during project preparation.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          Since specific project investments are not known by
OP/BP 4.11                                 appraisal, it is not possible to rule out the presence of
physical cultural resources. Provisions for screening
investments during project implementation and,
when needed, including requirements as part of
environmental assessment and ESMP, to avoid
impacting physical cultural resources, will be part of
the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          The project is expected to be country-wide and cover
4.10                                       all States and Regions, including areas with ethnic
minorities who are covered by OP 4.10. Ethnic
minorities in Myanmar live mainly, however not
exclusively, in the seven States (Kayah, Kayin,
Kachin, Chin, Mon, Rakhine, and Shan). Ethnic
minority communities would benefit from project
activities. However, the project also presents risks
and challenges concerning ethnic minorities,
particularly in terms of ensuring that they will
receive appropriate benefits. Investing in distribution
networks and off-grid electrification in conflict or
post-conflict areas where ethnic minority
organizations provide parallel social services and
community infrastructure also poses risks that
require a good consultation and project management
approach. Since specific project sites will not be
identified during project preparation, an Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared as part
of the ESMF to provide guidance on the screening
and planning process for sub-projects, including
requirements for sit-specific social assessment and
consultations and the preparation of site-specific
Indigenous Peoples Plans to address particular issues
concerning ethnic minorities.
Rural electrification of the villages near the Thaton
Power Station in Mon State supported by the Bank-
financed Myanmar Electric Power Project will be
prioritized for inclusion in the National
Electrification Program. The villages are inhabited
mainly by ethnic minorities. However, as the
upgrading of the power plant will not be completed
until 2017 the project design cannot be prepared until
project implementation. An Indigenous Peoples Plan
for Thaton and other sub-projects in areas with ethnic
minorities will be prepared during project


﻿implementation once site-specific information will
become available with the investment proposals.
A Poverty and Social Impact Assessment will be
undertaken during project preparation to assess
potential project impacts and risks as well as issues
pertaining to accessibility, affordability,
vulnerability, poverty, gender, productive uses and
benefits related to electricity. The PSIA will include
social assessment requirements of OP 4.10, as well
as OP 4.01, and will inform project design, the
ESMF and the IPPF to address any particular issues
concerning ethnic minorities. Thaton District and the
villages near the power station supported by the
Myanmar Electric Power Project will be covered by
the PSIA. Consultations following OP 4.10
provisions will be undertaken with Thaton villages,
other select villages in different States and Regions,
and civil society organizations, including ethnic
minority organizations.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          Since specific project investments are not known by
BP 4.12                                    appraisal, it is not possible to rule out that some sub-
project would involve involuntary resettlement in the
form of land acquisition or loss of other assets. The
project will finance distribution networks, including
expansion of existing Medium Voltage (MV)
substations and construction of new MV substations,
(ii) construction of new MV lines, Low Voltage (LV)
lines and MV/LV transformers. These investments
have a minimal footprint, normally follow existing
right-of-way and have some flexibility in terms of
specific location to avoid land acquisition or loss of
property. However, some land acquisition or loss of
assets may be needed for some sub-projects,
particular in cases where new substations will be
financed. Off-grid investments, such as mini-hydro
systems may also have minor impacts. Potential
impacts and risks in this regard will be assessed in
more detail during project preparation as part of the
PSIA. The PSIA will also assess any common
arrangements for village based compensation for loss
of assets or voluntary donations of land for rural
electrification infrastructure undertaken by village
cooperatives and other private sector entities. A
Resettlement Policy Framework will be prepared as
part of the ESMF to provide guidance on the
screening and planning process for sub-projects


﻿concerning involuntary resettlement impacts and will
include a protocol for voluntary land donations.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    TBD          The project interventions is not expected to require
the construction of dams or impoundment structures,
nor is it expected that they could cause impacts to
existing structures as governed by this policy. This
will need to be confirmed particularly for off-grit
small-scale hydropower systems during project
preparation. Hence, at concept stage the applicability
of this policy has been classified as 'TBD'.
Projects on International    No           The project interventions are in nature and in scale
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      not expected to cause any drainage or discharges to
surface waters, nor entail any significant usage of
surface water for cooling or other purposes, that
would affect international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project interventions are not in disputed areas
BP 7.60                                   and will be wholly within the borders of Myanmar.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 27-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
A.     Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage
ISDS would be prepared:
February 27, 2015
B.     For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-
stage ISDS:
C.     Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
.*         needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
February 27, 2015
A safeguards capacity building program for project counterparts, implementing agencies and
dedicated staff that will work on safeguards will be determined and commence in January 2015.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared during project
preparation. The ESMF will cover all environmental safeguard policies triggered, including OP
4.01, OP 4.04 and OP 4.11. The ESMF will also include an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (OP 4.10) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (OP 4.12). The ESMF will be
disclosed in country and be subject to public consultations prior to project appraisal.
Project preparation includes a Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) to, inter alia, assess
potential social impacts under OP 4.10 and OP 4.01. PSIA findings will be integrated into project
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿design, including the ESMF, RPF and IPPF, to enhance project benefits, particularly for the poor,
and to avoid or mitigate risks and adverse social and environmental impacts.
Public consultations will be undertaken during project preparation to inform the preparation of the
project and the ESMF. The draft ESMF will be publicly disclosed to seek input and feedback from
civil society and interested stakeholders, including ethnic minority organizations.
O
2 IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s):    ame: Dejan R. Ostojic
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards   Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                    Date: 09-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                 Date: 12-Jan-2015
Manager:


