                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8763
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Mexico                            Project ID:    P149858
                            Project Name:     Mexico Reducing Inequality of Educational Opportunity Project (P149858)
                            Task Team         Ciro Avitabile
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         23-Jun-2014                       Estimated   22-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEDDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (66%), Pre-primary education (31%), Public administration-
                                              Education (3%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       150.00           Total Bank Financing:  150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   150.00
                              Total                                                                                   150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project's development objective is to improve parental competencies in Early Childhood
                           Development (ECD) in targeted rural communities and increase the transition rate from the primary
                           to the secondary education level in CONAFE-administered schools in target municipalities.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         The Project's objective would be achieved through the re-designing and scaling-up of interventions at
                         the early childhood and basic education levels. These interventions aim at improving parental
                         competencies in early childhood development and increasing the transition rate from primary to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         secondary education by strengthening the involvement and the collaboration of parents, communities
                         and teachers in the delivery of education services.

                         The Project would seek to scale up two of the four interventions that were already included under the
                         Mexico Compensatory Education Project (P101369, Ln. 7859-MX): ECD and APIs. The Project
                         would continue following a multi-layered approach that recognizes the importance of multiple actors
                         in improving student outcomes throughout the different education stages. The ECD Intervention
                         would promote the cognitive and non-cognitive development of children ages 0-4 through an
                         improvement of parental competencies in early child development. The API Intervention
                         acknowledges that students, parents, and teachers play a key role in the learning production function
                         of students in basic education and would seek to strengthen the abilities of all of them in order to
                         increase the transition rate from primary to secondary education. Finally, the Project would provide
                         technical assistance to improve the design and the implementation of the FORTALECE program,
                         which tries to improve school outcomes of children in targeted communities by strengthening the
                         role of community and increasing the accountability of the school authorities in the community
                         schools.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Compensatory Education Project (Loan 7859-MX, P101369) targeted the poorest 172
                         municipalities in Mexico. Following the new social protection priorities defined by the Mexican
                         Government, the proposed Project would target the 405 poor and marginalized municipalities
                         included in the program “Cruzada Nacional Contra el Hambre” (CNCH). Because many of the
                         indigenous communities are marginalized and poor, this new focus would increase coverage of
                         indigenous localities from about 27% in the previous Project to about 44% in the selected
                         municipalities under CNCH; there is an indigenous population of 5.9 million in these localities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         representing 53% of the national indigenous population. Coverage for ECD would be nationwide. It
                         is important to note that although the CNCH program may incorporate additional municipalities in
                         the future, it has been agreed with the Borrower that the Project would continue to focus only on the
                         initial 405 municipalities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       No               The proposed Project seeks to improve education
                          BP 4.01                                             outcomes in the schools of poor communities
                                                                              through activities such as early childhood
                                                                              development and special assistance to students
                                                                              and teachers in these schools. These types of
                                                                              activities do not cause any adverse impact on the
                                                                              environment. The Project has thus been classified
                                                                              as “C” and OP/BP 4.01 is not triggered.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               The Project would only conduct activities
                                                                              intended to improve education outcomes in poor


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                                                         schools and therefore is not expected to cause any
                                                                         impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            The Project would not be situated near forests and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         would not have any impact on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No            This Project would not finance any procurement
                                                                         or significant use of pesticides or any activity
                                                                         related to pest management in any way.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The Project would not include any activity that
                         BP 4.11                                         may affect existing physical cultural resources or
                                                                         works that may result in chance findings of such
                                                                         resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes           The Project would target the 405 municipalities
                                                                         under the Cruzada contra el Hambre.
                                                                         Approximately 44% of the localities in these
                                                                         municipalities are of indigenous descent; they
                                                                         speak their own language, maintain -at different
                                                                         degrees- their traditional organizations and
                                                                         identify and recognize themselves as indigenous.
                                                                         The indigenous population in these localities is
                                                                         5.9 million, corresponding to 53% of the national
                                                                         indigenous population. The IPP prepared for the
                                                                         previous Project has been updated using the
                                                                         results of project evaluations and recently
                                                                         conducted consultation. Evaluations conducted
                                                                         from 2009 to 20012 indicate that the Project has
                                                                         adequate targeting and that its activities have
                                                                         widespread acceptance and are well-received by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         indigenous communities. The majority of the
                                                                         parents (90%) give a positive qualification to
                                                                         ECD, FORTALECE and APIs. Consultation was
                                                                         conducted in selected localities according to the
                                                                         following criteria: (i) localities under the CNCH;
                                                                         (ii) where all Project activities are implemented;
                                                                         (iii) in localities with a high representation of
                                                                         some the major indigenous peoples (nahuas in
                                                                         Puebla, maya varieties in Chiapas). Though the
                                                                         large number (62) of indigenous peoples in the
                                                                         country make it difficult to find a nationally-
                                                                         representative sample, the two entities where
                                                                         consultation was conducted can be considered to
                                                                         properly reflect the common characteristics of
                                                                         indigenous populations in Mexico in terms of
                                                                         factors that can explain the gaps in education
                                                                         attainments. Among these are geographic
                                                                         dispersion, difficult access, and monolingual
                                                                         prevalence. Moreover, Náhutal is the indigenous



                                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                                       language with the highest number of speakers in
                                                                       16 entities. Consultations unanimously
                                                                       corroborated support of the program and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       positive effects of ECD and APIs. However, in
                                                                       extreme poverty conditions, language barriers and
                                                                       some traditions (job preference for men, for
                                                                       instance) may be hindering results. The IPP
                                                                       recommends: (a) revising the intervention model,
                                                                       taking into account language barriers, updating
                                                                       and improving educational materials and
                                                                       methods, and developing a true bilingual
                                                                       education model; (b) increasing support to APIs,
                                                                       including better accommodation conditions and
                                                                       incentives to remain in the program; (c) provision
                                                                       of better infrastructure to carry out Project
                                                                       activities; (d) offering concrete incentives to
                                                                       mothers to participate in ECD, taking into
                                                                       account indigenous culture (most women are
                                                                       monolingual) and competition from other social
                                                                       programs offering transfers; (e) strengthening
                                                                       linkages with other programs, such as
                                                                       Oportunidades and PEC, and indigenous
                                                                       education programs in the Secretariat of Public
                                                                       Education. Interventions targeted at addressing
                                                                       points a and d would be piloted in the states of
                                                                       Oaxaca and evaluated through a rigorous impact
                                                                       evaluation. Based on the results of a cost-benefit
                                                                       analysis, they would be scaled-up in the entire
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       country. The team is actively promoting the
                                                                       dialogue between CONAFE and the authorities
                                                                       that manage PEC and Oportunidades, relying on
                                                                       the support of the Bank's teams working on both
                                                                       projects. Conditional on data availability, the take
                                                                       up of the Oportunidades program among
                                                                       CONAFE beneficiaries will be monitored. The
                                                                       Project could also benefit from a gender approach
                                                                       by strengthening the role of the “Promotores
                                                                       Comunitarios” and engaging women that are
                                                                       traditionally responsible for the care of children
                                                                       within indigenous communities. Certifying
                                                                       promotores (as has been done in some states) has
                                                                       proved to be positive. The possibility of
                                                                       increasing the number of female APIs would also
                                                                       help increase women's participation.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   No           The Project would not include any activity that
                         4.12                                          requires land acquisition or major construction
                                                                       that may cause any type of involuntary



                                                               Page 4 of 7
                                                                                 resettlement as defined in the policy.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The proposed Project would not involve any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 activity related to the construction or
                                                                                 rehabilitation of dams and would not depend upon
                                                                                 the operations of an existing dam.
                            Projects on International        No                  The proposed Project would not affect
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The Project would not be situated in any disputed
                            7.60                                                 areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project would have a positive social impact in reducing inequality in education by targeting
                              interventions in the country's poorest localities, and especially in the 405 municipalities under the
                              CNCH. In order to ensure that Mexico's indigenous populations benefit equally or
                              disproportionately from Project interventions, an Indigenous People's Plan (IPP) was developed
                              based on the experiences of the previous operation and the new targeting mechanisms defined by
                              CONAFE. The IPP discusses i) the targeting of investments; ii) actions for improving the
                              effectiveness of interventions in indigenous areas; and iii) the associated budget for IPP
                              implementation. For the ECD component, the IPP mentions the importance of the materials to
                              support parental learning. For the APIs, language comes across as the most important issue, and
                              context specific solutions are recommended as there as the needs change according to the
                              geographic location. The Project is classified as category C. It does not include construction or
                              rehabilitation of infrastructure, therefore the OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                              triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Targeting: The change in focus from 172 poor municipalities in the previous operation to the 405
                              municipalities in the CNCH would increase the potential benefits for indigenous populations.
                              These municipalities comprise 60,248 localities, of which 44 percent (26,330) include indigenous
                              populations, comprising 53 percent of the total indigenous population in Mexico. This percentage
                              was approximately 25 percent under the previous Project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              CONAFE has been implementing the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) prepared for the previous
                              operation. This institutional knowledge is expected to facilitate implementation of the IPP under
                              the new operation. The proposed technical assistance component would provide information for
                              and support this effort through studies such as the impact evaluation of the API Intervention,
                              which should differentiate an impact assessment of the program on indigenous communities. The
                              strengthened monitoring and evaluation system that would be developed with the technical


                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           assistance can further contribute to assess the implementation of the IPP. CONAFE’s institutional
                           capacity could also benefit from a stronger coordination with programs such as Oportunidades,
                           which operates in indigenous localities and supports community organization (Comités de
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Educación, for instance) and is also developing its own ECD program. The Comisión Nacional
                           para el Desarrollo de los Pueblos Indígenas (CDI), while leading the conceptual and analytical
                           work on the identification and characterization of indigenous peoples in Mexico, is not involved
                           inn any operational activity.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultations on the new IPP were held during preparation in various indigenous communities
                           throughout Mexico. In addition to identifying lessons learned for improving design of
                           interventions and operational elements, the consultations served to ground truth the relevance of
                           proposed improvements in the operational manuals of the interventions. The IPP was disclosed on
                           June 20, 2014 on the Bank’s website and CONAFE’s website on June 19, 2014.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jun-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jun-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mexico                                                           19-Jun-2014
                           Comments: The IPP was published on CONAFE's website and can be accessed at http://www.
                                         conafe.gob.mx/Documents/2014_Plan_de_Pueblos_Indigenas.pdf.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: Ciro Avitabile
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager:      Name: Rafael E. De Hoyos Navarro (PMGR) Date: 15-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
