                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA6099
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Oct-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Oct-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                               Project ID:    P132750
                            Project Name:      Project for Strengthening the National Rural Transport Program (P132750)
                            Task Team          A.K. Farhad Ahmed
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          02-Oct-2013                         Estimated   23-Dec-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDT                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (80%), Public administration-
                                              Transportation (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Rural policies and institutions (30%),
                                              Trade facilitation and market access (20%), Decentra lization (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     182.70           Total Bank Financing:                   100.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            71.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  100.00
                              UK British Department for International Development
                                                                                                                             11.50
                              (DFID)
                              Total                                                                                         182.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective for this operation is to enhance the availability and reliability of


                                                                         Page 1 of 9
                         transport connectivity for rural communities in target districts.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The concept for this project involves a framework for rural transport infrastructure investment that is:
                         (i) grounded on making the investments (made plus will be made in future) sustainable; (ii) demand
                         driven; (iii) focused on the achievement of results; and (iv) focused on developing and improving
                         strong Government systems for the long run. The project has two different components as described
                         below.

                         Component A (institutional strengthening and technical assistance):
                         Component A of SNRTP will fund three categories of activities, including: (i) institutional
                         strengthening and technical assistance; (ii) third party monitoring of physical works under
                         Component B of the project; (iii) an impact study of selected project interventions; (iv) a rural market
                         study
                         Target districts will receive technical assistance from Component A for: (i) updating District
                         Transport Master Plans (DTMPs) and Multi-Year Rolling Maintenance Plans (MYRMP); (ii)
                         consultancy support to manage safeguards related preparation and implementation tasks; (iii)
                         consultancy support to assist with technical implementation tasks such as site supervision, contract
                         management, and quality control; and (iv) staff training on specific technical, fiduciary, or safeguards
                         related subjects.

                         Component B:
                         Component B (civil works):
                         Component B will support districts to implement physical works needed for (i) upgrading or
                         rehabilitating rural transport infrastructure; and (ii) maintaining rural transport infrastructure. There
                         will be two funding windows within component B as follows:
                         �        Window 1 will support routine and periodic maintenance of roads and crossing structures
                         using a simplified output-based disbursement approach that ties a portion of payments to the
                         completion of works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         �        Window 2 will support road upgrading (or rehabilitation) and new crossing structure
                         construction as needed to provide all-weather connectivity.

                         Window 1 will only support works within existing rights of way along existing roads or crossing
                         structures. Maintenance that requires new or extended rights of way will be considered under
                         Window 2 as rehabilitation works.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         7.       The proposed project is located in Nepal, a geographically small landlocked country. Nestled
                         between China and India, the two most populous and among the world’s most rapidly growing
                         economies, Nepal’s territory is mostly mountainous/hilly and its transport infrastructure is poor.
                         Many communities have only limited access to markets, social services, general economic
                         opportunity. The country is located in the central part of the Himalayan arc and occupies nearly one
                         third of the mountain range. 83 percent of Nepal’s geographical area is mountainous and the
                         remaining 17 percent lies in the northern edge of the alluvial plains of the great Gangetic Basin.
                         Project activities will occur in 30-35 districts of Nepal’s (total number of districts in Nepal is 75 in
                         number). The environmental conditions and nature widely vary depending on mountain or plain/
                         Tarai area. Nepal’s mountains are fragile with natural incidences of landslides and soil erosion. There
                         are important environmentally sensitive sites in project districts. These include National Parks and


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         other protected areas, water bodies recognized as important biodiversity habitat (Ramsar sites or
                         habitat of endangered or protected species), forests (including state and community forests) and
                         various cultural heritage sites. Since this is a project that covers almost half of the districts in Nepal it
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will mainly use a framework approach to selecting investments. Although tentative project locations
                         are being worked out, they may change during the project implementation. Nonetheless, the type of
                         activities/ subprojects is known. Component B of the project will support physical works to maintain
                         and upgrade rural transport. The physical works include road and crossing structure maintenance,
                         upgrading and construction of crossing structures.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (SASDI)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (SASDS)
                         Rekha Shreesh (SASDT)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/           Yes                Environmental issues of rural road upgrading
                         BP 4.01                                                 activities includes landslides & erosion, water-
                                                                                 logging, management of excess construction
                                                                                 spoils, degradation of agricultural lands, dusts,
                                                                                 disruption to community infrastructures, and
                                                                                 impacts on community forests. Previous project
                                                                                 (Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization
                                                                                 Project – RAIDP) used Framework approach to
                                                                                 address these issues, which is under review and
                                                                                 revision for this project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04            Yes                Although precise location of subprojects are not-
                                                                                 known, there are protected areas in the districts in
                                                                                 which project activities will be implemented.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Some of the rural road that touch or partially pass
                                                                                 through protected area buffer zone may not be
                                                                                 ruled out. Environmental screening and EMP of
                                                                                 such road will assess the risks and include
                                                                                 mitigation measures. Clearance of the competent
                                                                                 authority is must. Subproject located in core
                                                                                 protected area will be excluded from project
                                                                                 support. Hence, impact on critical natural habitat
                                                                                 is not anticipated.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                     Yes                Previous project experience showed that many
                                                                                 rural road upgrading subprojects are likely to be
                                                                                 located in the community forests and state forests,
                                                                                 which may affect these forests. Environmental
                                                                                 screening and respective EMP will assess the
                                                                                 risks and include mitigation measures.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09                No                 Procurement of pesticide or use of pesticide is
                                                                                 not envisaged in this project, and project is not
                                                                                 expected to affect pest management (no




                                                                         Page 3 of 9
                                                                            biological/environmental pest control or use/
                                                                            reliance of synthetic chemical pesticides).
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             It is likely that local cultural sites are located
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.11                                         close to the rural roads. Since some civil works
                                                                            are involved, ‘chance finds’ at work sites is a
                                                                            likely impact that would have to be managed.
                                                                            Adverse impacts on any locally important cultural
                                                                            property would be examined, if any, for
                                                                            appropriate mitigation during planning and
                                                                            implementation stages.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes             Indigenous and vulnerable community is known
                                                                            to live across the country. Since exact location of
                                                                            sub projects are not known, the policy has been
                                                                            triggered. Consultations will be carried out with
                                                                            them for information dissemination of the
                                                                            proposed project, impact identification, design of
                                                                            mitigation measures and the positive impacts of
                                                                            the project. Vulnerable Community
                                                                            Development Plan will be prepared, disclosed and
                                                                            implemented.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             To the extent possible, DoLIDAR will consider
                            4.12                                            alternative designs and locations that minimize
                                                                            land acquisition and adverse social impacts.
                                                                            Project investments may require minor changes in
                                                                            road alignments, widening, or other
                                                                            improvements that make land taking on voluntary
                                                                            necessary. This may cause loss of land,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                            temporary or permanent loss of income or income
                                                                            sources. The project will try to avoid such sites to
                                                                            the extent possible. In case avoidance is not
                                                                            possible due to technical reasons, voluntary land
                                                                            donation impact mitigation plan will be prepared,
                                                                            disclosed and implemented.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              There is no construction of new dams or
                                                                            activities that are concerned with safe functioning
                                                                            of existing dams.
                            Projects on International         No              There are no interventions planned/proposed
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            over or around an international waterway that
                                                                            could cause a potential conflict. There are also no
                                                                            activities that may affect the use or pollute such a
                                                                            waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               The project activities will not be implemented in
                            7.60                                            any disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues


                                                                    Page 4 of 9
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Social and environmental impacts of the project will vary by the nature of the sub projects and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           their location. Maintenance works under Window 1 (Component B) are less likely to result in
                           significant impacts given the nature of works involved (e.g. shoulder and slope maintenance,
                           clearing drains, maintenance of road signs, road resurfacing, crossing structure maintenance, etc.).
                           However, full road upgrading and new crossing structure construction under Window 2
                           (Component B) will often require improved road sub-structures, new drainage works and new
                           retaining structures. Such works may result in significant adverse impacts. Where a new alignment
                           or realignment might be needed, it will be selected after considering two or more alternatives to
                           ensure that land acquisition, forest loss, landslides risks and other adverse impacts are minimized.

                           To the extent possible, DoLIDAR will consider alternative designs and locations that minimize
                           land acquisition and adverse social impacts. Project investments may require minor changes in
                           road alignments, widening, or other improvements that make land taking on voluntary necessary.
                           This may cause loss of land, temporary or permanent loss of income or income sources. The
                           project will try to avoid such sites to the extent possible. In case avoidance is not possible due to
                           technical reasons, voluntary land donation impact mitigation plan will be prepared, disclosed and
                           implemented Other key issues of concern in the management of social impacts, which will be
                           relevant to the project, are (i) National programs’ lack focus on vulnerable communities (e.g.
                           limited application of vulnerable community development plans); (ii) Nepalese laws do not allow
                           assistance to squatters and compensation payments for the restoration of livelihoods and
                           replacement costs of the properties, although in many cases such assistances/compensations are
                           provided informally; (iii) Nepal practices the notion of land donations, especially in projects in
                           rural areas, but such practices are hardly regulated and formalized, apart from internationally
                           financed projects;. The ESMF for the project covers all these issues.The environmental concerns
                           include: (i) landslides, soil erosion & slope instabilities; disposal of excavated materials, drain
                           outlets and drainage management, and quarrying operation in the hilly terrain, and (ii) water
Public Disclosure Copy




                           logging/flooding, borrow pit, sand and gravel extraction from rivers etc in the plain /Tarai areas.
                           Dust pollution, disruption to community infrastructure (water supply lines, irrigation structure,
                           foot trail, electricity lines etc), degradation of agricultural land, crushing operations, loss of tree
                           due to widening of road and fuel-wood by the construction workers, encroachment on cultural
                           sites, and health & safety of the workers and sanitation at labour camps/ work sites are other
                           coomonly encountered issues both in hill and plain areas.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to have limited adverse impacts from land acquisition and resettlement.
                           The experience from ongoing Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Project (RAIDP)
                           shows that adverse social impacts are negligible as only a narrow stretch ofland is donated by the
                           people and the area of impact is confined, mostly to the road corridor. The project is expected to
                           benefit many isolated communities due to improved physical access. The project will also benefit
                           indigenous communities that make up a third of the population in Nepal. Furthermore, past
                           experience shows that indigenous communities demand and support such projects to improve
                           physical access that is vital to public services and economic development. Rural road networks
                           have been expanding in Nepal in recent years with support from various donor agencies including
                           the World Bank as well through government own resources. Though single road’s environmental
                           impacts are generally assessed and mitigations employed in the donor supported activities,
                           probable impacts of road network development/ expansion on the environment (e.g on bio-


                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                           diversity, natural habitat, watershed degradation, prime agricultural lands, etc) have not been
                           systematically assessed. The proposed project includes an assessment of environmental and social
                           impacts of road network expansion during implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The subprojects with major social and environmental adverse impacts would be excluded.
                           Alternative designs and locations will be considered to avoid land taking on voluntary donation
                           basis and minimize adverse social and environmental impacts for each sub project. In case of any
                           adverse impact, for each sub project a specific management plan will be prepared and
                           implemented.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The sector wide Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) prepared by
                           DOLIDAR for the predecessor project encompasses environmental and social procedures,
                           practices, mitigation measures and analytical approaches applicable to road projects, and covers
                           the national legislative framework; potential environmental and social impacts of road projects;
                           consultation requirement; standards for land acquisition, compensation, and assistance; standard
                           impact mitigation measures; and treatment of vulnerable communities, including indigenous
                           peoples. The ESMF is comprehensive in scope with respect to road sector issues and its
                           procedures and requirements are consistent with the principles and attributes of OP/BP 4.10 on
                           Indigenous Peoples and OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement. The ESMF was followed to
                           mitigate adverse social and environmental impacts in RAIDP. Like RAIDP, DOLIDAR has
                           prepared Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF). The project specific
                           ESMF includes guidelines for preparation of sub project specific Environmental Management
                           Plans (EMP), Social Management Plans (SMP) and Vulnerable Community Development Plans
                           (VCDP). Based on social screening, a voluntary land donation impact mitigation plans (VDIMPs)
                           will be prepared and implemented in sub projects where private land will be taken on voluntary
                           basis. Similarly. a VCDP will be prepared in case there is presence of IPs and other disadvantaged
Public Disclosure Copy




                           groups in any sub project . There will be gender action plan for each sub project. The borrower as
                           part of project preparation has reviewed safeguard practices (both social and environmental).
                           These studies identified the safeguard related risks and proposed mitigation measures. The ESMF
                           has been accordingly revised..

                          The most significant issues with regard to safeguards are associated with Window 2 of Component
                          2 of the proposed project, namely upgrading the existing road and construction of crossing
                          structures. The Department of Local Infrastructure Development and Agricultural Roads
                          (DoLIDAR) under Ministry for Federal Affairs and Local Development (MoFALD) will be the
                          implementing agency of the project. DOLIDAR is familiar with the Bank’s safeguard
                          requirements, through its involvement in Rural Access Improvement and Decentralization Project
                          (RAIDP). The capacity of DoLIDAR and especially DDCs is generally weak in addressing
                          environmental impacts. SNRTP will appoint full-time Social and Environmental Safeguard
                          Advisers at the Central Project Coordination Unit (CPCU). Each of the two Project Coordination
                          Units (PCUs) will also have Social and Environmental Safeguard Specialists. A Safeguard
                          Specialist will also be appointed at each of the districts. The proposed operation will further build
                          upon DoLIDAR’s past experience in preparing and implementing Bank-financed projects in
                          compliance with all applicable safeguards policies. In the SNRTP, participating district will
                          receive support, under Component A, to manage safeguard works and training on environmental
                          and social management. At the DoLIDAR level, environmental management of expanding rural

                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           road networks and other rural infrastructures is being coordinated by Monitoring and Evaluation
                           Unit. As part of ESMF revision, institutional capacity in environmental management will be
                           further reviewed and assessed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders identified include those who will be adversely impacted, indigenous groups,
                           local government bodies such as village development committees (VDCs) and district
                           development committees (DDC), political parties, District Technical Office (DTO), CBOs
                           including Local Road Users Committee (LRUC) and Village Road Coordination Committee
                           (VRCC), Transport Associations and civil society members. Key stakeholders will be fully
                           consulted and involved in road sub-project selection, designing, implementation and monitoring
                           and supervision. Locals will be consulted in various phases of a project cycle; affected people will
                           be pre-informed about the loss and damages and possible benefits of the project and also received
                           the assistance on time. The local communities will be involved in road subproject selection,
                           screening and defining the impact corridor. The road users committees will be involved in
                           cadastral survey, preparation of management plans, implementation and as well as monitoring and
                           supervision. The DDC, as the main local project implementing body, will participate in overall
                           project activities through District Technical Office (DTO).

                           The borrower has already reviewed safeguard practices (both social and environmental) as a part
                           of the project preparation. These studies identified the safeguard related risks and proposed
                           mitigation measures. The ESMF is being revised based on the study recommendations. The
                           revised ESMF was disclosed in country on October 3, 2013. The ESMF has also been disclosed in
                           Bank’s Infoshop on October 4, 2013. The revised ESMF will be translated into Nepali and will be
                           distributed across all project districts. During the preparation of RAIDP’s ESMF, consultations
                           with key stakeholders and beneficiaries were carried out in randomly selected subprojects.
                           Separate consultations were held with vulnerable groups including, Dalits, ethnic indigenous
                           peoples, women, the elderly and landless. As outlined in the ESMF, subproject level consultations
Public Disclosure Copy




                           were carried out during implementation
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Oct-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         02-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      04-Oct-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Sector Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: A.K. Farhad Ahmed
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 29-Oct-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (SM)                      Date: 29-Oct-2013




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
