                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA7697
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Maldives                          Project ID:    P145317
                            Project Name:     Maldives: PFM Systems Strengthening Project (P145317)
                            Task Team         Jiwanka B. Wickramasinghe
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         20-Feb-2014                       Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SARFM                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          6.50                Total Bank Financing:       6.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                6.50
                              Total                                                                                    6.50
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objectives (PDO) are to enhance budget credibility, transparency,
                           and financial reporting of central government finances.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project aims to enhance budget credibility, transparency, financial reporting and
                           controls of central government finances. The proposed project will leverage the ongoing PFM work,

                                                                      Page 1 of 6
                         which is unfinished, to enable focusing on the immediate — indeed, urgent--requirements.

                         Project Components
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.    Strengthening the PFM Environment (US$1,400,000)

                         The objective of this component is to set the foundation and create an enabling environment for a
                         sound PFM system. This component will have 3 subcomponents: (1.1) strengthening the legislative
                         and institutional PFM framework, (1.2) enhancing the macro fiscal framework, and (1.3)
                         strengthening medium-term debt management.


                         1.1 Strengthening the legislative and institutional framework for PFM (US$440,000 ) .

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to enhance the legislative and institutional framework for
                         sustainable PFM development. A number of stand-alone pieces of legislation and sets of rules and
                         regulations governing various aspects of PFM have been introduced over recent years; these laws and
                         their interpretations at times undermine budget discipline and financial controls. This subcomponent
                         will include a comprehensive review of such laws and regulations to identify and recommend
                         measures to remove inconsistencies and fill gaps in the existing PFM regulatory framework. This
                         subcomponent will also finance part of the implementation of a communications strategy that focuses
                         on interpersonal communications, inter department/stakeholder communications, and change
                         management needed to support the legal and institutional changes that the subcomponent finances.
                         This subcomponent will also strengthen the institutional framework for identified departments of the
                         MOFT to support the work under the other subcomponents. This will build on the previous
                         institutional assessment that have been carried out and complement MoFT’s plan to revisit its
                         organizational structure. The work of this subcomponent is closely linked with Component 2,
                         Strengthening Budget Execution as: (1) legislation will underpin financial regulations that will spell
                         out financial control principles and, either within the regulations or as separate guidelines/manual,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the procedures to implement financial control principles; ii) Institutional assessment is closely linked
                         to the business process review and its recommendations.


                         1.2 Enhancing the medium-term macro fiscal framework (US$600,000) .

                         The objective of this subcomponent is the improve macro fiscal planning and forecasting for credible
                         budgeting and strategic planning. The subcomponent will support strengthening the economic and
                         fiscal policy capacity in the Fiscal Affairs and Economic Policy Planning Division, develop a
                         credible medium-term fiscal framework (MTFF), prepare and train staff on budget preparation
                         guidelines, and set up processes and techniques to prioritize capital projects. The project will also
                         support fiscal planning with necessary computer hardware and software, including interfacing budget
                         preparation with the public accounting system for a more efficient budget preparation process.


                         1.3 Strengthening debt and cash management (US$360,000 million ).

                         The objectives of this subcomponent is to (i) lower the cost and risk of debt through strengthened
                         debt and risk management capacity and institutions and better integration between debt and cash
                         management; and (ii) increase the predictability in the availability of funds to ministries,

                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         departments, and agencies (MDAs) for commitment of expenditures via better cash forecasting and
                         thereby lower the amount of payment arrears. Given the large borrowing requirements, there is great
                         need for an analytical strategy that is based on rigorous cost-risk considerations to support authorities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in meeting their financing gap at lower costs. This subcomponent will support medium-term debt
                         management by strengthening staff to maintain a robust debt management strategy that aims to
                         reduce the cost and risk of debt and meet debt-related provisions in the Fiscal Responsibility Act. In
                         addition, the Project will also support debt management with necessary hardware and software,
                         including interfacing budget preparation with the public accounting system under component 2.1.

                         This subcomponent also aims to support effective cash management by improving cash management
                         processes such as the establishment of a cash management committee that will include all key
                         stakeholders, including the line departments, implementing a model that will produce regular and
                         reliable forecasts of cash inflows and of major outflows that are linked to the budget implementation
                         and commitment plans for individual MDAs, and by incorporating the planned in-year borrowing to
                         ensure adequate liquidity at any time. The cash management initiatives will be closely linked to debt
                         management, PAS implementation, and the business process review.


                         2.    Strengthening Budget Execution (US$4,350,000)

                         The objective of this component is to improve the efficiency of resource utilization and the
                         credibility, comprehensiveness, and timeliness of financial reporting. There will be 2
                         subcomponents: (2.1) strengthening the public accounting system and (2.2) improving the control
                         environment.

                         2.1 Strengthening the public accounting system (US$ 3,500,000).

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to improve financial reporting practices to include timely
                         production of budget execution reports, project financial statements, and other financial reports
Public Disclosure Copy




                         providing relevant information such as value of arrears, commitments, and contingent liabilities. This
                         subcomponent will support (a) financing a business process review, preparation of an IT master plan,
                         and implementation of the review recommendations and the master plan through technical and
                         functional PAS improvements (areas already identified for support include the use of SAP platform
                         for maintaining establishment information to strengthen payroll controls, cash forecasting, and
                         implementation of project system to capture donor-funded activities in the public accounting
                         system); (b) SAP training for staff; (c) part of the urgent technical and functional upgrades and
                         maintenance that will be performed under SAP consultancy planned to be awarded under the
                         Pensions Project; (d) procurement of computer hardware and software, including additional software
                         licenses; and (e) establishing maintenance arrangements and incentives for SAP experts for which
                         financing support from the project will be provided for 3 years and 2 years respectively with the
                         Government taking over from there onwards.


                         2.2 Improving the control environment (US$ 850,000).

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen internal financial controls, internal audit, and
                         procurement management practices. Internal financial controls will be strengthened through the
                         finalization and dissemination of the Financial Regulations, Standard Operating Procedures and other
                         guidance materials identified as appropriate during comprehensive Business Process Review of

                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                         financial management and procurement processes. The subcomponent will also provide hands-on
                         consultant support to the internal audit function within the government. This will include verifying
                         the accuracy of budget execution reports generated by the public accounting system, along with a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         payroll audit in the Ministry of Education and a procurement audit in the Ministry of Defense.


                         Procurement management will be strengthened by standardization and establishing procurement
                         benchmarks based on international good practice and thereby reducing the vulnerability of the
                         procurement process, through the following activities: (a) setting up of the procurement policy
                         section; (b) strengthen the tender division within the MOFT-based National Tender Board; (c)
                         develop procurement manuals and standard operating procedures for harmonizing the procurement
                         practices across the country; and (d) review and update the standard bidding documents. The project
                         will also assist procurement management by establishing an institutionalized and sustainable
                         procurement training mechanism via the Civil Service Commission by developing training modules
                         to address the training needs of public officials both at the level of decision-makers and practitioners,
                         training of trainers, and designing a process for regularly analyzing training needs of procurement
                         staff and upgrading the skills.

                          This subcomponent will also finance part of the implementation of a communications strategy that
                         focuses on interpersonal communications, inter-department/stakeholder communications, and change
                         management needed to support recommendations of the Business Process Review.


                         3. Project Management (US$ 650,000)
                         The objective of this component is to provide support to the MOFT for coordination, monitoring,
                         administration, communication, change management, financial management, and procurement of the
                         Project. The project management component will finance the costs of: (a) an international
                         management implementation support consultant and local consultants for project coordination and
                         M&E activities; (b) any relevant training required to strengthen the skills of the project coordinating
Public Disclosure Copy




                         staff.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project interventions will be focused in the Island of Male, the capital of the Maldives, located at
                         the southern edge of North Male Atoll. All project counterpart agencies are based on the Male Island
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (SASDS)
                         Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (SASDI)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        No               As a category C project, the project does not
                          BP 4.01                                              trigger OP 4.01 - Environmental Assessment.

                                                                               No physical construction/reconstruction/
                                                                               rehabilitation is envisioned under the project
                                                                               interventions.




                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                                                                                It is expected that no e-waste will be generated
                                                                                via the upgrading of computer servers under
                                                                                component b (i) as the old servers are expected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                be used as backup servers. The hardware upgrade
                                                                                will not involve upgrading of any PC Units or
                                                                                other hardware.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              Project interventions are not expected to have any
                                                                                significant impacts on the natural habitats within
                                                                                the project locality
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              There are no forest areas on the Island of Male
                                                                                and no project interventions will be conducted in
                                                                                such areas
                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No              Not Applicable as no project interventions are
                                                                                made where significant use of pesticides and
                                                                                other such substances are utilized.
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              Project interventions do not involve any physical
                            BP 4.11                                             interventions, thus there are not impacts expected
                                                                                any physical cultural resources designated on the
                                                                                Island of Male
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              The project will not affect any indigenous groups.

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              Project activities are not expected to involve any
                            4.12                                                resettlement
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              No dams will be affected via project
                                                                                interventions.
                            Projects on International        No                 The project location does not fall in route of any
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                 The project location does not fall within a
                            7.60                                                disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There will be no safeguard issues impacts associated with project interventions. The project will
                              not finance any physical interventions nor partake in any activities that will lead to irreversible
                              environmental impacts.
                              The borrower has confirmed that the project will not lead to the generation of any e-waste during
                              computer hardware (server) upgrades planned under Component b (i) , the old servers will be used
                              as backup servers within the institution.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not Applicable
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                        Page 5 of 6
                              impacts.
                              Not Applicable
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Not Applicable
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Not Applicable
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not Applicable
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jiwanka B. Wickramasinghe
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                       Date: 18-Feb-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Fily Sissoko (SM)                              Date: 08-Apr-2014




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
