                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA5963
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Benin                             Project ID:    P132667
                            Project Name:     BJ-Youth Employment (FY14) (P132667)
                            Task Team         John Van Dyck
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         11-Dec-2013                       Estimated   27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    AFTSW                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         35.00              Total Bank Financing: 35.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                       0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             35.00
                              Total                                                                                   35.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the proposed project is to improve access to employment skills and employment
                           opportunities for underemployed youth in Benin.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will have four components:



                                                                      Page 1 of 5
                         Component 1: Developing Skills through Apprenticeships ($10.0 million). This component will
                         support underemployed youth to access apprenticeships of improved quality in skilled trades, and
                         help the Government and private sector trade associations to expand and improve nationally
Public Disclosure Copy




                         recognized certification for skills learned in such apprenticeships. The project will support the
                         expansion of the Certificat de Qualification Professionnelle (CQP) and Certificat de Qualification
                         aux Métiers (CQM) to a new range of trades. Standardized lists of competences will be developed in
                         collaboration with artisanal trade associations, key Ministries, and local governments. National tests
                         will be designed for those new trades. For the CQP, the project will make funds available to equip
                         existing training centers for the new trades. The project will also support improved quality of the
                         apprenticeship system, and encourage girls to complete apprenticeships in trades with low levels of
                         women.

                         Component 2: Developing Small Business Skills ($5 million)

                         This component would support the ANPE to scale up and improve the quality of its existing
                         programs to assist underemployed youth to develop skills related to establishing and managing a
                         small business. It will also support the ANPE to strengthen its programs to make them better adapted
                         to a wider range of educational backgrounds. Entrants into the program could include CQP and CQM
                         graduates, as well as other underemployed youth seeking to launch household or small businesses.
                         New modules will be developed in two separate tracks depending on the literacy of participants (high
                         or low), including life skills training and business training, and business plan preparation training.
                         Completing those modules will be mandatory for being able to apply to start-up support (Component
                         3).

                         Component 3: Start-up Support ($15 million)

                         The skills developed under components 1 and 2 may not be sufficient by themselves for youth to
                         access improved labor market outcomes without complementary support to address other constraints
                         that they typically face. Therefore, the project aims to take a holistic approach that not only
Public Disclosure Copy




                         addresses skills constraints through components 1 and 2, but also capital, lack of information,
                         networking, and mentoring. The project will help beneficiaries to address capital constraints through
                         two windows: (i) a grant window funded by the project which will provide non-reimbursable start-up
                         funding for individuals and groups in fields with significant capital intensity; and (ii) providing a link
                         to a loan window funded by the Government through the FNPEEJ which will provide larger amounts
                         than under the grant window at a below market interest rate. Start-up support will be accompanied
                         with mentoring and follow-up.

                         Component 4: Institutional Capacity Building and Project Management ($5 million).

                         This component aims to (i) strengthen the capacity of private and public sector institutions to engage
                         in an informed policy dialogue on skills and employment on a regular basis, particularly on the
                         alignment of public sector training programs with private sector needs; (ii) support improved
                         coordination and reduced fragmentation of youth employment activities; and (iii) improve the
                         knowledge base on employment and skills.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be nationwide



                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (MNSEE)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (AFTCS)

                            6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/      No             The project is expected to have minimal or no
                            BP 4.01                                         adverse environmental and social impacts. The
                                                                            project will finance training for selected youths
                                                                            who may be working with a master crafts person
                                                                            or in a training center acquiring skills and work
                                                                            experience. This skill acquisition might involve
                                                                            occupational health impacts to both the youth and
                                                                            the masters/teachers. Therefore, a manual will be
                                                                            produced to outline safe occupational health and
                                                                            safety procedures. Business plans prepared under
                                                                            component 2 will be screened to ensure that
                                                                            proposals with environmental and social impacts
                                                                            are not financed under component 3.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             This policy is not triggered

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              This policy is not triggered

                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             There will be no pest management, purchase of
                                                                            pesticides and health related concerns
                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             This policy is not triggered
                            BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              There are no indigenous peoples in project areas

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             The project will not finance any activities that
                            4.12                                            result in the involuntary acquisition of land or the
                                                                            involuntary restriction of access to legally
                                                                            designated parks and protected areas as per OP
                                                                            4.12 para 3. Business plans prepared under
                                                                            component 2 will be screened to ensure that
                                                                            proposals with environmental and social impacts
                                                                            are not financed under component 3.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                            not finance construction and/or rehabilitation of
                                                                            dams
                            Projects on International        No              This policy is not triggered as there will not be
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            project activity along international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              This policy is not triggered
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management


                                                                    Page 3 of 5
                         A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project is expected to have minimal or no adverse environmental and social impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project will finance training for selected youths who may be working with a master crafts
                           person or in a training center acquiring skills and work experience. This skill acquisition might
                           involve occupational health impacts to both the apprentices and the masters.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           A manual will be produced to outline safe occupational health and safety procedures. Business
                           plans prepared under component 2 will be screened to ensure that proposals with environmental
                           and social impacts are not financed under component 3.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are youth in apprenticeships and youth interested in acquiring skills to start a
                           small business, as well as master artisans and artisanal trade associations. The manual on safe
                           occupational health and safety procedures will be prepared in consultation with trade associations
                           and relevant government agencies.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
                          Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
                          be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
                          issue, been prepared
                          Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to Yes [         ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the OP?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader:      Name: John Van Dyck
                            Approved By
                            Sector Manager:        Name: Stefano Paternostro (SM)                    Date: 23-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
