                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC6215

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Africa                          Project ID:     P146515
                            Project Name:      Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Project (P146515)
                            Task Team          Marcus J. Wishart
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Oct-2014                     Estimated       09-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Hydropower (60%), Flood protection (20%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                               protection sector (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (60%), Natural disaster management (40%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    294.20                    Total Bank Financing:        75.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          19.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 75.00
                              African Development Bank                                                    75.00
                              EC European Development Fund (EDF)                                         100.00
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                     25.00
                              Total                                                                      294.20
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to assist the Zambezi River Authority in securing the
                           long-term safety and reliability of the Kariba Dam Hydro-Electric Scheme.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will assist ZRA in financing implementation of two critical components for the
                         rehabilitation of the Kariba Dam.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Stabilization of the Kariba Dam Plunge Pool. This includes an estimated US$80m for
                         reshaping and stabilization of the plunge pool. The ZRA commissioned consultants who completed a
                         series of feasibility and design studies in July 2012 estimating the cost of the works at around US
                         $50m, excluding required advanced infrastructure (access roads etc.), tendering, supervision and
                         engineering costs, along with the owners own costs, provisional sums or escalations from 2012.
                         These works are required to prevent further scour along the weak fault zone towards the dam
                         foundations.

                         An 80m deep scour hole has formed in the bedrock immediately downstream of the dam foundations
                         over the past 50 years. This work is unprecedented in dam history and urgently needed to prevent any
                         potential further regression and protect the dam from catastrophic failure due to lack of foundation
                         support. The measures are required to reshape the plunge pool through excavation of the downstream
                         face and north and south bank sides of the pool. An estimated volume of 300,000 m3 of rock is
                         required to be excavated from the plunge pool resulting in a stepped profile to increase the energy
                         dissipation and guide the spilling water in the downstream direction, away from the dam foundations.
                         A 3D FEM model has been established to assess how the plunge pool scouring progress and
                         excavation works would affect the stress field of the dam foundation. Further geological
                         investigations may also be required during work preparation and execution period.

                         This component would support: (i) technical assistance to ZRA in procurement for the works
                         associated with reshaping of the plunge pool, through either design-build contract or preparation and
                         supervision of detailed bidding documents; (ii) works associated with the reshaping of the plunge
                         pool; (iii) environmental and social mitigation activities; and, (iv) strengthening the project
                         implementation team for effective project monitoring and implementation. This will be supported
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through the provision of: i) Consulting Services; ii) Civil Works; (iii) Goods, Equipment and Non-
                         Consulting Services; along with (iv) Operating expenses.

                         Component 2: Rehabilitation of the Spillway Up-stream Hydro-mechanical Facility. The ZRA
                         completed a series of feasibility and design studies in July 2012 estimating the cost of the works at
                         around US$120m for capital expenditures related to the design, fabrication and installation of an
                         emergency gate and a new gantry, with refurbishment of associated civil works, including
                         replacement of secondary concrete and stopbeam built-in-parts, to prevent failure of the upstream
                         spillway control facility. This excludes any advanced infrastructure, tendering, supervision and
                         engineering costs, along with the owners own costs, provisional sums or escalations from 2012.

                         The studies conducted by ZRA highlight concerns over the limited function of the upstream stop
                         beam-facility due to the advanced deterioration of the secondary concrete in the guide slots, and
                         inability to lower the stop-beams for closing a sluice in the event of a downstream flood gate failure.
                         This means that there is no way to stop water flow if the downstream flood gate is jammed and
                         cannot be closed. The water level in such a case may go down to the sill of the spillway at +455.37
                         meters, well below the minimum operating level before the gates can be repaired. Thereafter, it may
                         take more than a year to restore the water level to the minimum operational level, corresponding to
                         the live storage volume of 41.3 km3, given that the annual runoff volume ranges between 15-94 km3/
                         year. During this period no power production would be possible at either the Zambian or
                         Zimbabwean power stations.

                         There is also a possibility that the gate could be jammed in the middle position and cannot be fully
Public Disclosure Copy




                         opened when required during large floods. The swelling effect of alkaline aggregate reaction (AAR)
                         in the dam concrete has resulted in distortions of the stop-beam guides, causing periodic jamming of
                         the stop-beams during operations. The AAR has also reduced the tolerances for gate movements
                         making gate operation increasingly difficult. The support would include plans to upgrade the current
                         stop beams (composed of six pieces) to a flexible roller gate which has independent opening/closing
                         function for the upstream sluice opening irrespective of downstream gate position/flow condition.
                         The existing gantry crane also needs to be replaced with higher capacity gantry in order to operate
                         the new emergency gate under water flowing conditions.

                         The operation of the flood gates is also constrained by the plunge pool condition. The operator can
                         currently open only a maximum of three out of six gates due to excessive scouring and erosion of the
                         plunge pool over 50 years of operation. This has the effect of needing a low ering of the operation
                         rule curve of the reservoir, thus reducing the water available for power generation. The delay in
                         commissioning of the north bank power station further contributed to more spilling and unanticipated
                         deepening of the plunge pool. Continued spilling will cause the progression of scouring towards the
                         dam toe area affecting the foundation rock supporting the dam. An empirical formula based
                         simulation, (numerical and physical modeling) has been established to allow comparison with survey
                         results to better understand the scouring phenomena and predict the progression and the intervention
                         measures required to arrest the scouring.

                         This component will support: (i) technical assistance to ZRA for either a design-build contract or
                         preparation and supervision of detailed bidding documents for the sluice gates; (ii) works required
                         for rehabilitation of the sluice gates; (iii) environmental and social mitigation activities; (iv)
                         strengthening of the project implementation team for effective project monitoring and
                         implementation. This will be supported through the provision of: i) Consulting Services; ii) Civil
                         Works; (iii) Goods, Equipment and Non-Consulting Services; along with (iv) Operating expenses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Cost and Financing

                         The cost of the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation Program is estimated at around US$200 million. This is
                         based on a series of feasibility and design studies completed in July 2012 by consultants appointed
                         by the Zambezi River Authority. These initial estimates were subject to an independent review by an
                         expert panel in 2013 and have been escalated to account for possible advanced infrastructure,
                         tendering, supervision and engineering costs, along with the owners' own costs, provisional sums and
                         escalations from 2012.

                         The ZRA is a financially autonomous organization that generates operating revenue through water
                         tariffs charged to the power utilities for water consumed in the generation of electricity. The formula
                         used is intended to provide the ZRA with sufficient revenues to carry out the mandated functions,
                         including operation and general maintenance but not to generate profits or finance major
                         rehabilitation works. The current tariff structure includes two-parts, with a fixed monthly element
                         supplemented by a volumetric charge billed monthly. The formula is reviewed every three years with
                         tariffs adjusted annually according to the CPI rate of the United States. The ZRA has experienced a
                         steady supply from 2007 to 2011, averaging around 35,000 MCM in the past 10 years. Tariffs have
                         increased roughly 10% per annum from 2008 to 2011, with average annual revenues of around US
                         $10 to 12m per year. A preliminary financial model has been developed and preparation would
                         support a more detailed analysis to provide an indication of:

                         (i) ZRA’s current assets and liabilities, including cash flows available to service debt;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) ZRA’s ability to take on further debt and at what cost;
                         (iii) the impact of additional debt to ZRA’s tariff structure; and
                         (iv) optimal tenor and margins ZRA should consider when seeking any debt.

                         A preliminary financial analysis indicates that concessional resources less than 3-5% could be repaid
                         by the Zambezi River Authority within a 10 year grace period without any increase in the current
                         tariff regime. Any non-concessional resources would require an increase in the current water tariff
                         regime charged by the ZRA which would have a pass through effect on the electricity sector tariffs.
                         Any such non-concessional resources would further require a substantial equity injection in order to
                         be financially sustainable under ZRAs current financing framework.

                         The Governments of Zambia and Zimbabwe have formally written to request support from the Bank
                         in exploring viable options for financing and raising resources for the Kariba Dam Rehabilitation
                         Program. Given that the Government of Zimbabwe is currently limited in its access to concessional
                         financing until settlement of outstanding arrears to the multi-lateral development banks, it will defer
                         the full cost to Zambia.

                         The proposed project is intended to be processed as one in a Series of Projects envisaged as part of a
                         program of support to the riparian states and regional bodies in the Zambezi River basin in
                         accordance with Investment Project Financing OP/BP 10.00. The Series of Projects is being
                         supported through the multi-donor trust fund for Cooperation in International Waters in Africa
                         (CIWA MDTF), complimenting an existing portfolio and pipeline of IDA projects among the eight
                         riparian states within the Zambezi River basin over a 10 to 15 year period. The projects are intended
                         to provide a broad program of support in response to the common development goals of the riparian
                         states and regional organizations relating to the integrated development and management of water
                         resources in the Zambezi River basin.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         An allocation of US$25 million has been earmarked from Zambia’s national IDA envelope for the
                         proposed project. The African Development Bank has indicated an interest to co-finance a portion
                         equal to the IDA contribution and the European Union has submitted an application to the 11th
                         European Development Fund for an estimated €50 to 70 million (~US$70-100m).

                         Regional concessional funds could be used to leverage the national contribution from Zambia and
                         close the financing gap. The project meets IDA’s regional eligibility criteria in that it provides
                         specific investments that have important regional as well as national social and economic benefits for
                         the eight riparian states as well as the members of the Southern African Power Pool.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located on the mainstem of the Zambezi River between Zambia and Zimbabwe at the
                         Kariba Dam. The Bank was involved in supporting the initial financing and development of the
                         Kariba Dam between 1954 and 1959 through an IBRD loan to the Federation of Rhodesia and
                         Nyasaland. This predates the current operational safeguard policies and the project involved the
                         resettlement of 57,000Gwembe-Tonga peoples; 34,000 people were resettled in Zambia.
                         Subsequently, the IDA financed Power Rehabilitation Project (1998) attempted to improve the life of
                         affected people through the Gwembe Tonga Rehabilitation and Development Program. Integrated,
                           multi-sectoral activities, designed through a consultative process attempted to balance infrastructure
                           needs with food production activities. While the outcomes of all the components funded under the
                           project were judged satisfactory, efforts at rehabilitation and environmental management for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           people were considered partially achieved.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower has limited experience with World Bank safeguard policies. There is a dedicated water
                           resources and environmental management department that carries out routine monitoring and
                           community relations. The ZRA also manages the Zambezi Valley Development Fund which was
                           established in 1997 to enhance the socio-economic status of people displaced during construction of
                           the Kariba Dam. A detailed assessment will be carried out during preparation to determine
                           appropriate capacity enhancement measures as required.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kristine Schwebach (GSURR)
                           Sanjay Srivastava (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The rehabilitation measures are not expected to have
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      any significant adverse environmental impacts. Any
                                                                           potential impacts are likely to be associated with site
                                                                           specific rehabilitation works. Given the limited
                                                                           scope, the project's potential negative and positive
                                                                           environmental impacts will be assessed as part of the
                                                                           detailed design works. Recommendations will be
                                                                           made to ensure necessary measures required to
                                                                           prevent, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           potential adverse impacts during implementation.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      No             The policy is not triggered. The rehabilitation works
                                                                           will take place in situ and will not lead to the
                                                                           significant loss or degradation of any critical natural
                                                                           habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No             The policy is not triggered. The project is limited to
                                                                           rehabilitation of the existing dam and will not impact
                                                                           on the health and quality of any forests; affect the
                                                                           rights and welfare of people and their level of
                                                                           dependence upon or interaction with forests; nor will
                                                                           it bring about changes in the management,
                                                                           protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                                           plantations.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09          No             The project does not involve the use of pesticides
                                                                           and agro-chemicals. Thus the policy is not triggered.
                           Physical Cultural Resources      Yes            The rehabilitation includes civil works and so
                           OP/BP 4.11                                      provisions will be included for chance find
                                                                           procedures in the Environmental Management Plan.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                                 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                TBD                        The rehabilitation works is not expected to require
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                the land acquisition, leading to involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement, or restrictions of access to resources,
                                                                                                                        livelihoods or legally designated parks and protected
                                                                                                                        areas. The need for a resettlement instrument will be
                                                                                                                        confirmed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   Yes                        The rehabilitation works will be carried out in
                                                                                                                        compliance with the OP/BP with the project aimed at
                                                                                                                        ensuring appropriate measures are implemented and
                                                                                                                        sufficient resources provided to ensure the continued
                                                                                                                        safety of the dam. An independent Panel of Experts
                                                                                                                        will be appointed to review the investigations,
                                                                                                                        design, and implementation of the rehabilitation
                                                                                                                        works.
                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        No new works will be undertaken and the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   rehabilitation is not anticipated to adversely change
                                                                                                                        the quality or quantity of water flows to other
                                                                                                                        riparians in the Zambezi River basin, nor will it
                                                                                                                        adversely affect water use by the other riparians. The
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation works will not exceed the original
                                                                                                                        scheme, change its nature, or so alter or expand its
                                                                                                                        scope and extent as to make it appear a new or
                                                                                                                        different scheme. However, notification will be made
                                                                                                                        in accordance with provisions of the ZAMCOM
                                                                                                                        Agreement along with the Revised SADC Protocol
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        on Shared Watercourses in compliance with OP/BP
                                                                                                                        4.37.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The policy is not triggered. The dam has been under
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                joint operation under the current arrangements since
                                                                                                                        1987 and there are no disputes over the project area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard studies that may be required will be confirmed and launched during the March 2014
                                      consultative mission.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Marcus J. Wishart

                                 Approved By:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 02-May-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (SM)   Date: 17-Dec-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
