                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8158
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kenya                             Project ID:    P145234
                            Project Name:     Kenya Petroleum Technical Assistance Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)
                            Task Team         Alexander Johannes Huurde
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated   24-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SEGM2                             Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Energy and mining (40%), Oil and gas (40%), Other
                                              Mining and Extractive Industries (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other environment and natural resources management (50%), Other
                                              accountability/anti-corruption (25%), Other Private Sector Developme nt (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              50.00
                              Total                                                                                    50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the GoK to manage its
                           petroleum sector and wealth for sustainable development impacts.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         Until recently, Kenya had no known commercial reserves of petroleum, despite 50 years of
                         exploration. In March, 2012 Tullow Oil (UK) and Africa Oil (Canada) announced an oil discovery in
                         block 10BB (northwestern Kenya) and a subsequent discovery in block 13T. Similar exploration
Public Disclosure Copy




                         prospects in the Tertiary Rift basin, the Anza basin and the Mandera basin are promising. Current oil
                         resources are estimated at 600 million barrels. There is a rapidly growing private sector interest to
                         continue onshore and offshore oil exploration, also influenced by commercial oil discoveries in
                         neighboring Uganda. Some of the international companies already operate in Kenya, such as BG
                         group, UK, Total, France and Anadarko, US. Kenya currently has no natural gas reserves but the
                         discovery of world class natural gas reserves in Tanzania and Mozambique has generated private
                         sector interest for onshore and offshore exploration of natural gas in Kenya. The possibility that the
                         favorable geological conditions of these two countries extend into Kenya has been confirmed by an
                         offshore gas discovery by Apache (USA) (that subsequently left Kenya in October 2013) in block
                         L8. The well encountered approximately 52 net meters of natural gas pay in three zones. Recent oil
                         and gas discoveries may have a substantial transformational impact on the Kenyan economy.

                         With strongly increased petroleum exploration activity and the potential for petroleum production
                         over the next three to four years, the volume of activity in the GoK’s petroleum sector is expected to
                         multiply. Increasingly activities will take place in environmentally sensitive and technologically
                         complex areas, which will dramatically increase the level of expertise required in the GoK. The
                         importance for the GoK to be able to extract optimal revenues from this opportunity, to adequately
                         forecast and manage revenues, as well as manage the potential macro-economic, social, and
                         environmental consequences and the impact on economic development justify a significant capacity
                         building effort in the GoK along all aspects of the Extractive Industries Value Chain.

                         The GoK recognizes that petroleum development in Kenya is about more than petroleum alone. In
                         order to get the best deals that are best managed for sustainable development, it is crucial to support
                         growth in domestic institutional competences, promote domestic businesses, increase employment
                         across the country, improve infrastructure to support expanded economic activities, and increase
Public Disclosure Copy




                         access to training and education, while minimizing adverse social and environmental impacts. In
                         follow-up to the request, MEP has led Project preparation and is contributing staff and support for
                         policy level work to formulate sector reforms and to commence Project implementation.

                         The Bank has extensive conceptual, policy and technical experience in Africa and in the extractive
                         industries sector and can draw on lessons learnt through the implementation of similar operations
                         globally and in the region, including in Burkina Faso, Ghana, Liberia, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania,
                         Mozambique, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. The Bank is uniquely positioned to offer
                         assistance covering the full spectrum of the extractive industries value chain through the proposed
                         Project, and in coordination with other World Bank and development partner supported activities.
                         Development Partners have asked the World Bank to take the lead in the development of a program
                         of support to the GoK for the petroleum sector. During 2012 and 2013, Bank support was provided to
                         Kenya in the form of policy dialogue and short-term, grant-financed projects, notably extractive
                         industries value chain diagnostics; support to sector development under the Extractive Industry
                         Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF), including a review of the petroleum legal and fiscal
                         framework of Kenya and recommendations for reforms to be included in the Petroleum Law; and
                         analytical work to inform good practices and sector reforms with support from UK Department for
                         International Development ( DfID) and Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development (DFATD) under
                         Externally Funded Outputs (EFOs), including Petroleum Master Planning, capacity building related
                         to contract negotiations, and policy analysis


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         The Project will be developed in the form of an IDA-funded Investment Project Financing Credit in
                         the amount of US$50.0 million equivalent for the Republic of Kenya. The Credit is planned to be
                         deployed over a six year period from September 2014 (expected Effective Date) to June 2020. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities under the proposed project, as described below, will be performed at the central
                         government level and any procurement of goods and services will be related only to the onshore
                         areas of Kenya as well as to those areas offshore the coast of Kenya that are not disputed. The
                         proposed Project Area will therefore be defined to exclude any disputed areas, whether onshore or
                         offshore. As a consequence, none of the envisaged activities are expected to have any impact on any
                         areas that may be the subject of a dispute between Kenya and any of the neighboring countries. The
                         proposed Project has three main components plus a separate component for project implementation:

                         COMPONENT A: Petroleum Sector- Reforms and Capacity Building (total costs US$ 39.68 million,
                         of which IDA US$ 36.68 million). The objective of Component A is to support strengthening the
                         capacity of the Recipient’s major institutions engaged in the development and governance of the
                         petroleum sector to allow them to execute their mandates in a way that is conducive to investments
                         while ensuring that safeguards and safety standards are met in accordance with international
                         standards.

                         Through Component A, at the policy level, the Project would support the drafting of a
                         comprehensive Petroleum Policy outlining a vision and policy for the petroleum sector. Also,
                         through this Component the Project would provide technical assistance to develop a Petroleum
                         Master Plan that considers strategic options and decision hierarchies for policies and investments in
                         the Project Area on a sound economic basis. A National Communication Strategy (NCS) would also
                         be developed to empower a greater proportion of the Kenyan public to effectively access, understand
                         and participate in the ongoing dialogue on using the petroleum and mining deposits as a source of
                         national wealth.

                         At the regulatory level, the Project would support the implementation of a comprehensive, clear and
                         workable regulatory framework for the development of Kenya’s petroleum resources. At the same
Public Disclosure Copy




                         time, the Project would support the implementation of institutional reforms including the
                         identification and division of roles, establishment of new institutions if needed and capacity building
                         for relevant institutions.

                         At the transaction level, the Project would also support capacity building for negotiation of
                         petroleum deals. Also, through this Project, GoK would hire and contract consultants for provision of
                         transaction advisory services. The Project would also support the acquisition, interpretation and
                         promotion of geodata in the Project Area and capacity building related to petroleum cadastre
                         database of the Project Area.

                         The Project would also provide technical assistance to manage the impacts from the petroleum sector
                         including the implementation of health & safety reforms, implementation of environmental and
                         social reforms and development of a framework for oil spill preparedness and response capacity.
                         This includes preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment.

                         COMPONENT B: Revenue and Investment Management- Reforms and Capacity Building (total
                         costs US$ 9.40 million, of which IDA US$ 6.65 million). The objective of Component B is to
                         support strengthening the government’s capacity to manage revenue streams from the petroleum
                         sector for sustainable development impacts.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         Through the activities grouped under Component B, the Project would support the design and
                         implementation of fiscal framework reforms in order to improve extractive industries taxation in
                         Kenya. The Project would also address transparency and accountability across the extractive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         industries value chain through a variety of mechanisms including technical assistance to subscribe to
                         and become compliant with EITI. The Project would also provide technical assistance for drafting
                         and implementing the appropriate legal and institutional mechanisms to allocate revenues from the
                         extractive industries in a balanced way. In addition, through this Component, the Project will provide
                         technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance and Central Bank for the design and implementation
                         of the appropriate fiscal mechanisms to address 1) the finite nature of most natural resource
                         endowments (e.g. savings funds) and 2) the volatility of resource revenues (e.g. dedicated buffer or
                         price stabilization funds).

                         Also, the Project would finance capacity building for setting-up a robust system of public financial
                         and investment management in anticipation of extractives revenues and potential increase in public
                         investments.

                         COMPONENT C: Sustainable Impact of Oil and Gas Industry –Reforms and Capacity Building
                         (total costs US$ 11.82 million, of which IDA US$ 3.20 million). The objective of Component C is to
                         support strengthening the government’s capacity to integrate the petroleum sector in its broader
                         economy.

                         Through this component the Project would support the upward and downward linkages of the
                         petroleum sector. The Project will provide: (1) support to stimulating local goods and services
                         procurement, including identification of local content opportunities interms of goods and services
                         and assigning the responsibility for implementation and monitoring; and (2) support to stimulation of
                         the development of downstream oil and gas industry through technical assistance for follow up
                         activities to the Petroleum Master Plan related to the downstream oil and gas industry.

                         Also, through this component the Project would support education and skills Development. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project will provide: (1) support to stimulation of local skills development, including conducting a
                         demand-side analysis, assessment of manpower requirements, skills gap and educational gap analysis
                         as well as development of educational program and staffing policy; (2) support to development of
                         sector-specific vocational training, implementation of an educational development plan and
                         preparation of curriculum; and (3) support to development of sector-specific academic and technical
                         college programs in petroleum engineering.

                         COMPONENT D: Project Management (total costs US$ 1.1 million, of which IDA US$ 1.1 million).
                         The objective of Component D is to support the GoK in managing and coordinating the Project and
                         building its procurement, financial management, safeguards management, and monitoring and
                         evaluation capacity through the provision of technical advisory services, training, acquisition of
                         goods, and operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The activities under the proposed TA project, as described above, will be performed at the central
                         government level and will include procurement of goods and services with no physical footprint. The
                         TA will not support any construction activities on the ground and will be focused on capacity
                         building activities, including policy dialogue, training and report preparation. The proposed Project
                         Area will therefore be defined to exclude any disputed areas, whether onshore or offshore. As a


                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         consequence, none of the envisaged activities are expected to have any impact on any areas that may
                         be the subject of a dispute between Kenya and any of the neighboring countries.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
                         Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 has been
                         BP 4.01                                             triggered in view of possible environmental and
                                                                             social risks and impacts associated with future
                                                                             investments in the sectors, if found to be feasible.
                                                                             The TA Project itself will improve client’s
                                                                             environmental management capacity on key
                                                                             environment and social issues relating to
                                                                             petroleum operations. Therefore a Strategic
                                                                             Environmental and Social Assessment will be
                                                                             undertaken. The SESA to be prepared as part of
                                                                             the project TA will include an assessment of
                                                                             environmental and social risks and impacts;
                                                                             involuntary resettlement; loss of income and
                                                                             livelihood; and occupational, health and safety
                                                                             aspects in Petroleum operations. Terms of
                                                                             Reference for Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                                             Assessment (SESA) has been finalized based on
                                                                             discussion with the client, and will be disclosed
                                                                             through the InfoShop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               The proposed TA is not expected to finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             projects that degrade or convert critical habitats.
                                                                             The TA will also not support projects that affect
                                                                             non- critical habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               Not applicable

                         Pest Management OP 4.09            No               Not applicable

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               Not applicable
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               The SESA will undertake social analysis to
                                                                             identify areas with potential presence of
                                                                             indigenous or vulnerable population including
                                                                             risks resulting from future petroleum operations.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No               The TA project does not envisage any land taking
                         4.12                                                or preparation of future investments that may
                                                                             involve involuntary land acquisition. The SESA
                                                                             will, however include analysis of socio-economic
                                                                             aspects of typical petroleum operations, including



                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                                                                                 areas for strengthening of resettlement policies,
                                                                                 guidelines and practice standards in Kenya, which
                                                                                 can complement the local resettlement policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              Not applicable

                            Projects on International        No                  Not applicable
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The TA project is expected to have significant positive environmental and social impacts through
                              improvement of overall understanding of environmental management risks and impacts in the
                              petroleum sector; promotion of modern and environmentally sustainable exploration and
                              production methods, and enhancement of environmental and social management capacity in
                              Ministry of Energy and Petroleum, Ministry of Environment, NEMA and DOSHS. As a technical
                              assistance operation, activities will have no significant physical impact on the natural and/or social
                              environment. Aerial surveys and desk studies will take place; however, there will be no acquisition
                              of land, new construction or significant civil works. Moreover, the project will only provide
                              technical support for establishment and improvement of general sector management systems, and
                              will not engage in zoning, planning or preparatory activities for specific investments linked to
                              identifiable impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area:
                              It is widely understood petroleum activities often involve risk of significant adverse impacts on
                              natural habitats, people and their livelihoods and cultural resources if inadequate arrangements are
                              in place to manage them. To help the Government address such safeguards concerns for future
                              petroleum investments (which are not part of this project), a key project activity will be the
                              preparation of a comprehensive Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). The
                              SESA is a planning tool that will involve a participatory consultative process aimed to help the
                              Government to: (a) diagnose the key environmental and social problems and opportunities
                              associated with the anticipated growth of Kenya's petroleum sector; (b) identify the policy, legal,
                              regulatory, and institutional adjustments and capacity-building actions needed to minimize the
                              adverse cumulative environmental and social impacts of petroleum operations and associated
                              infrastructure development, while enhancing the positive impacts; and (c) propose specific
                              measures that Government can implement in the near future to improve the environmental and
                              social sustainability of the petroleum sector in Kenya, particularly through the KEPTAP.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The project is a technical assistance project. No adverse impacts are envisaged.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                         A Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared during KEPTAP
                         implementation and will inform the GoK on any gaps in the legal and management framework for
                         the environmental, social, safety and occupational health aspects of the petroleum sector. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SESA will identify site and project specific risks, as well as cumulative environmental and social
                         impacts. The SESA will identify any gaps in Kenya's environment and social regulation and
                         policies with respect to Petroleum sector, and will propose measures to strengthen these aspects in
                         the new policies in order to bring them in agreement with international best practices.

                         The SESA will also include an assessment of social and socio-economic aspects of typical
                         petroleum operations within the context of Kenya’s policies, regulations and institutional structure,
                         including:

                         •        The potential presence of indigenous or vulnerable populations, and the risks/impacts
                         resulting from future petroleum operations,
                         •        Measures for avoidance or mitigation of adverse impacts, as well as for culturally
                         appropriate benefit-sharing,
                         •        Land acquisition and areas for strengthening of local resettlement policies, guidelines and
                         practice standards, and
                         •        Gender -specific impacts of the sector – including how men and women may differently
                         experience risks and benefits of the sector.

                         The SESA will include an action plan with recommendations and actions on strengthening conflict
                         resolution (especially between vulnerable and marginalized groups/local communities and oil and
                         gas developers). Mapping by the SESA will indicate the presence and collective attachment to the
                         land of distinctive or potentially vulnerable groups, and linkages among geo-political units
                         (national, regional, county, local and inter-local). It will also examine other social and economic
                         risks and identify possible claims/assertion of rights to oil and gas revenues by local communities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The SESA will also take into consideration of knowledge and capacity for Emergency
                         Preparedness and Response, including for management of environmental emergencies such as oil
                         and chemical Spill, explosion, leakages, other events. The SESA will include an assessment of the
                         relevant regulatory institutions and will draft a plan for capacity building, including changes in or
                         additions to the existing institutional structure and institutional development, recommendations
                         and an action plan. Advisory services and training would be provided for lead agencies under
                         KEPTA to build and strengthen their capability of providing effective and efficient oversight of
                         the petroleum industry in accordance with sector-specific environmental and social regulation and
                         in line with international best practice.

                         The Ministry of Environment and its agency NEMA have reasonable policy, standards and
                         regulatory requirements that are unevenly implemented in the country due to capacity constraints
                         and clear guidelines. Moreover with the help of the WB TA project, NEMA will be receiving
                         Technical Assistance to get trained on the WB Social and Environmental Safeguards policies. The
                         Ministry of Energy and Petroleum's capacity to manage and monitor social and environmental
                         safeguards risks associated with large scale sector development is rated as relatively low due to
                         lack of experience. Details will be assessed through the SESA, which will be undertaken as part of
                         Project implementation. Strengthening for social and environmental monitoring of the sector is
                         included under component A.




                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Consultation were held during the drafting of ToR for SESA, including with the Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Petroleum, Ministry of Environment, NEMA, county governments and CSOs. Capacity building
                           will be provided as part of the TA. Stakeholders will be further consulted during SESA. These
                           stakeholders include GoK institutions such as the Ministry of Environment, Water and Natural
                           Resources; the National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA), the Ministry of Labor,
                           Direction of Occupational Safety and Health (DOSH), the Ministry of Energy and Petroleum
                           (MEP), and county governments. Non-government organizations, civil society and communities,
                           which will be mapped and consulted during the SESA
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     20-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  21-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         The draft Terms of Reference of Strategic Environment and Social Assessment (SESA) will be
                         disclosed
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Not applicable
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                   Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Alexander Johannes Huurde
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 09-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (SM)               Date: 09-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
