                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC4354

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jul-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Romania                          Project ID:       P145174
                            Project Name:      Health Sector Reform (P145174)
                            Task Team          Carlos Marcelo Bortman
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          17-Dec-2013                      Estimated         27-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSH1                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (70%), Public administration- Health (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1105.00                Total Bank Financing:           325.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      780.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         325.00
                              Total                                                                        1105.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objectives will aim at strengthening prevention and health promotion,
                           rationalizing the health service delivery, increasing secondary specialized ambulatory services, and
                           promoting the implementation of clinical pathways for the most prevalent non-communicable
                           diseases (NCDs).
                           C. Project Description
                           To achieve these objectives over a five-year period, the proposed operation will focus on three main
                         areas: (a) rationalization of the health facility network; (b) strengthening of prevention, health
                         promotion, and the primary care level; and (c) improvement of health sector governance and
                         stewardship. The proposed Project, therefore, would focus on rationalizing the health facility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         network to address changing needs created by epidemiologic and demographic shifts in Romania and
                         advances in technology, improving access, quality, and greater efficiency of health care services.

                         Component 1. Hospital network rationalization. This component aims to support the rationalization
                         of the health care service delivery network through strengthening hospitals’ support systems and
                         services, such as diagnostic services, and laboratory functioning. This component would have two
                         subcomponents:

                         Subcomponent 1. Strengthening selected secondary hospitals and Regional Tertiary Hospitals. This
                         subcomponent aims at (a) redefining the hospital’s role in the health care system, (b) merging
                         services and reducing the number of single specialty hospitals; (c) improving the quality of care in
                         hospitals functioning in a multi-building setting by moving them into single buildings with integrated
                         diagnostic and interventional platforms, and (d) concentrating the resources available on the regional
                         and county level.

                         This subcomponent would include civil works (in the facilities current sites), medical and other
                         equipment, technical assistance, and training. Civil works would include the (a) rehabilitation of
                         intensive care units, (b) rehabilitation of operating (surgery) rooms, (c) rehabilitation of emergency
                         departments, (d) improvement of Diagnostic Imaging Services, (e) creation of 4 new burn units (with
                         about 6 beds each within a regional hospital), (f) development of regional pathology and cytology
                         laboratories, and (g) development of regional radiotherapy units.

                         Subcomponent 2. Implementing Specialized Secondary Ambulatory Care. Hospitals are no longer
                         the exclusive institution for delivering numerous forms of routine surgical and medical care.
                         Specialized ambulatory care represents a better option from the patient’s operability and safety point
                         of view, substituting costly medical treatments with cost-effective ones. This subcomponent would
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support:
                         i.       Establishment of hub centers for ambulatory diagnostic and treatment including (a)
                         improvement of Diagnostic Imaging Services, (b) implementing day care and ambulatory surgeries/
                         procedures, and (c) cancer screening centers.
                         ii.      Implementation of mobile units for cancer screening to support the cancer screening program
                         to reach hard to cover areas.
                         This subcomponent aims at creating the conditions to increase secondary specialized services (higher
                         volume–lower cost–greater quality) and reduce the admissions rate in hospitals for patients who can
                         be treated in outpatient settings.

                         Component 2. Primary care strengthening. This component aims to support primary care addressing
                         especially those who are “priority populations,” including low-income groups; minority groups (i.e,
                         Roma population); the elderly; and individuals with special health care needs, such as individuals
                         with disabilities, in need of chronic or end-of-life care, or living in inner-city or rural areas. The
                         component would support the scaling up of multifunctional rural centers currently under
                         implementation with the support of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC), and
                         in implementing different types of long-term care currently being provided as regular hospital
                         services:
                         i.      Implementing multifunctional rural centers. These centers will support the implementation of
                         community care services for the provision of the primary prevention services for noncommunicable
                         diseases, for increasing the access of vulnerable groups to basic health care services. Community
                         care services will be part of the basic services to be provided to vulnerable groups (including mothers
                         and children, elderly, persons with disabilities, persons with rare diseases, and persons with mental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health problems).
                         ii.     Implementing Differentiated Long-Term Care (LTC): Palliative care (including care for
                         chronic neurological cases requiring mechanical ventilation, other chronic long-term health care, and
                         terminal care) and social LTC.

                         Component 3. Health sector governance and stewardship improvement. This component aims to
                         support sector governance and stewardship improvement to bridge the gap between policy and
                         practice and to increase the capacity for conducting and improving the quality of medical care
                         services. Activities include:
                         i.       Improvement of Health Care Quality: Update of Clinical guidelines, implementing quality
                         control. Quality in services and facilities is a core precondition for Romania to obtain maximum
                         results from available resources. Greater heath care quality means better health outcomes, reduction
                         of the unfavorable evolution of diseases, reduction of the readmission rates, and reduction in the
                         number of avoidable medical procedures. In that regard, the existing capacity gap in terms of using
                         norms and protocols aligned with best international practice needs to be overcome.
                         ii.      Strengthening Health Technology Assessment (HTA). Within the last 30 years, many
                         European countries have established HTA programs to inform a variety of decisions, from
                         determining pricing and reimbursement to setting health service standards. Depending on the context,
                         a key policy objective behind HTA can also be to reduce variations in the adoption of new
                         technologies, thereby improving equity, and reducing variation in provider practices by informing
                         technology use in clinical protocols and pathways.

                         The MOH established the legal framework for the implementation of Health Technology Assessment
                         (HTA) to make further adjustments to the basic package of services. The HTA department was
                         created and the head of the unit selected. A draft interim HTA procedure to be applied to the already
                         preapproved drugs for compensation is being launched through the MoH web page. The methods and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processes employed in HTA would be enhanced by improving their timeliness while maintaining
                         high-quality assessments. This subcomponent would support additional technical assistance,
                         equipment and training to further develop standards and protocols and implementation of performing
                         HTA.
                         iii.     Strengthening the communications strategy. The main objective of the health sector reforms
                         is not to reduce cost or services, but rather to reorganize service delivery to more effectively and
                         efficiently meet the new needs of the population in a sustainable manner. To mitigate this risk, this
                         component would finance a communications campaign to inform the Romanian public about the
                         reforms program and the expected outcomes of such reforms.

                         Component 4. Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. This component aims to support
                         the Project Implementation Unit to provide day-to-day project management, including the fiduciary
                         tasks of the Project and Monitoring and Evaluation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Country-wide

                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Project would support limited civil works (no new buildings are expected) for the rehabilitation
                           of hospital infrastructure located throughout Romania, and provision of medical equipment, technical
                           assistance, and training. Civil works would more specifically be: a) rehabilitation of intensive care
                           units; b) rehabilitation of Surgery Rooms; c) rehabilitation of Emergency Departments; d)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           improvement of Diagnostic Imaging Services; d) creation of 4 new burn units (with about 6 beds
                           each within a regional hospital); e) development of regional Pathology and cytology laboratories and
                           f) development of regional radiotherapy units.

                           The borrower has successfully implemented the first phase of the Health Sector Reform Project, and
                           appropriate supervision measures are already in place in the existing Project Management Unit of the
                           Ministry of Health. In addition, an environmental safeguards responsible staff will be appointed
                           within the PMU, who would be responsible for coordination and supervision of the environmental
                           management plan and risk mitigation measures to be undertaken in the project. S/he would (a)
                           coordinate environmental training for staff, designers and local contractors; (b) disseminate existing
                           environmental management guidelines and develop guidelines in relation to issues not covered by the
                           existing regulations, in line with EU standards for implementation, monitoring and evaluation of
                           mitigation measures; (c) ensure contracting for construction and supply of equipment includes
                           reference to appropriate guidelines and standards; and (d) conduct periodic site visits to inspect and
                           approve plans and monitor compliance. In addition, PMU staff does include civil works specialists,
                           who will be actively involved in the planning and supervision process of environmental issues during
                           project implementation. A separate environmental impact assessment and site-specific screening
                           process, as well as supervision of construction, is required by law for all civil works in Romania.

                           In addition, all aspects related to nuclear safety and radiation protection are well regulated by the
                           National Commission for Nuclear Activities Control (CNCAN). According to the existing
                           legislation, the equipment providers are contractually obligated to dispose of the radioactive material.

                           Further details are described in the Framework Environmental Management Plan, which will be part
                           of the Project Operational Manual. Implementation of the site-specific EMPs and relevant provisions
                           by Romanian law would be supervised by the MoH and the District PublicHealth directorates.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cesar Niculescu (ECSEN)
                           Marcel Ionescu-Heroiu (ECSSO)
                           Kosuke Anan (ECSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The Project will have limited negative
                           BP 4.01                                               environmental and social impacts, as a
                                                                                 considerable part of physical works will be
                                                                                 undertaken to rehabilitate the existing health
                                                                                 care facilities. In most cases the works will be
                                                                                 interior renovations; in a few cases they may
                                                                                 include small additions to existing buildings
                                                                                 within the hospital grounds. In some cases it is
                                                                                 expected that the latter will include
                                                                                 construction/rehabilitation of “bunkers” for
                                                                radiotherapy. The expected temporary
                                                                environmental impacts and inconvenience to the
                                                                surrounding dwellers during construction are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                limited and typical to small/medium scale
                                                                construction works, such as generation of dust,
                                                                noise and vibration; movement of the
                                                                construction vehicles and machinery; piling of
                                                                construction materials; and accumulation of
                                                                demolition/construction waste. Some associated
                                                                risks include improper disposal of construction
                                                                waste, minor operational or accidental spills of
                                                                fuel and lubricants from the construction
                                                                machinery, and improper reinstatement of
                                                                construction sites upon completion of works.
                                                                Discharges from the medical facilities and
                                                                disposal of medical waste are the main concerns
                                                                for the operational phase. Measures shall be put
                                                                into place to ensure the separate collection of
                                                                the different categories of waste. In particular,
                                                                staff will be trained and informed on the
                                                                mechanisms for safe collection of hazardous
                                                                wastes, and clinical wastes – both infectious and
                                                                non-infectious. Disposal of obsolete radiation
                                                                treatment equipment represents a special issue,
                                                                and will be specifically addressed in the
                                                                Framework Environmental Management Plan
                                                                (EMP). All construction impacts are
                                                                manageable and could be effectively mitigated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                by adherence to the framework and site-specific
                                                                Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). As
                                                                for the adequate handling of medical waste
                                                                during operation of the facilities, not only it is a
                                                                safeguard matter for this Project, but rather one
                                                                of the expected outcomes of the planned
                                                                investments and technical assistance.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No

                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   The Project is not expected to have negative
                         4.12                                   environmental and social impacts, as a
                                                                considerable part of physical works will be
                                                                                                                                 undertaken to rehabilitate the existing health
                                                                                                                                 care facilities. The construction works will be
                                                                                                                                 either entirely inside existing buildings or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 possibly an extension from an existing hospital
                                                                                                                                 into its garden or parking lot. In the later cases,
                                                                                                                                 the client, before starting any construction
                                                                                                                                 activity, will verify that there are no users of
                                                                                                                                 competing claims on such areas where such an
                                                                                                                                 extension might occur.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Safeguard Preparation Plan:
                                      Subproject sites will not all be identified prior to appraisal, but the works at all sites are expected
                                      to be similar. Therefore, a “Framework Environmental Management Plan” will be prepared prior
                                      to appraisal, to describe common environmental issues and their expected impacts, and provide
                                      options of mitigation measures. This general Framework document will be based on the ECA
                                      Region Checklist EMP for Small Scale Construction, and will be used as the basis for preparing
                                      site-specific Checklist EMPs for any subproject where there are no unusual risk factors. The site-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      specific EMPs will be attached to construction contracts.

                                      A national public consultation will be organized in Bucharest prior to appraisal to discuss/consult
                                      on the draft Framework EMP. This public consultation meeting will be organized by the Ministry's
                                      PMU, and all the comments and suggestions will be included into the final Framework EMP.

                                      The Framework EMP will be disclosed in-country and in the InfoShop.


                                      *Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The
                                      specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
                                      Prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Carlos Marcelo Bortman

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: John R. Butler (RSA)                                                                                                 Date: 24-Jul-2013
                                 Coordinator:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Sector Manager:   Name: Daniel Dulitzky (SM)   Date: 16-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy
