INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC1001
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Aug-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Bangladesh                 Project ID:   P150938
Project Name:    Financial Sector Support Project (P15093 8)
Task Team        Niraj Verma
Leader:
Estimated        19-Jan-2015                Estimated      17-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       SME Finance (50%), Banking (35%), General finance sector (15%)
Theme(s):        Other Financial Sector Development (75%), International financial standards
and systems (25%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     350.00             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               50.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     300.00
0          Total                                                          350.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
9.     The Proposed Development Objective of the project is: "to improve financial market
infrastructure, regulatory capacity and access to long term financing".
C. Project Description
Component 1: Strengthening Financial Market Infrastructure
Financial market infrastructure is critical to facilitate a stable and efficient financial system and is an


﻿essential foundation of financial markets. It typically comprises the payments and remittance
systems, securities settlement system, credit bureaus, etc. Strong financial market infrastructure is
associated with financial soundness, enhanced efficiency and financial intermediation and lower
transaction costs (see Figure 1 from a 2009 World Bank-IFC study in annex). Several studies also
O
point to significant savings for countries by greater usage of electronic payments. For instance, a
recent study by Central Bank of Brazil projected annual savings of around 0.7% of their GDP.
The proposed component will build on previous efforts, including those under the Central Bank
Strengthening Project (CBSP), and improve financial infrastructure further. It will focus on the
improvement of the payment and settlement systems but also on other critical financial market
infrastructure, such as that related to credit information. This would be done through information
technology investments that improve digitization of internal BB systems (for example: core banking,
Bangladesh Automated Clearing House and central securities depository) and better integration with
external systems like the Government payment systems (including the National Board of Revenue
(NBR) and the Ministry of Finance Public Financial Management System, PFMS) and effective
oversight of the national payments system. It would also include the strengthening of the Credit
Information Bureau (CIB) to improve data reliability and coverage; and; strengthening the systems of
the Bangladesh Financial Intelligence Unit (BFIU). The proposed component would also strengthen
the core underlying IT infrastructure supporting the financial market infrastructure.
Component 2: Strengthening Regulatory Capacity
A strong regulatory and supervisory capacity is essential for maintaining the stability and efficiency
of the financial system. For the banking sector, the capacity of BB, must continue to be strengthened
further and updated to meet the ever growing complexity and evolution of financial markets and the
growing stresses in Bangladesh's financial sector (reflected in growing NPLs, capital shortage, etc).
Enhanced capacity will support BB's compliance with the international standards and Basel accords
for regulation. The capacity enhancement of BB will support reforms by strengthening prudential
regulations and will also help BB better supervise and monitor banks, including the SOCBs,
mitigating the risk of that part of the financial system posing a threat to the stability of the entire
system. The proposed component will continue to also strengthen the capacity of the Bank and
Financial Institutions Division (BFID) which monitors SOCBs. The project will focus on the
migration to Risk Based Supervision as well as support strengthening prudential regulations and
completing preparations for BASEL III.
In addition, in support of BB's developmental role, the project will also support innovative and
inclusive financial market development activities, focusing on select areas where there has been little
by way of financial sector development/activities. These would include: (i) initiating and facilitating
reforms in and the development of warehouse (and cold storage) receipt system and financing as a
demonstration pilot, and possibly, also on agriculture insurance; and (ii) the development and
implementation of innovative programs for financial literacy and consumer protection.
Component 3: Supporting Long Term Finance
This component will provide Bangladesh's exporters/SMEs with access to long term finance and
also provide technical assistance to banks in credit appraisal skills and to banks and industry in
improving safeguards practices. Preliminary initial findings confirm the acute lack of supply of long
term finance in Bangladesh's credit market. For instance, of the four surveyed lending institutions,
the vast majority of export finance is short term in nature (no trade finance would be provided), and
none of it is five years or longer - a factor that clearly inhibits competitiveness and investment
amongst exporters. The demand side survey validates this finding as well.


﻿By providing long term financing to exporters/SMEs via PFIs (which will be selected through an
appraisal conducted by BB a nd based on eligibility criteria which will be developed and reflected in
the Operations Manual and could include Islamic financing banks and financial institutions) and
O
U       through technical assistance to PFIs and industry associations, the project will demonstrate the
potential of this product and market segment to financial institutions. In addition, through the
implementation arrangements promoting good practices on safeguards amongst lenders and funded
firms, the project will contribute to the improvement of health and safety standards, including for
women workers in the industry. Such support can leverage the momentum that is slowly but steadily
gathering amongst firms - as captured in the demand side market survey - to improve safeguards
performance. Also, technical assistance to develop the secondary bond market and explore the
development of new instruments to facilitate long term financing, which are both critical for building
a long term financing market in Bangladesh, will be included. The component will be designed in
line with Bank policy OP/BP 10.0 and the accompanying Guidance Note on financial intermediary
lending.
Component 4: Project implementation and monitoring
This component will support BB's capacity in project implementation and in developing a strong
monitoring and evaluation mechanism.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed Project will support Bangladesh's exporters/SMEs with access to long term finance
and also provide technical assistance to partner financial institutions (PFIs) on this area. Imports of
new equipment (capital machinery) are expected to be the primary use of funding, but funds could
also be used for up-gradation and/or relocation (relocation, where supported, would be in designated
industrial zones, and the project would not involve any land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or
impact indigenous people) of factories in order to reduce health and safety risks and environmental
damages. Any qualified Bangladesh's exporters/SMEs from any part of the Bangladesh can receive
the long-term financing. The exact SME locations will not be known at appraisal stage. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the Bangladesh
Bank for the project, which will lay out the requirements and procedure for the environmental and
social impact assessment at sub-project level. The SIA will focus on labor standards and possible
ways of enhancing/improving those.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Bangladesh Bank (BB) will implement the project. The BB has experience in implementing IDA
funded projects and familiar with the World Bank Safeguard Policies. BB has recently completed the
Central Bank Strengthening Project (CBSP) and presently implementing the Investment Promotion
Financing Facility (IPFF) project. In addition, International Finance Corporation (IFC) has been
working with the Bangladesh Bank to develop their capacity on environmental and social risk
assessment and green banking. The BB will hire qualified staff/consultant to oversee the project
environmental and social issues and institutionalize the environment and social safeguards
management. The proposed project will support in strengthening the BB's environmental and social
safeguards management capacity, including possibly by housing a team in one of the existing
departments or creating a new cell, if needed. Technical assistance on safeguards management to
industry stakeholders and PFIs will also be considered under the Project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)
Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         As mentioned earlier, the proposed Project will
OP/BP 4.01                               support Bangladesh's exporters/SMEs with access to
long term finance. However, the key sectors for long-
term financing are not yet identified but an indicative
list will be available during project preparation. In
view of project nature, the overall project is
classified as a Category 'Fl' and the safeguard policy
OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that the sub
project design and implementation will be focused
on reducing adverse impacts and enhancing positive
impacts. The environmental and social management
framework (ESMF) will define the procedure for
environmental and social screening/assessment for
each subproject.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The subprojects are mostly expected to be limited to
the existing project location within the industrial
areas. Accordingly, the project will not result
conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats.
For this reason, the policy has not been triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project is expected have no impacts on the
health and quality of forests, no affect the rights and
welfare of people and their level of dependence upon
or interaction with forests and bring no changes in
the management, protection, or utilization of natural
forests or plantations. As such, the policy has not
been triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project is not expected to finance any synthetic
chemical pesticides activities and the policy has not
been triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          Since the subprojects are expected to be limited to
OP/BP 4.11                              the industrial areas, there will be no impact on
landscape with archaeological, paleontological,
historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other
cultural significance.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          The project will not have any impacts on indigenous
4.10                                    people, their lands, culture, livelihood or way of life
in any way.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         The project will not finance any civil works or
BP 4.12                                 activities that are expected to trigger either OP 4.12
Involuntary Resettlement or OP 4.10 Indigenous
People. No land acquisition, displacement of people


﻿or communities from private or public lands or any
negative impacts on livelihoods will be permissible
under the project. The ESMF will include a social
management framework which will provide
guidelines for carrying out a social screening to
ensure the above impacts are not triggered.
Additionally it will contain guidelines for carrying a
brief social assessment for sub-projects
commensurate with the nature and scope of Bank
funded activities. The Assessment will focus on labor
standards compliance regarding national regulations
and vis-d-vis IFC performance standards. The SMF
will provide guidelines for stakeholder identification,
consultation and communication strategy, inclusion
and gender mainstreaming, etc. It will also contain
institutional arrangements and roles and
responsibilities of people who will implement the
SMF, guidelines for a grievance redress mechanism,
disclosure policies of the World Bank, and budget
for the implementation of the SMF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
o
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF)- preparation starts in mid August, 2014
and expected to end by September/October, 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:     Name: Niraj Verma
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                    Date: 14-Aug-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/     Name: Thyra A. Riley (PMGR)                     Date: 10-Dec-2014
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


