                                         INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                  CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC9968

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Sep-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:         Bangladesh                     Project ID:      P149553
                            Project Name:    Bangladesh NATP-2: National Agricultural Technology Program - Phase II
                                             (P149553)
                            Task Team        Patrick Verissimo
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       05-Nov-2014                     Estimated        26-Feb-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFADR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector(s):       Agricultural extension and research (50%), Animal production (20%), Crops
                                             (20%), Information technology (10%)
                            Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), Rural
                                             markets (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:    200.00                 Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        3.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                             150.00
                              US Agency for International Development (USAID)                          25.00
                              Bangladesh MDTF for Climate Change                                        0.00
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                           22.00
                              Total                                                                   200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a        No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           6.     The proposed project development objective (PDO) for NATP-2 is to enhance the
                         agricultural productivity of smallholders through better research and extension and improve their
                         market access through better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will support
                         a decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote market-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         oriented smallholder production. NATP-2 will also support access to markets for smallholder farmers
                         by facilitating their linkages with selected value chains, contributing in turn to increased farm income
                         and to the sustainability of farmer groups and producer organizations formed by the project. The
                         following project design emerged as an outcome of the Identification mission: Comp.1: Promoting
                         Agricultural Innovation, Comp.2: Supporting Crops Development; Comp.3: Supporting Livestock
                         Development; Comp.4: Supporting Fisheries Development; and Comp.5: Project Management and
                         Coordination.
                         7.       NATP-2 will achieve the PDO: (i) by strengthening the capacity of the NARS and the
                         extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm
                         productivity; and (ii) by promoting the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups and
                         producer organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and
                         diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive
                         national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development
                         and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported by
                         appropriate value addition and market linkages through the strengthening of supply chains for high
                         value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research and
                         extension, it will need to have a stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains and
                         on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under NATP-1.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed development objective of this project is to enhance the agricultural productivity of
                         smallholders through better research and extension services and improve their market access through
                         better integration in selected value chains. To that effect, NATP-2 will support a decentralized,
                         demand-driven agricultural research and extension services, and promote market-oriented
                         smallholder production.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         NATP-2 will achieve the PDO by: (i) continuing to strengthen the capacity of the NARS and
                         extension services to generate and disseminate agricultural technologies aimed at increasing farm
                         productivity; and (ii) promoting the sustainability of existing and new farmer groups and producer
                         organizations by strengthening their linkages with markets. Sustainable intensification and
                         diversification of agriculture through technological change requires an efficient and productive
                         national agricultural technology system, comprising agricultural research (technology development
                         and refinement) and agricultural extension (technology dissemination). This needs to be supported by
                         appropriate value addition and market linkages through the development of supply chains for high
                         value agriculture. To that effect, while NATP-2 will continue supporting agricultural research and
                         extension, it will need to have a much stronger focus on market-oriented production, on value chains
                         and on the participation of smallholders in those emerging market opportunities, than under NATP-1.
                         A differentiated approach will be required for project activities at field level to account for the
                         vertical and horizontal scaling up efforts under NATP-2. The new project will deepen the
                         interventions in existing upazillas (vertical scaling up) while expanding the geographic coverage to
                         include new districts and upazillas (horizontal scaling up).

                         Component 1: Enhancing the Agricultural Innovation System
                         This component, led by the Project Management and Coordination Unit with implementation support
                         from other agencies, will support the development of decentralized, demand-driven and integrated
                         agricultural research. This component will likely include investments, capacity enhancement and
                         technical assistance in areas launched under NATP-1 (such as sustainability of Common Interest
                         Groups (CIGs) and emerging Producer Organizations (POs), rehabilitation of rural markets, technical
                         advisory services), strengthening National Agricultural Research Institutes (NARI) (including
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments in physical infrastructure), developing one-stop farmer advisory service centers. The
                         component will also include the window for competitive research and matching grants under the
                         Agricultural Innovation Fund.

                         Component 2: Supporting crop development
                         This component, coordinated by the Department of Agricultural Extension, will support the
                         development of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for crop production
                         (including horticulture), post-harvest management and processing, and facilitate the integration of
                         smallholder farmers in selected crop-based value chains (bananas, vegetables, and aromatic rice).
                         This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g.
                         smallholder farm mechanization, seed testing facilities (with IFC), an electronic phytosanitary
                         certification system (with IFC), food safety, agricultural commercialization, and promotion of
                         smallholder-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the
                         adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to
                         private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will
                         be secured through the corresponding AIF window.

                         Component 3: Supporting fisheries development
                         This component, coordinated by the Department of Fisheries, will support the development of
                         decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for fish and aquaculture, and facilitate
                         the integration of smallholder fish farmers in selected commodity value chains (tilapia, major carps,
                         and shrimps). This component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical
                         assistance in e.g. the rehabilitation of fish ponds, food safety, quality improvement of fish feed and
                         fingerlings, fish commercialization and the promotion of aquaculture-based commodity value chains.
                         Financial incentives to smallholder farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-
                         harvest loss reducing technologies, as well as support to private small and medium agro
Public Disclosure Copy




                         entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g. food processing) will be secured through the
                         corresponding AIF window.

                         Component 4: Supporting livestock development
                         This component, coordinated by the Department of Livestock Services, will support the development
                         of decentralized extension services and demand-driven research for livestock products, and facilitate
                         the integration of smallholder farmers in selected commodity value chains (dairy, goat meat). This
                         component would include investments, capacity enhancement and technical assistance in e.g.:
                         laboratory infrastructure and equipment (including at the regional level), artificial insemination,
                         fodder production and conservation, efficient biogas production, farm mechanization, food safety,
                         and the promotion of livestock-based commodity value chains. Financial incentives to smallholder
                         farmers for the adoption of productivity enhancing and post-harvest loss reducing technologies, as
                         well as support to private small and medium agro entrepreneurs in the selected value chains (e.g.
                         food processing) will be secured through the corresponding AIF window.

                         Component 5: Project Management and Coordination
                         Under this component a Project Management and Coordination Unit will be in charge of overall day-
                         to-day project management and implementation, as well as coordination among the project PIUs
                         from the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Food. The PCMU will have the operational,
                         safeguards and fiduciary responsibility and be accountable for overall project performance. The
                           PCMU will carry out procurement and financial management activities. Other specific PMU-led
                           activities under this component will include among others: (i) the support to the development of a
                           national agricultural atlas, (ii) the coordination of third-party project monitoring and impact
Public Disclosure Copy




                           evaluation (with baseline, midline, endline surveys), (iii) the coordination of analytical studies and
                           dissemination of findings, (iv) the support to short- and longer term assistance to the project
                           management team and other agencies involved in component implementation, (v) the coordination of
                           all staff training and (vii) preparation studies for a potential follow-up operation (phase III of NATP).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           NATP-2 is national in coverage and will deepen the interventions in existing upazillas (vertical
                           scaling up) under the NATP-1while expanding the geographic coverage to include new districts and
                           upazillas (horizontal scaling up). The listing of districts and upazillas to be covered by NATP
                           phase-2 will be agreed upon with the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Fisheries and
                           Livestock during project preparation. However, the main feature of the new project, relative to its
                           predecessor, will be: increased focus on linking smallholders with markets, increased focus on
                           climate-smart agriculture and technology, and increased focus on support to post production
                           activities (e.g. agro processing).
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The project will be implemented by the Department of Agricultural Extension Services (DAE,
                           Ministry of Agriculture) as well as the Department of Livestock Services and the Department of
                           Fisheries (DLS and DoF, respectively, Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries). The Ministry of
                           Agriculture (MoA) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock (MoFL) have prior experience of
                           working with Bank finance project and are familiar with the Bank’s safeguard policies. However,
                           MoA and MoFL still need capacity improvement with regard to environmental management and to
                           comply with Bank’s safeguards requirements since the new project would concentrate more on
                           market-led production and commodity value chains for sustainability.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sabah Moyeen (GURDR)
                           Farhat Jahan Chowdhury (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              While the project designed to provide
                           BP 4.01                                               opportunities for an overall positive impact,
                                                                                 some activities may have adverse environmental
                                                                                 impacts. The key environmental issues that will
                                                                                 need to be addressed by the project are: (i) soil
                                                                                 degradation; (ii) pollution of the eco-system
                                                                                 with agro-chemicals, particularly in ponds and
                                                                                 water bodies; (iii) pesticide-related health and
                                                                                 safety issues (iv) possible depletion of
                                                                                 groundwater due to irrigation; (v) saline water
                                                                                 intrusion in groundwater and surface water in
                                                                                 select sites. Activities that would require
                                                                                 mitigation action may include construction of
                                                             community collection marketing centers, cold
                                                             storage, biogas plant, handling and management
                                                             of wastes from livestock, chilling plant, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             other related activities. Since some of the target
                                                             sites have high level of groundwater depletion,
                                                             technologies and strategies that improve the
                                                             efficiency of irrigation and/or reduce the
                                                             dependence on groundwater, as well as, enable
                                                             the recharge of groundwater should be included
                                                             in the design of the project.

                                                             The project is classified as a “Category B”
                                                             under OP/BP 4.01 with a partial assessment as
                                                             the impacts are likely to be small-scale, site
                                                             specific with no irreversible impacts and
                                                             mitigation measures can be designed more
                                                             readily. The implementing agencies will update
                                                             the Environmental Management Framework
                                                             (EMF) prepared for the current NATP-I. The
                                                             updated EMF will be supported by an
                                                             assessment of environmental practices of
                                                             currently on-going IDA project (NATP-I),
                                                             institutional capacity assessment, some limited
                                                             environmental baseline, as well as guidelines to
                                                             carry-out sub-project specific environmental
                                                             assessment, consultations, prepare site specific
                                                             EMP, costing, review process, implementation,
                                                             and monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No    It is unlikely that the project will implement any
                                                             agricultural activities inside protected areas
                                                             (wild life sanctuaries, national parks, etc). A
                                                             final decision will be taken once the final listing
                                                             of areas of project interventions will be agreed
                                                             with the Bank.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not implement any agricultural
                                                             activities inside forests. Hence the policy is not
                                                             triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   The project is only expected to have minor use
                                                             for nationally approved pesticides and there are
                                                             no significant issues of pest management and
                                                             pesticide use to be addressed in the subprojects.
                                                             However, in anticipation of higher yields,
                                                             farmers could expand the use of chemical
                                                             fertilizers, and pesticides more than what is
                                                             recommended. Increased use of chemical
                                                             pesticides leads to destruction of pest predators
                                                             and increase in pest and diseases. Similarly,
                                                                 imbalanced and excessive use of chemicals in
                                                                 farming destroy the soil biota and thereby its
                                                                 fertility as well, leading to a need for increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 use of chemical fertilizers. As a result, these
                                                                 agro-chemicals would pollute the village
                                                                 ecosystem and affect the health of the farming
                                                                 families in the village. Since NATP-2 is
                                                                 expected to promote sustainable production
                                                                 practices as a part of project design, the above
                                                                 issues are not considered to be critical in the
                                                                 project. However, as a matter of precaution to
                                                                 address any potential and unforeseen issues of
                                                                 pest and pesticide management, OP 4.09 has
                                                                 been triggered. Therefore, an Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management plan will be developed focusing
                                                                 on the review of IPM technologies available and
                                                                 identification of appropriate IPM technologies
                                                                 and environmental code of practices for nutrient
                                                                 and pest management, as well as on creation of
                                                                 awareness about soil and nutrient management.

                                                                 The NATP-2 project will continue to promote
                                                                 green agriculture technologies that were
                                                                 initiated under NATP-1. This includes: (i)
                                                                 Integrated Pest Management (IPM) such as the
                                                                 use of pheromone traps and light traps; (ii)
                                                                 balanced fertilizer use to reduce the dependence
                                                                 on fertilizers; and (iii) composting. It will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 arrange training of pesticides dealers, and
                                                                 initiate balanced fertilizer use to reduce the
                                                                 dependence on fertilizers. This will be done as
                                                                 much as possible throughout project activities
                                                                 especially through training activities which will
                                                                 be discussed and agreed during project
                                                                 implementation.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    The project would not impact any physical and
                         BP 4.11                                 cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project may work in areas where
                                                                 indigenous people (IPs) live. The project does
                                                                 not anticipate any adverse impacts on IPs. Since
                                                                 the new upazillas where interventions will take
                                                                 place have not been determined at this stage, a
                                                                 the NATP-1 Social Management Framework
                                                                 will be updated after conducting a Social Impact
                                                                 Assessment (SIA) in sample areas to include a
                                                                 Tribal Peoples Development Framework
                                                                 (TPDF). The SMF will also include a gender
                                                                framework and will focus on enhancing
                                                                community participation and inclusion through
                                                                information dissemination, and an on-going
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                strategy for consultation and communication. A
                                                                comprehensive SIA was undertaken and
                                                                detailed SMF was prepared for NATP-I which
                                                                will serve as a basis for the preparation for the
                                                                updated SMF and will incorporate the lessons
                                                                learned from NATP-I. The SMF will include a
                                                                screening format (to be implemented at the time
                                                                of sub-project submission) to determine if
                                                                project areas include IPs. If so, the sub-project
                                                                will be required to prepare and implement a
                                                                Tribal Peoples Development Plan in compliance
                                                                with the TPDF included in the SMF. The gender
                                                                and inclusion elements should be incorporated
                                                                and implemented project wide.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   The project will not require acquisition of
                         4.12                                   private land. The construction of mini
                                                                laboratories under Component 4 will be
                                                                undertaken on public lands only. However this
                                                                does not preclude the possibility of involuntary
                                                                resettlement as the lands may have squatters
                                                                living on them (not widespread in rural areas),
                                                                or have on-going livelihood activities (public
                                                                lands are commonly leased out or “permitted” to
                                                                be used for small scale agricultural activities in
                                                                rural areas). The rehabilitation of ponds is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                expected to require additional lands as the
                                                                activity focuses on deepening the ponds only.
                                                                The project activities may have special impacts
                                                                on women or can enhance benefits to them and
                                                                other vulnerable groups. The project will update
                                                                the Social Management Framework (SMF) from
                                                                NATP-1, which will contain a Resettlement
                                                                Policy Framework and a Gender and Inclusion
                                                                Framework focused on participatory processes,
                                                                social inclusion and accountability. The SMF
                                                                will include a screening format to be applied in
                                                                case land use is required to check whether
                                                                squatters are impacted or livelihoods are
                                                                adversely impacted due to the project. If so the
                                                                RPF will apply and site specific Resettlement
                                                                Action Plans will have to be produced. All sub-
                                                                projects will follow the guidelines provided in
                                                                the Gender and Inclusion Framework and
                                                                                                                                 maintain the requisite consultation processes
                                                                                                                                 and documentation.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not construct or rehabilitate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 dams larger than 10 meters in height.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            The project does not involve in any international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            waterways. The project does not plan to carry
                                                                                                                                 out any interventions that affect the use or
                                                                                                                                 pollute international waterways, particularly
                                                                                                                                 river or body of surface water that flows
                                                                                                                                 through two or more states.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No project activity will be implemented in
                                 7.60                                                                                            disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Sep-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      -              Environmental Management Framework: launched; to be completed by October 2014
                                      -              Integrated Pest Management Plan: launched; to be completed by October 2014
                                      -              Social Management Framework: launched; to be completed by October 2014
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Patrick Verissimo

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 09-Sep-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                                                                                             Date: 12-Sep-2014
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
