INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO75
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jan-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Vietnam                     Project ID:   P151086
Project Name:    Vietnam Industry Energy Efficiency Financing (VIEEF) (P151086)
Task Team        Franz Gerner
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Oct-2015                 Estimated     04-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                              Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                         Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (90%), Banking (10%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     335.00             Total Bank Financing:   200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                         130.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            200.00
Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                                  5.00
Total                                                            335.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to improve energy efficiency in the industrial sector, to
contribute to achieving the government's energy efficiency objectives. There is no constraint on the
type and size of industrial enterprises to participate in the project. The eligibility will be determined
by setting a minimum energy savings requirements and demonstrating the financial performance of
the enterprise.


﻿The Project Development Objective will be achieved through (a) an IBRD Loan to support energy
conservation investment lending to selected participating financial institutions (PFIs); and (b) a grant
from donors to provide technical assistance and capacity building for improving energy efficiency to
PFIs, lEs and ESCOS.
o
C. Project Description
The proposed project is part of the World Bank's long term engagement to support Vietnam to
increase energy savings and improve demand side energy efficiency. The CPEE project is assisting
a       the government in developing voluntary agreements with energy-intensive industries. Such voluntary
agreements will be more effective when combined with financial incentives and increased access to
financing offered by this proposed project as rewards to incentivize the participating enterprises for
improving energy efficiency. As a result, this proposed project will provide financing to strengthen
the voluntary agreements, thus, help the government achieve its EE targets. In the meantime,
international experience demonstrates that a key success ingredient to the dedicated credit line is to
provide TA to support project pipeline development and capacity building of both participating
financial institutions (PFIs) and local project developers. Therefore, this proposed project will also
offer TA and capacity building to policy makers, PFIs, and industrial end-users and service
providers, to go hand in hand with the credit line.
The project has two components: (a) energy efficiency investment lending, where a US$200 million
IBRD Loan supports energy conservation investments in industrial enterprises through the selected
participating financial institutions (PFIs); and (b) technical assistance and capacity building, where a
[US$5] million grant from bilateral donors to provide technical assistance and capacity building to
MOIT, PFIs, and selected energy users and service providers for improving energy efficiency.
Component 1 - Energy Efficiency Investment Lending (US$330million, of which $200 million from
IBRD, $66 million from PFIs, and $60 million from industry enterprises):
This component consists of an energy conservation lending program of US$330 million over five
years: (a) US$200 million in debt financing from IBRD; (b) PFIs will co-finance project activities
under the VIEEF project, financing at least 20 percent of the total investment costs; and (c) sub-
borrowers (i.e. industrial enterprises) will contribute 20 percent of investments as equity financing,
which is common practice for loan applications in Vietnam.
A US$200 million IBRD loan will be on-lent by the GOV to selected PFIs. The PFIs in turn will lend
the funds to industrial enterprises and/or energy service companies for energy conservation
investment subproject. Their lending rates will be determined based on market conditions and will
adequately cover the financial and operating costs and provide for a reasonable profit margin for the
PFIs.
The PFIs will be determined during project preparation. The criteria to select the PFIs would be: (a)
senior management commitment to and interest in energy efficiency lending; (b) prior experience
and track record in energy efficiency lending; (c) qualified staff and dedicated teams; (d) bank's
internal organization conducive to generating deal flows and managing risks; (e) existing client base
(whether there is a large industrial custom base)... The potential PFIs are BIDV and Vietcom Bank,
who are the PFIs under the Vietnam Renewable Energy Development Project and have prior
experience with EE lending under an EIB credit line. How to allocate the IBRD funds among the
PFIs will also be determined during project preparation.
The PFIs will develop an Operational Manual, which outlines selection criteria for sub-borrowers


﻿and sub-projects, appraisal procedure and guideline, roles and responsibilities of the PFIs and the
government, PFIs' internal institutional arrangement for project implementation, technical evaluation
framework, environmental and social management framework, and procurement and financial
management frameworks that are consistent with the World Bank and Vietnamese government rules
U       and procedures, subject to the World Bank approval. During project implementation, the PFIs will be
responsible for identifying, appraising, and financing sub-projects that meet the criteria in the
Operational Manual, and bear 100% default risks. The World Bank aims to support the PFIs to
prepare for the first batch of sub-projects in the lending pipeline through the PPTAF facility.
Component 2 - Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Improving Energy Efficiency (US
$5million - bilateral donors to be determined):
This technical assistance and capacity building component intends to assist: (a) MOIT, which is
responsible for EE policies and targets, to implement voluntary agreements with relevant industries,
further improve incentives for industry to carry out EE investments, and mandatory EE standards and
benchmarks in the energy-intensive industries; (b) PFIs to improve their knowledge, experience and
expertise in identifying, appraising, and implementing EE lending projects in the industrial sector
and business development to generate deal flows; and (c) industry enterprises and EE service
providers such as ESCOs to develop bankable projects. This component will be closely linked with
the ongoing CPEE on policies and voluntary agreements.
IBRD and IFC will work together to provide the TA and capacity building to the PFIs. The TA and
capacity building will include support to: (a) capacity building and training, particularly to staff at
both the HQ and branches as well as risk assessment staff, including support for the development of
necessary procedures, and the creation of an adequate knowledge base to evaluate and extend energy
efficiency loans; (b) marketing and business development to generate a robust EE lending pipeline;
(c) support to due diligence of eligible energy efficiency sub-loans, including financial, technical,
social and environmental assessments; and (d) development of energy conservation-related financing
instruments and risk management tools.
0
The TA and capacity building to MOIT, which is responsible for EE in Vietnam, will include support
to: (a) strengthen the policy and legal and regulatory framework for EE in industrial enterprises; and
(b) conduct a communication campaign to raise awareness on EE for lEs.
The TA and capacity building for industrial enterprises will include support to: (a) identify EE
projects and prepare relevant energy audits, technical design and EE project preparation; and b) raise
awareness through a communication campaign organized jointly with relevant industry associations.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented by the selected ESCOs and Industrial Enterprises located in the
whole country. During project preparation, locations of the subprojects will be carefully considered
in order to avoid potential significant environmental and social impact.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The MOIT has the overall project coordination responsibility for the project and is responsible for
the implementation of capacity building to MOIT under Component 2. MOIT has gained significant
safeguards experiences in execution of a number of Bank-financed projects including Vietnam
Demand-Side Management and Energy Efficiency Project (DSM-EE Project), Clean Production and


﻿Energy Efficiency Project (CPEE), Renewable Energy Development Project (REDP), and
Distribution Efficiency Project (DEP).
The PFIs will implement the credit line with eligible industrial enterprises and are responsible for
O
U       Component 1. The PFIs have full responsibility for the EE lending process and approvals including
oversight of safeguards compliance of the project. Each PFI will form a Project Implementation Unit
(PIU) with dedicated teams, supported by technical, environmental and social safeguards, and
procurement experts. Of the potential PFIs, Vietcombank, BIDV, and Techcombank have safeguards
experience in implementing REDP. However, other PFIs may not have such a safeguard capacity. It
is anticipated that most ESCOs and Industrial Enterprises, which will bear the primary responsibility
for environmental management of the project, may not have previous experiences with the Bank's
safeguards policies or lack capacity in this area. During project preparation the Bank will evaluate
the institutional capacity of the selected PFIs, ESCOs, and Industrial Enterprises for environmental
management and supervision. If this capacity is not adequate, technical assistance will be defined and
incorporated into the project to strengthen this capacity accordingly.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)
Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is part of the Bank's long term
OP/BP 4.01                               engagement to support Vietnam to increase energy
savings and improve demand side energy efficiency.
Overall the project would bring benefits to the
industries and the environment by contributing to
reduction of GHGs and pollutants, energy savings,
and promotion of the environmentally good industry
practices.
This policy is triggered because the project involves
the small construction for installation or replacement
of energy efficient technologies and equipment under
Component 1 requiring the identification, mitigation
and monitoring of potential adverse environmental
and social impacts. The loans for energy efficiency
improvements will target energy intensive industries
such as cement, iron and steel, and pulp and paper,
public and private. All the project works will be
confined within the premises and facilities of the
existing industries, and any new construction will be
within the boundaries of these.
As the investments are not yet fully determined by
the current stage and also by the appraisal, the
potential impacts could not be not entirely
characterized. Possible environmental impacts
associated with subprojects could be noise, dust and


﻿disposal of nonhazardous wastes common to the
installation of new equipment; waste management
for the energy inefficient equipment being removed
from service; and safety issue during the operation of
the new equipment and facilities. There may be some
issues of combustion gas emissions associated with
the installation of new boilers, kilns or other types of
heat treating equipment. The magnitude of impacts
could be varied and will be assessed case by case
depending on nature and the scale of specific
investments. Since not all investments will be
identified during project preparation, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be developed by the client to guide the
environmental assessment process and ensure
compliance with the government's environmental
management regulation and the Bank's safeguards
requirements and the WBG Environmental Health
and Safety Guidelines (WBG EHS Guidelines).
The ESMF will includes robust screening
mechanisms, identification of specific mitigation
measures, monitoring, assessment of institutional
capacity, and the cost to implement the ESMF along
with the need for consultation. The ESMF will
include the procedures and parameters for
conducting environment and social audit/due
diligence of existing facilities that will be supported/
retrofitted by the project. The ESMF will also cover
TA under Component 2 particularly on supporting
due diligence of eligible energy efficiency sub-loans.
In addition, the ESMF will refer to the Interim
Guidelines on the Application of safeguard Policies
for TA activities in Bank-financed Projects and TA
activities should be screened against the Interim
Guidelines.
TA activities under Component 2 will be screened
during project preparation and implementation for
their potential environmental and social implications,
risk and impacts, environmental categorization, and
the selection of relevant safeguard instruments. By
the project appraisal stage, public consultation and
disclosure of the ESMF and the safeguard
instruments for the subprojects identified for the first
phase of implementation will be completed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD         The project would only finance the works of existing


﻿premises and facilities within the existing industries,
which are not expected to be located within
environmentally sensitive areas such as protected
area, wetland, mangrove, estuarine, buffer zone of
protected area, special area for protecting
biodiversity. However, at the identification stage the
project locations have not yet known. Therefore, this
policy is triggered as TBD.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project would not anticipated to involve
acquisition of forest land and have the potential to
impact on the rights and welfare of local people and
their level of dependence upon low quality natural
forests and plantation forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           The project will not involve any investment that
would result in procurement of pesticides or any
increase in the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          The project would not involve significant
OP/BP 4.11                                 excavations, demolition, moving of earth, flooding,
or other environmental changes. However, the
project locations are yet to be known. Therefore, this
policy is triggered as TBD. In any event, a chance
fmds procedure will be prepared and included in the
ESMF, site-specific subproject safeguards
instruments, bidding, and contractual documents
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD          The triggering of this policy remains to be
4.10                                       determined at this concept stage. Although there is
significant interest in the steel and cement industry,
there is little understanding about the nature of EE
projects. Therefore, it is difficult to understand the
project affected area and potential impact over ethnic
minority communities. The triggering of this policy
will be visited and confirmed during the project
preparation when the eligibility criteria for sub-
projects are defined. Once triggered, by appraisal,
relevant instruments (EMPF, EMDP) will be
prepared in accordance to the requirements of OP
4.10 Indigenous People.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD          The triggering of this policy remains to be
BP 4.12                                    determined at this concept stage. At this stage,
although there is significant interest in the steel and
cement industry, there is little understanding about
the nature of EE projects. Therefore, it is difficult to
understand the project impact in terms of land
acquisition and physical relocation of people. The
triggering of this policy will be visited and confirmed
during the project preparation when the eligibility


﻿criteria for sub-projects are defined. Once triggered,
by appraisal, relevant instruments (RPF, RP) will be
prepared in accordance to the requirements of OP
4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            The Project will not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dam. The project is also not
dependent on any existing dam or dam under
construction.
Projects on International     No            The project is not implemented in areas of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           The project is not located in any known disputed
BP 7.60                                     areas as defined under the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-May-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Will be determined during project preparation.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Franz Gerner
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards     Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                         Date: 16-Jan-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/       Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                      Date: 16-Jan-2015
O
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


