                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA9367
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                              Project ID:    P150395
                            Project Name:     Tamil Nadu Sustainable Urban Development Program (P150395)
                            Task Team         Raghu Kesavan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         27-Jan-2015                        Estimated   31-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSURR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (30%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (30%), Water supply (30%), Solid waste management (1 0%)
                            Theme(s):         Municipal finance (40%), Municipal governance and institution building (30%),
                                              City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     600.00           Total Bank Financing:                400.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                               200.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                  400.00
                              Total                                                                                  600.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To pilot improved urban management practices and improve urban services delivery in participating
                           ULBs in a financially sustainable manner.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         The proposed TNSUDP will have three components: (i) Results Based Grants for Urban Governance
                         Component; (ii) Urban Investments Component (comprising three sub-components); and (ii) Urban
                         Sector Technical Assistance Component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.       Component A: Results Based Grants for Urban Governance Component (Bank Loan: US$
                         56 million): The main objective of this component is to demonstrate new models of urban
                         management with a focus on building strong governance and financial sustainability at the ULB
                         level. This component will target three ULBs (‘Model Cities’) that have been identified, viz. Vellore,
                         Erode municipal corporations and Hosur Municipality, which will be empowered and incentivized to
                         improve urban management across a range of areas. Four such urban reform areas have been
                         identified as follows: (i) ULB Empowerment and Organizational Capacity; (ii) Spatial /Development
                         Planning; (iii) Sustainable Finances; and (iv) E-Governance and & Public Disclosure. The selected
                         Model Cities will be provided an annual grant based on satisfactory performance in these urban
                         governance / management areas aggregating US$60 million in total over the period of TNSUDP. The
                         disbursement decision will be based on achievement of pre-specified results / annual targets— a set
                         of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) in these four areas. Further on achieving the DLIs, such
                         disbursements will be against a set of “Eligible Expenditure Programs” (EEPs) that would comprise
                         mainly the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) expenditures of the ULBs, excluding a ‘negative’ list
                         of expenditures. The achievement of annual targets for disbursements against the pre-set DLIs will
                         be individually assessed for each city every year by the GoTN, through independent assessment
                         teams.

                         2.      Component B: Urban Investments (Bank loan: US$ 320 million) will comprise of the
                         following three sub-components as follows:

                         a)       Sub-component B1: Urban Investments (Bank loan: US$287 million): The main objective of
                         this sub-component is to provide investment support to participating ULBs by way of sub-loans /
                         sub-grants through TNUDF to improve a range of urban services, including water, sewerage, solid
Public Disclosure Copy




                         waste, urban transportation, storm water drainage etc. This would be a ‘demand-driven’ facility and
                         there would be an emphasis on 'sustainability' or improvement of urban environments (not less than
                         40% by value under this sub-component) through interventions in waste-water collection and
                         treatment / water reuse, storm water drains and restoration of water bodies in urban areas. The
                         selection of participating ULBs will be based on existing TNUDF framework / criteria which
                         assesses, inter alia, financial sustainability of the interventions in ULBs through mainly the following
                         criteria – ULB maintaining an operating surplus and aggregate debt service < 30% of revenues
                         throughout the period of projections after loading the costs / revenues of the proposed sub-project or
                         the proposed sub-project having stand-alone financial viability.

                         While all of the participating ULBs are not known at this point, as part of preparation, the first sub-
                         project, viz. Greater Chennai Storm Water Drainage (SWD) sub-project that accounts for 30% of the
                         TNSUDP overall cost is part of the appraisal. This sub-project costing about US$180 million
                         envisages laying/restoration of storm water drains (329 km) in selected peri-urban areas / zones that
                         were recently added to Chennai Corporation, which hitherto did not have a comprehensive drainage
                         network. These include parts of Valasavakam, Ambattur and Alandur administrative zones of
                         Chennai Corporation (sub-project area, total 54 sq. km), that drain into Adyar and Cooum rivers
                         flowing through the city. An urban flood risk model is being developed for sub-project area, in order
                         to be able to assess the flood risks in the sub-project area and in the downstream Chennai core city
                         area and take appropriate mitigation measures, such as flood warning systems. This subproject is


                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         expected to benefit over (0.8 million) city residents in the sub-project area, through reduced
                         incidence of flooding and consequent reduction in damages / disruptions. Lastly, this sub-component
                         will also include retroactive financing of some expenditure incurred in TNUDP-III.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b)      Sub-component B2: Credit Enhancement (Bank loan: US$15 million): Tamil Nadu is a
                         pioneer in mobilizing resources from financial markets for urban infrastructure through the issue of
                         municipal bonds and other instruments. It has so far mobilized about US$64 million for financing
                         viable urban projects in the state through the issue of bonds. This sub-component will seek to further
                         enhance these efforts through a capitalized facility held under a separate account within TNUDF and
                         to be used as a cash collateral / debt service reserve fund to credit enhance municipal bonds and other
                         market based financing instruments that ULBs in TN would seek to issue for mobilizing additional
                         resources beyond budgetary sources. This too would be a ‘demand-driven’ facility potentially open
                         to all ULBs in the state and would seek to leverage at least about 4 times, i.e. US$80 million of this
                         amount. Operating guidelines / access criteria for this facility and institutional structure have been
                         agreed upon as part of project preparation.

                         c)      Sub-component B3: Project Development and TNUDF Technical Assistance (TA) (Bank
                         loan: US$19 million): This would be managed by TNUDF and would: (i) provide technical
                         assistance to ULBs (excluding Chennai) for preparing and/or supervising sub-projects in ULBs,
                         including environmental and social mitigation actions, contract supervision, Public Private
                         Partnerships (PPPs), etc.; (ii) TA to ULBs for credit enhancement; and (iii) TA for institutional
                         development of TNUDF itself. In addition, this sub-component will also include TA support to
                         Corporation of Chennai (CoC) that would comprise: (i) TA for building institutional capacity of CoC
                         in urban flood risk mitigation; (ii) preparation and supervision of urban investment sub-projects; (iii)
                         TA for general urban management as well as accessing market based financing.

                         3.          Component C: Urban Sector Technical Assistance (Bank loan: US$ 23 million) ) is aimed
                         at strengthening the capacity of ULBs and urban sector officials in the state in specific areas as well
                         as supporting reforms in the area of urban finance and municipal governance. Hence this component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would mainly comprise the following activities: (i) Support for next generation of municipal e-
                         governance system & GIS systems covering a majority of ULBs in TN; reforms to strengthen public
                         financial management, disclosure and oversight in ULB’s (ii) Institutional Development and
                         Capacity Building of ULBs and urban sector institutions in the state, including training, sector
                         studies and measures for strengthening O&M at ULBs, etc. (iii) Project management, incremental
                         operating costs, etc. at DMA.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in participating Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) within the state based
                         on the selection criteria. The state is broadly divided into natural divisions-the coastal plains and the
                         hilly western areas and comprises of 20% of Scheduled castes and 1% of Scheduled Tribal
                         population. The state has the third highest slum population with 507 out of 721 statutory towns
                         reporting the slum population consisting of about 1.46 million households.

                         The state is also rich in environmental resources, with a long coast line of over 1000 km covering 12
                         districts of the state and has about 17.5% of the state under forest cover. The state is endowed with
                         the Gulf of Mannar Marine Biosphere Reserve, Nilgiri Hill Biosphere Reserve, 3 National Parks, 8
                         Wild Life Sanctuaries and 12 Bird Sanctuaries. The water resources of the state consist of 16
                         seasonal rivers and over 39,000 water tanks / lakes. Depending on the location of the proposed


                                                                       Page 3 of 11
                         project interventions, these environmental sensitivities will be relevant to the project.

                         The first sub-project that has been identified and appraised is the Chennai Storm Water Drainage
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (SWD) sub-project for which ESA has been prepared. Chennai is the capital city of Tamil Nadu.
                         Other tentative sub-projects in the pipeline include Tertiary Treatment and Reversed Osmosis Plant,
                         Pedestrianization in T-Nagar, Upgradation of city roads in Chennai City and Underground Drainage
                         System for Hosur City and restoration of water bodies around Chennai. These other sub-projects
                         projects’ ESAs will be prepared during the implementation phase as per the agreed ESMF of the
                         project.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
                         I. U. B. Reddy (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment Yes                  The project interventions are expected to cause impacts
                         OP/BP 4.01                                    on urban environment. Depending on the nature and
                                                                       location of the urban investment activities, the project
                                                                       initiatives such as tertiary wastewater treatment plants,
                                                                       restoration of water bodies are likely to contribute to
                                                                       significant adverse environmental impacts on the
                                                                       project area during their construction phase. The project
                                                                       hence has been categorized as ‘Category A’. The
                                                                       Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                       developed for the project is an updated version of the
                                                                       Safeguard Framework implemented in the recently
                                                                       closed TNUDP III, and incorporates policies and
                                                                       procedures relevant to the proposed project, compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       to the safeguard policies of The World Bank and
                                                                       Government of India.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP         No             Based on the currently available information on sub-
                         4.04                                          projects, no impacts are expected on the natural habitats.
                                                                       The policy hence has not been triggered. The ESMF
                                                                       prepared for the project will screen the respective sub-
                                                                       project with regard to these aspects and ensure that the
                                                                       project activities avoid impacts on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No             Based on the current list of activities being considered,
                                                                       the project doesn’t involve substantial conversion of
                                                                       forest areas and impacts on the forest resources. The
                                                                       ESMF prepared for the project will screen the respective
                                                                       sub-project with regard to these aspects and ensure that
                                                                       the project activities avoid impacts on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No             Project activities, are not expected to trigger the
                                                                       requirements of OP 4.09. The ESMF prepared for the
                                                                       project will screen the respective sub-project with regard
                                                                       to these aspects and ensure that the project activities will
                                                                       not involve OP 4.09.



                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                            Physical Cultural Resources No              The project investments are not expected to cause
                            OP/BP 4.11                                  impacts on cultural resources. The ESMF prepared for
                                                                        the project will screen the respective sub-project with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        regard to these aspects and ensure that the project
                                                                        activities avoid impacts on Physical Cultural Resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP No                 The tribal population in urban areas of Tamil Nadu is
                            4.10                                        only 0.40 % and scattered and the tribal population in
                                                                        urban areas does not exhibit typical characteristics such
                                                                        as living as group, speak separate population from
                                                                        dominant population and have separate institutions.
                                                                        Hence this policy is not triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement     Yes            The project will have some adverse impacts related to
                            OP/BP 4.12                                  displacement of people, especially the non- title holders
                                                                        and also involve some private land acquisition for the
                                                                        proposed infrastructure improvement interventions.
                                                                        Therefore, this policy is triggered and Environmental
                                                                        and social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                        adopted for this project consistent with the Bank's
                                                                        operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement which
                                                                        will guide the preparation of sub-project specific RAPs
                                                                        as needed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No                Project activities do not involve construction of dams
                                                                        and / or dependent on dams.
                            Projects on International    No             Project activities do not involve / located in international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas   No             Project activities are not located in disputed areas.
                            OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental safeguard Issues: The project activities are aimed at sustainable urban development
                              of the participating cities, thereby contributing to the environmental improvement in the urban
                              areas. However, depending on the nature and location of the urban investment activities, the
                              project initiatives such tertiary wastewater treatment plants, restoration of water bodies are also
                              likely to cause significant adverse environmental impacts on the project area during their
                              construction phase. The project hence has been categorized as ‘Category A’. During the
                              construction phase of the sub-projects concerns such as, construction safety to the workers and
                              communities, air and noise impacts during construction phase, impacts on utilities and traffic
                              movement etc. are also expected. Similar impacts were identified in the environmental assessment
                              of Chennai Storm Water Drainage sub-project, which will be implemented in the first year of
                              TNSUDP. The ESMF designed for TNSUDP provides a framework for identifying potential
                              impacts of sub-projects, carrying appropriate environmental assessments and integrating
                              mitigation measures in compliance with the operational policies of the Bank.



                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                          Social Safeguard Issue and Impacts. The key issues include displacement of people especially
                          non- title holders occupying the public lands and Right of ways. For example, the Chennai Storm
                          Water Drainage (SWD) sub-project, which is subject to appraisal involves displacement of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          substantial number of non-title holders living along the natural drains (canals), due to the proposed
                          widening of the canals (about 320 families, most of them lose their full structures and are subject
                          to physical displacement ).

                          Since the sub-projects will be implemented in urban areas which are congested and present
                          complex situations, there are bound to be temporary impacts during the execution of works.
                          Social Impact Assessment (SIA) would be carried out as part of preparation of the sub-projects to
                          determine the nature and magnitude of impacts. The anticipated issue will be timely resettlement
                          of displaced families, resistance from slum leaders, availability of suitable alternative resettlement
                          sites/houses, effective grievance mechanism and coordination with implementation agencies in
                          dealing with social impacts. Therefore, the cost of land acquisition and resettlement will be issues
                          in those sub-projects involving private land acquisition and displacement of people.

                          The restoration of water bodies may also have substantial impacts as the poor and vulnerable
                          people are often found to be occupying the land around water bodies along the rivers and other
                          vacant public places and are subject to displacement. In addition, some other sub-projects may
                          trigger private land acquisition, though the extent may be small.

                          There is one outstanding action to be completed related to previous loan, which was closed in
                          March, 2013. In case of Resettlement Implementation in Salem Town, the titles to allotted house
                          owners need to be conferred on completion of payments of installments as per applicable local
                          laws / procedures in Tamil Nadu. The borrower has now confirmed that the titles to 65 resettled
                          families will issued by July, 2015 and this will be followed up until the PAPs receives the titles.

                           The project also involves Credit Enhancement sub-component where the Bank loan will act as
                           collateral for raising the funds from the market through Bonds by some ULBs and the proceeds
Public Disclosure Copy




                           from this bond issue will be used for refinancing and green field projects. Thus, the provisions of
                           ESMF will be applied for green field sub-project(s) transactions. For refinancing transactions,
                           there would be screening and due diligence done to confirm that there are no outstanding issues
                           from the then applicable environment and social policies at the time of its implementation. In case
                           of Model City component, the provisions and process of ESMF will be taken into consideration
                           for any physical activities to be undertaken under eligible expenditure and also factor safeguard
                           dimensions in the preparation of development plans as would be applicable to TA activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The indirect impacts of the project are also expected to contribute positively to the urban
                           environmental quality of the participating cities. However, the project could lead to indirect
                           impacts of land use change and development, leading to deterioration of environmental quality.

                          There will be downstream impacts due to flooding of certain parts of Chennai because of the
                          proposed storm water drainage since the improvements and widening of canals will not be
                          designed for the maximum rain fall due to various design constraints. This issue will be addressed
                          once the ongoing Flood Modeling study is completed and the recommendations will be taken into
                          account while designing mitigation measures such as advance warning systems, community
                          education, information dissemination etc. Another potential impact could be related to post


                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                           resettlement support in case of those resettled families which may pose a challenge as people who
                           will be resettled will be brought into formal system. In addition, there may also be pressures from
                           leaders for inclusion of additional families for project benefits and there may also be multiple
Public Disclosure Copy




                           claims from the affected people for additional benefits. Appropriate grievance redress mechanisms
                           will be put in place to deal with these types of issues.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Alternatives will be analyzed individually for each sub-project during the design phase, to
                           minimize adverse environmental impacts and these will be considered in the final design
                           alternative of the respective sub-project. This will be carried out as part of thescreening exercise
                           and environmental assessment that will be carried out for the sub-project as per the agreed ESMF
                           of the project.

                           As part of social impact assessment of sub-projects, various options will be explored at the time of
                           finalization of DPRs to minimize the impacts. In case of city roads type of sub-projects the
                           improvements would be planned to be restricted to available corridor width to avoid or minimize
                           the displacement of people. Similarly in case of restoration of water bodies sub-projects, the area
                           already encroached will be excluded from restoration to avoid displacement of people.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project is likely to finance some investments which will involve complex safeguard issues and
                           will encounter category A sub-projects. For instance, the Chennai storm water Drainage project
                           has some of the complex resettlement issues including both physical and economic displacement
                           of more than 300 families. The respective implementing agencies will be responsible for
                           implementation of the sub- projects and TNUIFSL will be the coordinating the safeguards
                           application and will also monitor the implementation. The following measures have been taken by
                           the borrower to address the safeguard issues.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          ESMF: Though this project is implemented as an “Investment Project Financing”, TNUIFSL will
                          act has a Fund Manager and will play a role akin to that of a financial intermediary on safeguards.
                          A project specific ESMF has been prepared to put in place a mechanism for screening, appraising
                          and supervising the sub -projects by the Fund Manager. This ESMF has provisions to deal with
                          adverse environmental and social impacts and selection of sites for new facilities to be proposed
                          under various sub-projects and also a provision for independent annual environment and social
                          Audit. All the costs related to land acquisition and R&R assistance paid in cash will be met out of
                          counterpart funding. The ESMF has been now finalized incorporating RSA and Task Team’s
                          comments including the comments on entitlements and a Government Order is expected soon
                          signifying the adoption of this EMF for the project. The issue of Government Order for ESMF is a
                          pre-requisite for project negotiations which is now planned in middle of February, 2015. The draft
                          ESMF has been disclosed by the borrower and the Bank in November, 2014 and the final version
                          will be replaced once the Government order is issued.

                          India’s new LARR Act, 2013. This new Act which replaced the previous anarchic Land
                          Acquisition Act of 1894 seeks to balance out the interests of the land owners, project affected
                          people and the acquirers and links land acquisition and the obligations of resettlement and
                          rehabilitation. This law also provides that no one shall dispossess their land and assets until the
                          payments are made and alternative resettlement sites have been prepared. This Act significantly
                          reduces the differences between India’s national standards for land acquisition and R&R and the

                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                         World Bank’s operational policy requirements in relation to compensation, transitional support,
                         resettlement sites, and support to vulnerable people, grievance mechanisms, consultations,
                         disclosure, etc. The Task Team is working with the client to appropriately incorporate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provisions of the new Act in ESMF to be adopted for this project. There are still few gaps/
                         differences which need to be agreed by close of appraisal with the client on the Entitlement matrix
                         before it is made consistent with new Act LARR Act and the Bank’s operational policy on
                         Involuntary Resettlement.

                         Technical Assistance (TA): As part of TA, a separate allocation fund is earmarked for safeguard
                         capacity building among ULBs and CMA and will manage the capacity building initiative. As per
                         the agreed ESMF all TA studies will be prepared in line with ESMF provisions and will be
                         reviewed by the Bank and approved and disclosed by the client. However, the Bank is not
                         responsible for its implementation unless those projects are implemented through Bank financing
                         under the project.

                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The social Impact assessment and a draft RAP has been prepared
                         for the first sub-project- ISWD and consultations with affected people has been completed, where
                         about 50 shopkeepers have refused to the household surveys. The RAP has been finalized
                         incorporating the comments from RSA office and Task Team and its approval by the appropriate
                         official is expected soon. About 320 families including about 100 shopkeepers will be displaced
                         due to this component and no private land acquisition is involved. The implementation of RAP
                         will be a challenge as there will be issues related to selection of suitable sites, timing of shifting,
                         resistance from the shopkeepers to move out of the area, pressure for multiple claims for
                         additional houses, pressures for inclusion of ineligible people for benefits, resistance from slum
                         leaders for loss of rental income from those to be resettled, loss of site related income earning
                         opportunities, income restoration of those affected shopkeepers, grievance redress mechanisms,
                         etc. The implementation capacity at Corporation of Chennai (CoC) for safeguards management is
                         inadequate and the same is sought to be mitigated through a Project Management Consultant
                         (PMC). The draft RAP has been disclosed in both borrower’s web sites; and the Bank’s Info shop
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in December, 2014 and the final version will be replaced once the RAP is approved by the
                         Corporation of Chennai. In case of other sub-projects to be accepted for financing under the loan,
                         the social Impact Assessment/ RAPs will be prepared as needed prior to acceptance of sub-
                         projects for financing the loan prior to approval bid documents by the Bank.

                         Borrower’s Capacity Assessment: As part of the implementation of the previous TNUDP-III
                         Project funded by the Bank, TNUIFSL was involved and h as been exposed and sensitized in
                         addressing the issues related to environmental impacts, displacement and private land acquisition.
                         Two Safeguard Specialists (Environment and Social) who are part of TNUIFSL are associated
                         with the project for more than 5 years, have gained experience in safeguards issues and to assist
                         the implementing agencies in preparation of monitoring of safeguards implementation of sub-
                         projects. As part of the overall safeguards implementation in the previous project under TNUDP-
                         III, TNUIFSL has demonstrated willingness to implement the sound environmental and social
                         safeguards practices. In the context of the current project, the safeguards capacity of participating
                         local bodies and other implementing agencies will be strengthened.

                         In the current project, TNUIFSL in the capacity of a Fund Manager will provide safeguards
                         support in preparation and implementation of sub-projects to the participating ULBs. The ESMF
                         has been strengthened with the processes for screening, appraisal, supervision and reporting of
                         preparation and implementation of sub-projects. Keeping the work load of TNUIFSL as they are

                                                                    Page 8 of 11
                           also involved with projects from other external aided partners, TNUIFSL will assign two full time
                           staff for this project during implementation keeping the anticipated safeguards work load.
                           However, there are capacity issues at the sub-borrower level and this is partly being addressed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           through the proposed capacity training programs. In case of Chennai Storm Water Drainage
                           (SWD) sub-project to be implemented by Chennai Corporation, it will put in place adequate
                           capacity through a Project Management Consultant (PMC) In addition, full time environmental
                           and social specialists will be deployed to supervise the implementation of SWD and other sub-
                           projects of CoC.       The ESMF has proposed a role for Directorate of Municipal Administration
                           (DMA), the concerned line department to have safeguard specialists to complement the
                           supervision of sub-projects implementation and also provide support to ULBs in getting approvals
                           and clearances from the Government on LA and R&R matters from the district administration.
                           The team will seek confirmation on strengthening DMA with safeguard specialists during
                           implementation.

                           Risks: The likely risks from environment safeguard point of view would be (i) inadequate sub-
                           project assessments and EMPs (ii) non-integration of EMPs in the sub-project bid documents and
                           (iii) improper implementation of EMP leading to environment and safety during construction and
                           operation of the sub-projects. To address these issues the ESMF provides sample terms of
                           references for carrying out EAs and Generic EMPs for typical sub-projects. In addition,
                           integration of EMPs in sub-project bid documents will be reviewed by TNUIFSL safeguard team
                           and regular monitoring of safeguards will be carried out during the construction phase of the sub-
                           projects.

                           The likely risks from social safeguard points of view will be: (i) delays in payment of
                           compensation and R&R assistance as State Government does not support this expense to ULBs
                           and the expenditures above certain level require Government approvals; (ii) Selection of suitable
                           sites for the proposed facilities with appropriate consultations with people living close to the sites
                           and thus avoid changing of sites during implementation, which was an issue in the previous
                           project; (iii) Inadequate safe guards capacity at sub-borrower level; (iv) safeguards readiness and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           coordination with procurement and civil works time table; (v) resistance from the shopkeepers to
                           move out of the existing place; and, (vi) complex urban challenges in dealing with the squatters
                           and encroachers and multiple claims and pressures to include additional people for project benefits
                           and entitlements. To deal with the above risks, the Bank will factor procurement clearances in
                           relation to safeguard readiness, ensure appropriate grievance mechanisms in place and strengthen
                           safeguards implementation support and capacity at sub-borrower level.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stake holders for the project include the people of the participating cities, implementing
                           agencies (Department of Municipal Administration, Urban Local Bodies, and Chennai Water
                           Board), local NGOs and people directly / indirectly affected by the project. The draft ESMF has
                           also been disclosed in the web site of TNUIFSL and DMA for feedback from the stakeholders. A
                           meeting has been held with implementation agencies to seek feedback on the draft ESMF.

                           As part of social impact assessment for Chennai SWD sub-project which is subject to appraisal,
                           household surveys among the affected families is completed and consultations and focus group
                           meetings are in progress where the ESMF provisions, entitlements, resettlement process, grievance
                           mechanism and other support to be provided will be explained to the affected people and their
                           willingness to move to the pre-identified sites. The Executive summary along with Entitlement


                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                           Matrix and grievance mechanisms will be disseminated through brochures among the affected
                           people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nine focus group consultations including two meetings exclusively among the women and three
                           among the shopkeepers were held to explain about the process of resettlement and available
                           entitlements/ R&R assistance. In each of these meetings about 20-30 people participated and
                           women actively participated in these meetings. The key issues highlighted in these focus group
                           meetings include most of them fear loss of locational advantages such close by schools, hospital
                           and access to various basic amenities. The participants expressed their concerns that most of the
                           women work as maids in the nearby houses and men work as wage labourers and masons in the
                           nearby areas. People also expressed that they are very safe in the current locations and fear that
                           fear that security may pose problems in the new areas.

                           As regards disclosures, Project specific ESMF and sub-project specific EIA/EMP and RAP for
                           category A sub-projects will be disclosed through Info shop and for category B/C sub-projects, the
                           documents will be filed in WB docs. All these documents will be disclosed by the borrower in
                           their respective websites.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      03-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      26-Nov-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            10-Nov-2014
                           Comments: Draft ESMF
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Dec-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Dec-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            12-Dec-2014
                           Comments: Draft
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?


                                                                    Page 10 of 11
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Raghu Kesavan
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)                               Date: 21-Jan-2015
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ming Zhang (PMGR)                                Date: 21-Jan-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
