                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC8329

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                            Project ID:      P147818
                            Project Name:      Greening the Energy Mix in DVC (P147818)
                            Task Team          Mohua Mukherjee
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                           Estimated        15-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SASDE                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (20%), Other Renewable Energy
                                               (80%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Other public sector
                                               governance (30%), Corporate governance (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    486.00                     Total Bank Financing:        243.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     243.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        243.00
                              Total                                                                        486.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objectives are (i) To green the energy mix of DVC through
                           increase in grid connected solar energy generation; and (ii) To improve power system reliability and
                           efficiency by modernizing and improving operation of DVC's grid network.
                           C. Project Description
                         Damodar Valley Corporation (DVC) is an organization set up under an Act of Parliament (DVC Act
                         1948) and is owned by 3 (three) participating Governments viz. Government of India and State
                         Governments of West Bengal and Jharkhand. DVC was formed to construct and operate various
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dams, reservoirs, hydro-electric plants and irrigation canals, etc. in the Damodar river basin primarily
                         to control recurring devastating floods in the lower basin and also to derive other benefits e.g.
                         providing irrigation, generating electricity and providing water supply to industries and domestic
                         consumers along with improvement in the socio economic condition of the people residing in the
                         DVC Command Area.

                         The network of investments along the basin has successfully controlled and moderated large floods
                         since the 1950s. Over the years, leveraging its locational advantage, DVC has progressed towards
                         becoming a leading power producer in Eastern India. DVC has around 3,710 MW of thermal
                         capacity and 144 MW of hydel capacity under operation and another 4,200 MW of thermal plants
                         under construction scheduled to be commissioned in the 12th Plan period by FY2014. Another 1,320
                         MW is planned to come up by the year 2018 with overall capacity reaching 9,230 MW, almost a
                         three-fold increase on the current operational capacity. In addition, DVC also distributes power to
                         about 290 High Voltage consumers (voltages above and including 33 kV) in the Damodar Valley
                         Command area. Its current consumers include the Indian Railways, steel plants, and collieries. DVC
                         has recently also agreed to supply 120 MW in 2016 and scale-up to 360 MW in the next 4 to 5 years,
                         to the Dedicated Freight Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL), to meet the requirements
                         of the electrified Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor, which is under construction at present. This
                         freight corridor is expected to be a growth pole for regional development in the coming years.

                         In the past, DVC’s focus has been only on development of thermal projects but now DVC is keen to
                         green its energy generation mix and also improve the quality of power supplied to its consumers. On
                         the solar side, DVC’s initial plan is to scale up its solar capacity to around 235 MW by FY 2017 and
                         upto 1,000 MW by 2022. To improve the power quality, DVC plans to implement a system
                         strengthening and modernizing project on a pilot area and also extend the Automated Meter Reading
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system implemented recently on all consumers, to power injection and interchange points, in order to
                         build an efficient energy accounting system. Whether this will cover only the pilot area or the entire
                         DVC network, will be decided during project preparation.

                         The proposed project is planned to have three components:

                         (a) Investment in Greenfield Solar Generation (Estimated cost - US$ 386 million): DVC’s assets
                         include almost 25000 acres of land, a significant percentage of which is presently not utilized and a
                         network of irrigation canals maintained by the respective state government. DVC’s primary objective
                         in diversifying into solar energy investments is to diversify its energy mix to offset the challenges
                         faced in thermal generation capacity addition while utilizing its vast holdings of unused land and
                         spaces. Addition of solar capacity will also enable DVC towards meeting its RPO targets as a
                         deemed licensee, and replace a part of its thermal generation in future. The initial plan is to scale up
                         its solar capacity to around 200 MW by 2017, as the first phase of its proposed program to invest in
                         1,000 MW of grid-connected solar PV by 2022. This would complement its 5,000+ MW of thermal
                         power generation assets. Since there is no prior in-house experience with solar power, DVC is
                         already piloting with its own funds a 15MW canal-top grid-connected solar PV investment to better
                         understand solar procurement (in this case, on a supply and install basis with operation and
                         maintenance for three years), and to establish and train an in-house solar PV team to complement its
                         vast expertise in conventional generation. This 15 MW solar pilot project, the largest of its kind in
                         India (so far, only a 1 MW pilot project of grid-connected irrigation canal-top solar PV has been
                         undertaken near Ahmedabad in Gujarat),will be mounted over a stretch of irrigation canals (in
                         Burdwan district of West Bengal), that are part of a vast irrigation network owned by DVC and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maintained by the Irrigation Department of West Bengal.

                         DVC proposes to undertake a program to invest in 1,000 MW of grid-connected solar PV on its
                         available vast holdings of un-utilized land. DVC’s available land holdings can be classified in
                         various categories: (i) wastelands owned by DVC, (ii) stretches inside the protected boundaries of
                         thermal power plants; (iii) land under its transmission infrastructure; (iv) flat hydel catchment area;
                         (v) sloping embankments of its dams; (vi) outside the perimeter fence of power plants, for example,
                         on the shores of reservoirs or other un-utilized flat land; (vii) the irrigation canal network in owned
                         by DVC and maintained by West Bengal; (viii) partial use of space above existing productive water
                         bodies located on DVC land such as cooling ponds. Considering a minimum requirement of 5 acres
                         per megawatt for ground-mounted solar panels, DVC’s proposed overall investment targets will
                         therefore require at least 5,000 acres. This translates to a little over 20 sq km, if it were assumed to be
                         entirely ground-mounted solar installations. Judicious use of available spaces for installing solar
                         generation capacity is therefore a hallmark of this proposed investment program if DVC succeeds in
                         greening its energy mix to 1,000 MW which is far above its minimum regulatory requirements, as it
                         proposes to do.

                         DVC is in the process of engaging a consultant, under its own funding, to prepare the Detailed
                         Project Report for Phase 1 of its Solar PV Investment Program, proposed to be funded under the
                         project. Further, as some of the investments in solar component are likely to be on unconventional
                         surfaces (e.g. water bodies or sloping land etc.), technical and environmental issues associated with
                         these investments will be carefully assessed during project preparation. DVC will prepare an
                         Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and undertake social and environmental
                         screenings for sub-projects to identify and categorize adverse impacts, and accordingly prepare and
                         implement Environment and Social Mitigation Plans (ESMPs) to minimize and mitigate the adverse
                         impacts and enhance positive impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b) Investments in DVC's Grid Network to Improve Reliability and Efficiency (Estimated Cost - US$
                         90 million): DVC’s existing electricity distribution operation has shown a demand growth of 9% per
                         annum and this is expected to continue over the 12th (2012-17) and 13th (2017-22) five year plan
                         periods, aided by rapid industrialization in the Damodar River Valley. Over these two plan periods,
                         DVC plans to undertake significant capital investments to build the backbone transmission and sub-
                         transmission infrastructure to address the demand growth and ensure reliability of supply.

                         DVC has divided its grid network into six operational divisions and has identified a pilot zone
                         consisting of parts of three divisions. The pilot zone covers about 14 sub-stations, 4 switch yards of
                         thermal and hydro power generation stations and feeder points for 50 critical consumers. DVC plans
                         to strengthen and modernize the grid network in the pilot zone and invest in improving its efficiency
                         in the first phase of the project. DVC has identified the pilot zone based on availability of
                         communication infrastructure and critical consumer coverage. This zone is proposed to be
                         strengthened, augmented and modernized to improve reliability and operational efficiency by
                         augmenting existing sub-stations and lines and building new assets. A SCADA cum EMS is also
                         proposed to be installed along with a suitable Management Information System. The upgradation and
                         modernization of the switchyards included in the pilot zone is critical to attaining the end-objective
                         of improving the quality of power supply to consumers but there are no investments envisaged in the
                         power stations themselves. DVC has already prepared a concept note about the proposed investment
                         and is currently preparing the Detailed Project Report, which will help the Bank team in preparing a
                         phased plan and also in identifying the suitable investments under this component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (c) Technical Assistance Component (Estimated Cost - US$ 10 million): DVC’s organization and
                         institutional practices have not evolved as required, over time and the organization is presently not
                         fully equipped to take on the challenges of business expanding by three times in 7 years and several
                         new critical initiatives being planned. DVC’s Corporate Plan has been prepared recently for the
                         period 2012-22 with a perspective plan up to 2027. The Corporate Plan of DVC identifies several
                         critical areas of institutional strengthening, which need to be implemented in order to improve the
                         effectiveness and efficiency of such large investments and to make the organization deliver
                         sustainably on its intended objectives in the Valley and beyond. DVC is keen on using the
                         association with the Bank in improving its technical and organizational capacity, learning from the
                         experiences of other key CPSUs like NTPC and POWERGRID in the power sector, who have had
                         long association with the Bank and which today are recognized as flagships, being listed on the
                         Indian stock market and operating according to international best practices. The Technical Assistance
                         component will aim to assist DVC to conduct institutional assessments across all key functions of
                         DVC, developing a comprehensive business process reorganization plan to enhance core capacities
                         of the organization across functions such as human resources, project management and monitoring,
                         operation and maintenance, financial management and implementation of enterprise wide IT and
                         assistance in project management support in implementation of the two investment components
                         indicated above. In addition, DVC is also keen on getting exposure to the latest tools and
                         technologies in the area of solar investment and smart grid investments. The specific interventions
                         will be designed and agreed with DVC during project preparation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The DVC owned land areas are located in the states of West Bengal and Jharkhand, in the catchment
                         of the Damodar river which eventually flows into the Ganges. Most of these areas are in Gangetic
                         Plain and some extend into the Jharkhand plateau. Some of the potential sites are located close to or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         within Forest lands. Several candidate sites are located close to the Damodar or its tributaries like
                         Konar and Barakar, and some others close to man-made reservoirs.

                         The long list of candidate sites identified for the two investment component are located in areas
                         acquired and transferred to DVC earlier by the state governments of West Bengal and Jharkhand.
                         Specifically, the proposed sites include: (a) West Bengal: (i) open spaces above 15 kms of the right
                         bank main canal of Damodar river at Khanda Ghosh in Bardhawan; (ii) land areas acquired at
                         Panagarh for switch yards; (iii) land areas and open spaces over reservoirs owned by DVC in and
                         around Mejia Thermal Power Station premises; (iv) land areas acquired earlier near the Durgapur
                         Thermal Power Station; (v) lands available at the Panchet Zero Point beyond the catchment areas,
                         and lands available along right side and left side of the river downstream the Panchet dam; and (b)
                         Jharkhand: (i) Land acquired for Tail Pool Dam downstream of Panchet Dam and not utilized; and
                         (ii) lands beyond catchment areas of Maithon Dam and lands around the dam township.

                         Most of these areas are clear (barren/waste) lands free from encumbrances, except a few small
                         parcels under agricultural activities by the local farmers or previous owners; which means the
                         proposed activities could affect livelihoods of some local people at some sites. No formal settlements
                         exist on these lands; however, presence of any squatters will need to be verified. A few of these sites
                         are located closer to tribal habitations, and presence of tribal communities in the proposed areas will
                         need to be verified. These sites are generally away from habitations, however, any impacts with
                           regard to people’s mobility and any hazard risks shall assessed in order to minimize and mitigate the
                           same.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           DVC has an environment department working out of its headquarters with environmental
                           professionals at each of its existing power plants. It also has a Directorate of Forests headquartered in
                           Hazaribaug that undertakes forestry and soil conservation related works. DVC has obtained
                           environmental clearances for its power plants and has carried out afforestation as compensation, as
                           well as Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities. However, their familiarity is with
                           Safeguards Policies is only beginning with this engagement.

                           DVC has a CSR cell comprising a team of social development professionals and implements a Social
                           Integration Program (SIP) in about 300 villages with an annual budget of some USD 6 million. It has
                           been implementing community development activities including rural infrastructure, education,
                           vocational training for women, and community health, in consultation with village development
                           advisory committees (VDAC) at the project level. DVC has a Land Cell to coordinate land
                           acquisition activities with the concerned state government. Even though DVC, as a requiring body,
                           does not have direct experience in managing land acquisition or resettlement activities and has so far
                           played only a liaising role in this regard, its CSR Cell, which has 10 social development
                           professionals already. This CSR Cell shall be established as the Social Development Unit (SDU)
                           with additional safeguards management capacity as required. The Bank will support capacity
                           building of the SDU to carry out social screening, impact assessment, and prepare, and implement
                           social management framework’ in a manner consistent with the Bank safeguards policies and with
                           addressing ‘gender equality and social inclusion’ issues.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Gaurav D. Joshi (SASDI)
                           Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project activities have the potential to cause
                           BP 4.01                                               impacts on the environment. These could
                                                                                 include impacts on the land use, soil leveling,
                                                                                 habitat loss, etc. These will be assessed during
                                                                                 preparation and suitable tools for managing
                                                                                 these will be developed. Frameworks / Policy
                                                                                 and Procedures for guiding the management of
                                                                                 environmental and social issues in transmission
                                                                                 and in solar PV connected to the grid will be
                                                                                 prepared for the project. In addition, investment
                                                                                 specific mitigation/management plans will be
                                                                                 prepared as investments get identified and
                                                                                 finalized. It is envisaged that DVC will prepare
                                                                                 ESMFs for the Transmission and Distribution,
                                                                                 as well as Solar PV components for guiding the
                                                                                 preparation of the management plans before
                                                                 appraisal. It will also prepare Management
                                                                 Plans for the investments identified for
                                                                 implementation in the first 18 months during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 preparation phase. The management plans for
                                                                 the remaining investments will follow the
                                                                 respective ESMFs and will be finalized as sub-
                                                                 projects are finalized.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   Some sites or parts of sites may be located on or
                                                                 close to Natural Habitats. This will be
                                                                 confirmed during site selection and subsequent
                                                                 analysis.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes   While no commercial logging is to be
                                                                 undertaken as part of the project, some activities
                                                                 could affect their health especially if solar PV
                                                                 arrays are installed or transmission lines
                                                                 connecting to the grid cross such areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           TBD   This will be determined during preparation as
                                                                 there is potential for use in case of ground
                                                                 maintenance during operation phase.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Some installations under the project may cause
                         BP 4.11                                 impacts on locally important cultural properties.
                                                                 In addition, during construction, there is a
                                                                 chance of finding important artifacts that would
                                                                 need to be managed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     TBD   A few of these sites are located closer to tribal
                                                                 (IPs) habitations. A Social Screening will be
                                                                 carried out to verify and confirm physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 presence of IPs within the project area, and
                                                                 tribal people not living strictly within the project
                                                                 boundary but who may be impacted by the
                                                                 project through loss of livelihood, etc. Based on
                                                                 the screening results, OP 4.10 shall be triggered
                                                                 and appropriate safeguards measures taken,
                                                                 consistent with the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Most of these areas are clear (barren/waste)
                         4.12                                    lands free from encumbrances, except a few
                                                                 small parcels under agricultural activities by the
                                                                 local farmers or previous owners; which means
                                                                 the proposed activities could affect livelihoods
                                                                 of some local people at some sites. No formal
                                                                 settlements exist on these lands; and the
                                                                 presence of any squatters on the lands selected
                                                                 for the project will needto be verified. Based on
                                                                 the social screening of sites identified, an
                                                                 assessment of key social issues and risks, an
                                                                 Environment and Social Management
                                                                                                                                 Framework (ESMF) including a Resettlement
                                                                                                                                 Policy Framework (RPF) shall be prepared
                                                                                                                                 consistent with the OP 4.12. Based on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 ESMF, Social Management Plans shall be
                                                                                                                                 prepared and implemented for individual sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects (sites) based on detailed assessment of
                                                                                                                                 adverse impacts on livelihoods and shelter, etc.
                                                                                                                                 The Social Management Plan will provide
                                                                                                                                 details of the site identified for sub-project
                                                                                                                                 including the process of land acquisition
                                                                                                                                 completed prior to site transfer in a manner
                                                                                                                                 compliant with OP 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         TBD                           This will depend on whether the final site
                                                                                                                                 selection will include any dam locations.
                                 Projects on International                                         No                            There is no activity under the project that can
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            significantly affect water flowing in the
                                                                                                                                 Damodar river or its tributaries.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             The project does not involve any disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 11-May-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The tentative timeline for completing the safeguard related studies is May 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Mohua Mukherjee

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                                                                                             Date: 28-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)                                                                                                  Date: 05-Jun-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
