                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA8507
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Apr-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                          Project ID:    P121507
                            Project Name:     Dasu Hydropower Stage I Project (P121507)
                            Task Team         Masood Ahmad
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Apr-2014                       Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDE                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Hydropower (90%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Other economic management (67%), Water resource management (33%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      4247.70             Total Bank Financing:          576.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                    545.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                            98.80
                              IDA Guarantee                                                                         460.00
                              Borrowing Agency                                                                      680.00
                              IDA recommitted as a Credit                                                           477.80
                              Export Credit (unidentified)                                                          546.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                                    1439.90
                              Total                                                                                4247.70
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                     Page 1 of 23
                         2. Project Development Objective(s)
                         The overall project development objective is to facilitate the expansion of electricity supply of hydro-
                         power in Pakistan. The Project would also improve access to socio-economic services for local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities in the project area and build WAPDA’s capacity to prepare future hydropower projects.
                         This would be achieved by installing a 2,160 MW hydropower plant on the main Indus River, which
                         can be expanded to 4,320 MW in future with very low cost. The Project is a “high-risk-high reward”
                         operation aimed at providing low cost non-carbon renewable energy.
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed Dasu Hydropower Project (DHP) is a run-of-river project with total generation
                         capacity at 4,320 MW. Due to capital constraints faced by GoP and WAPDA, it is proposed to
                         develop the project in two stages, with each stage further divided into two phases of 1,080 MW each.
                         Under the DHP Stage I (DHP-I), the two phases of 1,080 MW each would be developed
                         simultaneously to provide 2,136 MW capacity. The total Project cost is about US$4,250 million for
                         Stage-I which consists of two phases with a total installed capacity of 2,160 MW (1,080 MW in each
                         phase).

                         The Project consists of the following five components:

                         Component A: Construction of the Main Hydraulic Structure on the Indus River (US$1,479.7
                         million): This component would primarily consist of the civil works required for main dam structure
                         on the Indus River to raise the water level and thus create energy for running the power generating
                         turbines and generators. The spillway structure would be built in the main hydraulic structure to pass
                         the floods. Nine, Low Level Outlets (LLO) will be built in the main structure and two flushing
                         tunnels on the right bank to flush the sediment coming from upstream and that me be deposited in the
                         reservoir. The main dam structure would be constructed with Roller Compacted Concrete (RCC).
                         This project would have an operational storage capacity of 0.82 BCM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B: Power Generation Facilities (US$1,397.8 Million): As indicated above the power
                         generation facilities would be developed in two stages and four phases. Four Headrace Tunnels
                         (HTs) would divert water from the reservoir for power generation to the Power House (PH)
                         constructed underground. Water passing through the turbines would be discharged from the power
                         house to the river through four Tailrace Tunnels (TTs). Each Headrace Tunnel would supply water
                         to three generation units of 360 MW each. A total of 12 units with a total installed capacity of 4,320
                         MW at full development. Similarly each TT would discharge water from three generating units. The
                         underground sub-stations would be constructed to serve the power house. The component would
                         have two sub-components: (B1) works for waterways for the power generation facilities that is head
                         race tunnels, power house and tailrace tunnels and associated infrastructure such as gates and other
                         control structures, etc. ; and (B2) Turbines, generations, and electro-mechanical equipment etc. As
                         indicated above under the DHP-I only two waterways i.e. two HTs, two TTs and power house would
                         be completed and equipment would be installed for a generation capacity of 2,160 MW i.e. six units
                         of 360 MW each.

                         Component C: Preparatory and Permanent Works (US$344.8 Million): These include access roads,
                         relocation of a section of Karakoram Highway (KKH), construction of 132 kV transmission line
                         from Dubair to Dasu, offices, on-site housing, and possibly access tunnel to the power house.

                         Component D: Transmission Line (US$350 Million): For transmission of power, a double circuit


                                                                      Page 2 of 23
                         500KV line would have to be installed from Dasu to Islamabad (via Mansehra) that can serve two
                         phases i.e. an installed capacity of 2,160 MW. The component would have three sub-components:
                         (D1) construction of Dasu Transmission Line (DTL); (D2) construction supervision and project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management; and (D3) social and environmental management. Transmission line (D1) and related
                         activities under D2 and D3 components would be constructed by the National Transmission and
                         Dispatch Company (NTDC) that is including the implementation of Social and Environmental
                         Management plans and supervision and monitoring of construction works.

                         Component E: Implementation of Social and Environmental Management Plans, and Glacial,
                         Sediment River Monitoring (US$503.9 Million):

                         Sub-Component E1: Social and Resettlement Management Plan (US$438.9 Million): The Social and
                         Resettlement Management Plan (SRMP) will include designed programs to address social
                         dimensions of the Project, including compensation for assets, , resettlement, livelihood
                         development, public health and gender measures and local area development interventions for all
                         affected by the project infrastructure for the full DHP, including the main hydraulic structure
                         construction, reservoir area as well as the waterways. The cost of social environmental interventions
                         related to the Transmission Line is included in component D of the project to be implemented by the
                         NTDC.

                         Component E2: Environmental Management Plan (US$ 54.5 Million). All construction related
                         environmental issues would be addressed in the construction contracts, thus cost of such measures is
                         included in the construction components. This component would include those issues which are not
                         or cannot be covered under the construction contracts, including plans addressing indirect and
                         cumulative impacts, development and implementation of programs for ecological conservation,
                         fisheries and forestry management, and costs associated with monitoring and supervision of EMP
                         implementation.

                         Component E3: Flood warning system, watershed, sediment and river monitoring (US$10.5 million):
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Most of the water resources of the Indus River are derived from glacial melt, and the DHP is
                         designed to withstand probable maximum floods that may be caused by glacial lake outbursts.
                         Nevertheless, continued monitoring of glaciers is crucial for the water security of the country, and
                         useful for developing the knowledge base for the operation of the dam and for planning future
                         hydropower investments in the Indus Basin. This sub-component would support the Glacier
                         Monitoring and Research Center (GMRC) under the WAPDA General Manager Planning for
                         monitoring and research on the Upper Indus Basin (UIB) glaciers. The component would support,
                         improved monitoring of flows and watershed improvements. It would also support sediment, river
                         and project infrastructure monitoring program that would help in optimal operation of the project and
                         development of further projects of the Indus Cascade.

                         Component F: Construction Supervision, Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project Impacts and
                         Social and Environmental Management Plans (US$99.1 million):

                         Sub-component F1: Construction Supervision and Implementation Support (US$91.1 million, of
                         which IDA $40 million): This sub-component would cover the cost of consulting and other services
                         for Project implementation, including construction supervision and Project management support,
                         namely the construction supervision consultants (CSCs). It would also cover implementation of all
                         activities under the Project, including: procurement, contract administration, quality control,
                         certification of payments, financial management, preparation of any additional designs, and bidding

                                                                     Page 3 of 23
                         documents, etc.

                         Sub-Component F2: Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project Impacts and of Social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Management Plans (US$8.0 million, of which IDA $8.0 million): The monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E) activities would provide continuous feedback to the Government of Pakistan
                         (GoP), Ministry of Water and Power (MoWP) and WAPDA on the Project’s performance and impact
                         of its various components, so that corrective actions could be undertaken in a timely manner. The
                         component would support independent monitoring of implementation of the environment and social
                         management plans and Project Management Support to WAPDA as owner of the project.

                         Component G: Project Management Support, Capacity Building of WAPDA, Technical Assistance
                         and Training and Future Project Preparation and Strategic Studies (US$72.4 million):

                         Sub-Component G1: Project Management Support and Audits (US$42.40 million, of which IDA
                         $30.0 million): This sub-component would support WAPDA in implementing Project related
                         activities, including support for operation of the PMU, capacity building, incremental staff salaries,
                         operations cost and audits, etc.

                         Sub-Component G2: Strengthening of WAPDA, Independent Panel of Experts and Technical
                         Assistance (US$10.0 million, of which IDA $10.0 million): This sub-component would build the
                         capacity of WAPDA to effectively implement the Project, O&M of the dams it manages, and fully
                         carry out its mandated functions. It would also strengthen WAPDA’s capacity in developing
                         financing plans and mobilize funding for this project, for other large water and hydropower
                         infrastructure and other elements of the Indus Cascade.

                         Sub-Component G3: Future Project Preparation and Strategic Studies (US$20.0 million, of which
                         IDA $20.0 million): This co mponent would support strategic studies to address technical, financial
                         or management issues, mitigation measures, pilot projects and preparation of future projects that may
                         be identified during Project implementation and agreed upon with the Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Financing Strategy: The best approach for this project is to arrange the financing in a sequenced
                         manner, in line with the sequenced construction schedule, with a mix of concessional and
                         commercial funding sources. Based on the financing strategy, a first IDA credit of US$576.6 million
                         (SDRs 371.9 million equivalent) is proposed for project startup and an IDA partial Credit Guarantee
                         (PCG) of US$460 million from IDA16. This would be followed by an additional financing credit of
                         US$545.2 million and an IDA PCG additional financing of US$460 million during IDA17.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Proposed Dasu Hydropower Project (DHP) is a run-of-river project located on the Indus River about
                         240 km upstream from Tarbela dam. It is another 8 km from Dasu town (capital of Kohistan District
                         of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa Province) and 350 km from Islamabad. At this site the river Indus flows in a
                         deep and narrow valley (elevation 750 - 800 m asl) which is strongly incised into the lower
                         Himalayan mountains with an average altitude of 2,000 to 4,000 m. The Indus River presents some
                         important biota with longitudinal connectivity along its main stem. The project area is accessible
                         through the Karakorum Highway (KKH), which is the only road connection between Islamabad and
                         the northern parts of Pakistan and China (Kashgar).

                         Northern parts of Pakistan (including Kohistan) are covered with 29 percent forests. However, the


                                                                      Page 4 of 23
                         project area, which is mainly situated below el. 1500 m consists of steep slopes full of rubble and
                         rocks with hardly any vegetation other than low scrubs and stunted trees. This area does not include
                         any forests. The forests from higher altitudes above el. 2000 m produce substantial amounts of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         timber and non-timber forestry products. A large proportion of the harvested forestry products is
                         transported southward; local people are heavily dependent on the forests and forestry products for
                         their income. Officially, all forests in the project area are classified as “Private Forests”, owned by
                         the local community, but managed by the KP Forest Department. There are no protected areas or
                         forests or nature reserves in the project area other than Kaigah Nullah Game Reserve. Inside the
                         valley of the Kaigah tributary (nullah) there is a 5,000 ha Community Conservation Area for
                         Markhor sheep (Capra falconeri falconeri), which was established through an act of the NWFP (now
                         KP) Government in 2000. The area also provides protection to other mammal and bird species. This
                         area, supported by WWF, was holding the largest population of Markhor in Indus Kohistan during
                         the 2005 census (150 individuals). In terms of transmission line for power evacuation from the
                         project area, the TL corridor passes through Palas valley, which is an environmentally sensitive area
                         supporting some unique biodiversity and is also an important bird area. The TL corridor also crosses
                         through international migratory birds rout No.7. The project will have minimal impact on these
                         critical habitats. The project has prepared an Environmental Assessment and Review Framework
                         (EARF), which provides guidelines to be used during EIA for the 'Analysis of Alternatives' and
                         options to mitigate potential negative impacts likely to arise due to the routing of access roads for the
                         construction of TL. These issues will be looked into detail during the EIA in the light of guidelines
                         provided in the EARF. The project plans to undertake detailed EIA in FY 15 in commensurate with
                         the detailed designing study of the TL.

                         There are important cultural or archaeological resources in the vicinity of the Project. They are the
                         following: (i) rock carvings near Shatial, these will not be submerged and are rather unique for the
                         Buddhist period. DHP has prepared plans to protect them, (ii) a total of 33 mosques will be flooded
                         by the reservoir, together with the houses and other structures in the affected villages. Five of these
                         mosques have wooden structure; the remaining ones have either brick-mortar (pucca) or stone-mud
                         (kutcha) structure. , (iii) sixteen; older and more recent graveyards and (iv) moveable artifacts/chance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         finds. Since the narrow Indus valley has been the only connection between the Indian subcontinent
                         and China since pre-historic times the possibility of unexpected “chance finds” in the project area is
                         high.

                         Kohistan District is sparsely populated with only 63 persons per sq. km. People in the project area
                         are divided along ethnic, religious and tribal lines. The maliks, ulemas (religious leaders) and tribal
                         elders are members of the local jirga, which is the main forum for collective decision-making for all
                         matters in Kohistan. Kohistan has a highly patriarchal society and polygamy is the norm in
                         Kohistani society. The main sources of livelihoods in Kohistan are livestock, agriculture and
                         collection of forest products. Seasonal migration is very common up and down the mountain slopes
                         between the river valley and high elevation areas. This is mainly for climate and economic reasons.
                         In winter people live near the river in their more permanent ‘winter residences below 1,500 meters.
                         Two agricultural crops are possible at this height but there is little suitable land available for farming.
                         So farmers cultivate the higher level land (2,000- 2,500m) with only one crop annually. Here they
                         build their “summer residence”. The pastoralists herd their livestock in summer at higher altitudes
                         (2,500- 3,000m), coming down with their livestock in winter time. There is no land records system
                         but tribal demarcation of territory is very distinct and people know each other’s territories very well.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         L. Panneer Selvam (SASDI)


                                                                       Page 5 of 23
                           Chaohua Zhang (SASDS)
                           Leanne Farrell (SASDI)
                           Javaid Afzal (SASDI)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes
                            BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes

                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes

                            Pest Management OP 4.09              No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes
                            BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes
                            4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            Yes

                            Projects on International        Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project in the present thermal dominated energy mix is a non-carbon renewable energy
                              generation facility with net positive environmental impacts. Further, there will be a net reduction
                              of about 223 million tCO2e in GHG emissions over the project life as GHG emissions are
                              negligible compared to thermal alternatives. The project has prepared an environmental and social
                              assessment (ESA) studies. These studies for the project assessed the impacts on biological,
                              physical and socio-economic aspects. In terms of impacts on biodiversity, it is concluded that the
                              area has a relatively lower footprint and most of the ecologically sensitive flora and fauna is rather
                              located at higher altitudes (located at 2,000 meters or above). In terms of fisheries, major impact
                              will be a change in the habitat from present high velocity river flow to the lake type. During the
                              construction stage, limited work space within the project area, heavy traffic volumes, air and water
                              quality issues, workers health and safety, need for large construction material from outside the
                              project area, noise and vibration are analyzed as some key issues. Major issues that have been
                              identified for operation stage include impacts on downstream water uses due to first-time filling of
                              the reservoir and its timing, negligible flows in the river reach between the dam and the tail-race
                              connecting with the river, change in river ecology in the reservoir area and its impact on fisheries,


                                                                         Page 6 of 23
                         and possible impact on downstream ecosystem during peaking and sediment releases, which are
                         expected to take place several years after the commissioning of the power plant. In addition, there
                         are likely to be some induced impacts on the forest resources at the higher altitudes caused by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         resettlement of the population necessitated by land acquisition for the project and that of in-
                         migration of large number of work force to the area. These major issues are discussed in detail
                         below.
                         For the power evacuation from DHP, two parallel-running 500 kV transmission lines of 250 kms
                         length will be constructed in the five districts of KP province. The Environmental Assessment And
                         Review Framework (EARF) report reveals two major issues which are partly siting of high-
                         voltage transmission line in the Internationally Migratory Bird Route No. 7 (Indus flyway) and its
                         passing through Palas valley, which is an environmentally sensitive area.

                         Some major impacts, as identified in the ESA report are described below:

                         Loss of river connectivity, and changes to downstream flows: During project operation, the
                         presence of the dam and the diversion tunnels will break the natural connectivity of the Indus
                         River in the 4.4km stretch between the dam and the confluence of the tailrace with the river,
                         creating a barrier to fish movement and impacting the aquatic fauna and overall ecology of the
                         river in this reach. The impact in the dewatered stretch will be partially mitigated by expected
                         backflow of water from the tailrace up to about 1.2 km downstream of the dam during regular run-
                         of-river base load operations, due to a favorable profile of the riverbed. In addition, a small
                         tributary Sieglo stream joins the Indus at about 1.2 km below the dam, contributing an average
                         of 1.7 m3/s of flow, and up to 0.5 m3/s during low flow season. Therefore, the loss of flow during
                         base-load operations will be most significant in the first 1.2 km of river below the dam.

                         Following construction of the Diamer Basha hydropower project and completion of stage two of
                         Dasu construction, peaking power generation (if pursued) would furthermore generate additional
                         downstream impacts due to the intentional holding followed by controlled release of river flows.
                         During the 18-20 hour periods between peaking generation cycles, both backflow into the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         dewatered stretch between dam and tailrace as well as discharges downstream of the tailrace
                         would be greatly reduced, and potentially zero during dry season. Regular run-of-river (non-
                         peaking) operation is meanwhile not expected to alter the flow regime downstream of the tailrace,
                         with the exception of the first-filling of the reservoir, although this will be carried out during the
                         high flow season and at a rate of about 2m a day, which will result in only minimal impact on
                         downstream flows (e.g., retention of about 215 m3/s of flow, with the remaining 4,000+ m3/s
                         continuously released).

                         Ecological flow: To mitigate these impacts, the project is committed to maintain a minimum
                         ecological flow of 20 m3/s in the “dewatered” reach – which represents about 4% of the average
                         winter flow and 7% of the lowest recorded flow – as well as to run at least one turbine at all times
                         (which will generate continuous discharge from the tailrace of at least 222 m3/s) including during
                         future peaking operations, if pursued. The only water uses in this stretch are to maintain aquatic
                         life, predominantly snow carp. All other uses including for domestic and agricultural purposes are
                         not from this section of the Indus river, but rather are met by water from the Seiglo nullah. The
                         International Panel of Experts for the project reviewed and approved this ecological flow
                         determination for the proposed project.

                         Impacts to fish and fisheries: The presence of the dam will also permanently alter the upstream
                         aquatic ecology and habitat by transforming the fast-moving sediment-laden river into a narrow

                                                                    Page 7 of 23
                         controlled reservoir, which will cause changes, both biotic (altered habitat) and abiotic (less
                         turbidity, changes to temperature profile), to about 570 ha of river and tributaries. Flow velocities
                         in the reservoir will be high in comparison to most lakes and storage reservoirs, but nonetheless
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lower than in pre-reservoir conditions. Some existing fish species may gradually disappear fro m
                         the main stream. However, the reservoir area may also provide suitable habitat for non-migrating
                         species (e.g. carp species) as has been shown in the Tarbela reservoir. Meanwhile, it is expected
                         that fish spawning areas in the current confluence zones between the Indus main stem and
                         tributaries will be able to be re-established at the new confluence with the reservoir, mitigating the
                         loss of these important areas of existing aquatic habitat to inundation. Setting up of a
                         compensatory fishing hatchery and commissioning of study on fish migration to help establish the
                         baseline data are some of the major proposed mitigation measures.

                         Impacts to sediment transport: The Dasu dam will trap an estimated 27% of annual sediment flow
                         into the reservoir. Beginning in its 15th year, dam maintenance will therefore require annual
                         flushing of sediments, which will include drawing down and then refilling the reservoir and
                         discharging accumulated sediments. Both sediment entrapment and subsequent flushing will
                         affect the size, flow patterns and aquatic ecology of the reservoir itself, as well as downstream
                         water quality. Once Basha is constructed, the annual sediment load entering Dasu will drop from
                         200 million to 46 million tons (mostly fine fraction). The combined effect of the two projects will
                         be significantly reduced sediment flow downstream to Tarbela. This cumulative effect on the
                         composition and quantity of the sediments (relatively more fine fraction) reaching downstream
                         areas will be positive in terms of lengthening the life of the Tarbela reservoir by up to 30 years;
                         however, there may also be an incremental negative impact to aquatic ecology between Dasu and
                         Tarbela as a result of changes to water quality from the combined reduction in sediment loads. In
                         addition, sediment flushing from the two reservoirs – once Basha fills to the point where flushing
                         becomes required – will need to be coordinated, which could also result in a net larger increase in
                         sediments downstream of Dasu during the combined flushing as compared to during flushing of
                         just Dasu, in the absence of Basha. Monitoring of downstream water quality and habitat, besides
                         recommending sediment flushing only during the peak flow season are some of the key mitigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures suggested in the ESA report. Continuous operation of one turbine has also been
                         proposed to avoid any significant adverse impact on the fish and fisheries downstream.

                         Impacts to terrestrial habitat and wildlife: The project will submerge about 1800 ha of terrestrial
                         habitat, including a small amount of the privately held and managed Kaigah Community
                         Conservation Area (KCCA), which is considered critical habitat as per World Bank Policy on
                         Natural Habitats OP 4.04. The KCCA, which is supported by WWF, was established through an
                         act of the NWFP (now KP) Government in 2000 primarily to protect the endangered Markhor
                         sheep (Capra falconeri falconeri) as well as other mammal and bird species, and was holding the
                         largest population of Markhor in Indus Kohistan during the 2005 census (150 individuals). The
                         total area to be directly intervened within the KCCA (including submerged area as well as land
                         required for the KKH realignment) is 82 ha, out of the KCCA’s 5,000 ha, or about 1.6% of the
                         protected area. The KCCA will also experience impacts during the construction phase related to
                         quarrying activities, as the main project quarry will be located on or adjacent to the KCCA land in
                         the future submergence zone. The project has proposed undertaking at least two community-led
                         conservation activities in the project area near Kaigha game reserve, and providing compensation
                         to community for any loss from the sales of hunting permits during the construction stage.

                         Impacts to highland forests: The influx of project related personnel as well as the resettlement of
                         displaced communities to higher elevation sites will generate indirect impacts by placing

                                                                    Page 8 of 23
                         additional pressure on the natural resource base of the region, including most importantly its
                         already dwindling forests located at higher altitudes. These forests are of significant importance
                         particularly given that Pakistan’s remaining forests cover a mere 2.0 percent of its territory. Based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on household surveys conducted, local people are also heavily dependent on the forests for timber
                         and other forest products for their income. This effect will be even more significant when
                         considering the cumulative impact of DHP and Diamer-Basha, which together will lead to influx
                         of many thousands of people to the region over a period of 25 to 30 years and combined
                         resettlement much greater than for Dasu alone. As a result of both projects, there will be more
                         collection and commercial trade in firewood and herbs, illegal deforestation, logging, reclamation
                         of land for agriculture and other activities. Illegal practices such as poaching, trapping and hunting
                         will increase. The EIA reports proposes planting of natives trees near resettlement villages and
                         along roads, promote using of alternatives fuels for wood-burning, preparing and implementing
                         plans for rejuvenation of forests at higher altitudes, improvement in community forest
                         management developing and implementing code of practice for workers and employees ad
                         raising awareness through training to protect flora and fauna in the area are some of the major
                         mitigation and enhancement measures suggested in the ESA report.

                         Impacts to physical cultural resources: DHP will cause submergence of 33 mosques and 16
                         graveyards (old and new). These impacts were thoroughly discussed in consultations with local
                         communities, and mitigation measures developed based on community feedback include complete
                         salvage and relocation of the mosque to a higher elevation at one of the resettlement sites, along
                         with in-situ protection of graves to prevent dislodging. A large field of pre-historic and historic
                         rock carvings (50,000 rock drawings and 5000 inscriptions) is found on both sides of the Indus at
                         the upper reaches of the future reservoir, over a distance of more than 100 km. The rock art dates
                         from Stone Age (8-9th millennium BC) to Buddhist and Islamic periods and is internationally
                         known as the “guest book of the Silk Route”. The proposed Dasu project will not directly or
                         indirectly impact any of the known rock carvings. About 20,000 of these engravings will be lost
                         due to submergence from the Diamer Basha reservoir if ever constructed in future. Therefore, the
                         importance of strengthening protection of the remaining engravings which are outside both Dasu
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Basha submergence zones is heightened, given their archaeological significance. Although
                         there will be minimal impact on the physical and cultural resources due to the project, community
                         led mitigation measures have been agreed like re-construction of submerged mosques, and
                         coverage of graveyards with heavy slabs. One of the 33 mosques, which is historic, its material
                         will be salvaged and used in the reconstruction of this mosque.

                         Other Relevant Issues

                         Risk of earthquakes. The Dasu project site is located in a zone with high seismic activity,
                         classified as ‘Serious Seismic Danger Zone’. The dam design is in accordance with the
                         international standards (International Commission on Large Dams - ICOLD) for dam construction
                         in an earthquake zone of class VIII. According to these standards the dam is considered to be safe
                         under strong earthquake action. In the seismic hazard assessment also the risk of reservoir-
                         triggered earthquakes was considered. A committee of international experts recruited by WAPDA
                         finally reviewed and approved the dam design. This was done in accordance with World Bank
                         Policy OP 4.37 Safety of Dams.
                         Risk of landslides. Landslides are common and natural phenomena in the mountain slopes along
                         the KKH. Landslide-prone areas near the project site and reservoir have been identified and
                         mapped. Any blasting activities required in these areas have to be controlled and contained within
                         a limited area.

                                                                    Page 9 of 23
                         Risk of flooding. Although the risk of flooding in the Indus Basin might increase in the coming
                         years due to rising air temperature, shift in rainfall pattern and increased melting of glaciers in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upstream regions, the risk of flooding and related damage in the area is low. Large floods as
                         occurred with the unprecedented catastrophic flood events in July 2010 are not very likely to
                         occur, since the Upper Indus Basin is outside the influence of the monsoon rains. More often
                         rivers are blocked by an ice dam from glaciers. A lake is formed behind the glacier and through
                         overtopping or collapse of the natural dam a sudden outburst flood can occur, sometimes with
                         devastating results. About 60 North Pakistan glacial outburst floods have been reported since
                         1830.

                         Climate change. During the last decade substantial research is carried out to study the effects of
                         long-term climate change on precipitation, air temperatures and droughts. Some of the main
                         conclusions of these studies are:

                         �       between 1980 and 2005 the frequency of heat waves (T >40º C) has been increased in
                         north-western Pakistan. It is expected that there will be more frequent periods with extreme
                         drought;
                         �       based on predictions in scenarios of the International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
                         estimates have been made by the Pakistan Meteorological Service of the increase in maximum
                         daily temperatures, which ranges from 2.8º C to 4.2º C in the year 2080 for northern Pakistan;

                         From the studies it has been concluded that glaciers in the Himalaya and Karakorum are receding
                         faster than happens in any other part of the world. From digital terrain models and satellite
                         observations it might be concluded that the reduction of the thickness of ice in the Western
                         Himalayan glaciers ranges between 0.50 to 0.90 m per year, although in some areas in the
                         Karakorum an extension and increase of glaciers has been reported. After a period with increased
                         flows due to accelerated glacial melt it is expected that summer and late spring discharges of the
                         Indus will be consistently be reduced around 2050.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Social impacts. Major adverse impacts under the project are related to land acquisition and
                         involuntary resettlement for various components of the project, such as the construction of the
                         dam, its ancillary structures, formation of reservoir and relocation of Karakoram Highway. A total
                         of 4,643 ha of land will need to be acquired for the reservoir, relocation of KKH and other
                         associated ancillary works. Most of the lands are barren land and only about 600 ha of them are
                         agricultural lands, consisting of terraced farm land, grazing areas and orchards. A total of 945
                         houses and residential structures, 197 shops, 31 mosques, seven schools, two basic health units,
                         three community centers and 17 graveyards will need to be relocated. These would result in the
                         displacement of 6,953 persons from 767 households, requiring development of new sites for their
                         resettlement. These would also have impact on the household income of those losing agricultural
                         lands and those whose commercial business would be disrupted along the KKH and would need to
                         be relocated along the new sections of KKH.

                         There will be an influx of “outsiders” into Kohistan District during the construction of the project,
                         including construction workers, project management staff and people seeking business and job
                         opportunities. The size of population influx will vary, reaching the maximum at the peak of
                         construction phase. This influx of population will put increased pressure on local capacity to
                         provide services as well as local resources use. This may create competition and lead to conflicts
                         with local population. The population increase and increased interactions with local population

                                                                    Page 10 of 23
                          are likely to increase exposure of local population to public health risks. Besides, considering the
                          social norms under the tribal culture, inappropriate conduct on the part of the “outsiders” could
                          potentially lead to tension and conflict with the construction forces as well. Contractor operations,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          confined to this narrow valley, will also bring in the issue of safety for local population. An
                          impact assessment was carried out on downstream impacts, particularly fishery. The assessment
                          survey identified the communities that include households who conduct fishing in the river. The
                          assessment reveals that there are no professional full-time fishermen along this stretch of the river,
                          fishing is mostly for self-consumption, and fishing activities mostly take place along the tributaries
                          rather than the main stem of the river. The assessment concludes that the project is unlikely to
                          have major impacts on fishing income downstream of the dam.

                           Safety of Dam: Since the project involves the construction of a large dam including associated
                           infrastructure, WAPDA appointed an international Panel of Experts, including five renowned
                           experts, which has reviewed and signed off on the engineering designs of the dam and its safety
                           aspects, including stability and stress/deformation behavior analysis, seismic engineering analysis,
                           RCC design and construction technology, dam safety against norm al and catastrophic extreme
                           loading conditions and thermal stress, geology/geotechnical (including safety of temporary and
                           permanent excavations and rock slope stability / stabilization measures), hydrology, sediment
                           management, hydraulic structures (including spillway, outlet works, and intake) and hydropower
                           generation system, and safety of cofferdam foundations and sealing method. Dam safety
                           monitoring equipment will be installed, and regular monitoring of appropriate safety parameters
                           will be carried out throughout the life of the project. WAPDA’s Dam Safety Organization will
                           furthermore annually conduct safety surveillance and inspection, including the monitoring of dam
                           safety instruments and the movement of sediment. Twelve engineers from WAPDA have recently
                           completed training on Dam Safety from USBR under a separate Bank funded Pakistan Water
                           Sector Capacity Development project (WCAP). The construction supervision and quality control
                           plan has been prepared, and the consultant is on board. The instrumentation plan has been
                           prepared as part of detailed design and technical specification of the bidding document. The
                           preliminary O&M and Emergency Preparedness Plans have been prepared. The detailed O&M
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and Emergency Preparedness Plans will be prepared six months and twelve months prior to the
                           first impoundment of the dam reservoir. Further, an early warning system will be installed, and an
                           emergency response plan will be implemented in case of any dam related emergency. The Panel
                           of Experts will continue to remain involved throughout the project implementation period, first
                           impoundment and during the warranty period of the major works. During operation of the project
                           an internationally recognized safety inspection regime would be followed as it has been in case of
                           Tarbela Project. This would consist of annual inspection of the project infrastructure and every
                           three year inspection by an external and international panel of experts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           A cumulative impact assessment has also been prepared as part of the ESA, to evaluate the
                           impacts of the Dasu project when taken together with impacts from other planned water resources
                           and hydropower projects within the Indus Basin (including main stem and tributaries) which are
                           considered likely to be developed within the next 20 years. Non-hydro or water resource related
                           developments are not considered likely in this mountainous and rugged terrain belonging to the
                           lower Himalayan and Karakorum mountain range. Although the first phase of WAPDA’s “Vision
                           20205” program for Indus Cascade development envisions an eventual 4 dams along the Indus
                           main stem upstream of Tarbela – namely, Thakhot, Pattan, Dasu and Diamer-Basha, given fiscal
                           space constraints for the financing of such large investments, realistically only Dasu and Diamer-


                                                                     Page 11 of 23
                         Basha are expected to take place within the next 20 years. As such, the cumulative impact
                         assessment focused on these two projects, plus six smaller projects planned for Indus tributaries
                         between Diamer Basha and Tarbela. The evaluation is based on the assumption that DHP (phase 1
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and 2) will be constructed during the period 2015- 2022, and will begin generating electricity in
                         2020. Diamer Basha project and other smaller hydropower projects proposed for Indus tributaries
                         between Diamer Basha and Tarbela producing electricity by or before 2030, assuming that
                         everything goes as planned. The temporal and spatial scope of the Cumulative Impact Assessment
                         is inevitably limited in order to ensure that the assessment remains relevant and adds value to the
                         project-level assessment process. Major impacts identified due to the development in the Upper
                         Indus Basin are as under:

                         Hydrology: The operation of DHP as a run-of-river facility used for base load power production
                         will essentially not change the hydrological regime of the Indus downstream. No change in the
                         Indus flow between Dasu and Tarbela is expected. The downstream flow will only slightly be
                         reduced during the first-filling of the reservoir and during yearly flushing operation, which starts
                         after 15 years. In case the Basha dam is constructed by that time flushing is only needed after 30
                         years. The reduction in the discharge will be relatively small and will not happen in a critical
                         period for downstream areas. Impacts of the change in flow therefore will be almost negligible.

                         Sediment transport and water quality: Annually about 200 million ton of sediment are flowing into
                         the reservoir. Sand will be trapped but most of the suspended silt will pass the turbines and the
                         LLOs from Dasu. Without flushing it is expected that the Dasu reservoir will be filled in 20-25
                         year. Once the flushing commences after 15 year (assuming Basha is not completed) about 27
                         percent of the annual sediment inflow would be trapped and 73 percent would be flushed through
                         the flushing tunnels and LLO. This will have an impact on the composition of the sediments
                         (relatively more fine fraction) reaching downstream areas, with possibly some changes in the
                         aquatic ecology. The reduction of the sediment quantity and composition as a result of the
                         construction of DHP is not expected to have a large impact on the water quality of the Tarbela
                         reservoir. But after completion of Basha the situation will change drastically. The construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Basha will have a considerable impact on both Dasu and Tarbela reservoir. The Basha reservoir
                         with a large storage volume will then act as a sediment trap and the inflow in Dasu reservoir will
                         be reduced to 46 million ton of sediment (mainly fine fraction). The cumulated impacts of both
                         Dasu and Basha together will have a considerable positive impact on Tarbela reservoir and may
                         extend its life with another 30 years.

                         Natural forests and wildlife: The construction of both DHP and the Diamer-Basha project may
                         have a significant cumulative and induced impact on the high-altitude natural forests and wildlife
                         of the area. There will be large influx of many thousands of people including construction
                         workers, operational staff, and business people together with their dependents and over a period of
                         25 to 30 years. They will settle in the main urban centers in the area around Dasu/Komilla and
                         Chilas. The construction of new resettlement sites for both projects at higher altitudes will also
                         increase the population pressure of the rural population at higher elevations particularly on forest
                         resources and wildlife including a whole range of rare and endangered plants and fauna. As a
                         result there will be more collection and commercial trade in fire wood and herbs, illegal
                         deforestation, logging, reclamation of land for agriculture and other activities. Illegal practices
                         such as poaching, trapping and hunting will increase.

                         Preservation of archaeological resources: While DHP will not have any impact at all on any of the
                         rock carvings, a large field of pre-historic and historic rock carvings (50,000 rock drawings and

                                                                   Page 12 of 23
                           5000 inscriptions) is found on both sides of the Indus between Shatial and Raikot bridge over a
                           distance of more than 100 km. The rock art dates from Stone Age (8-9th millennium BC) to
                           Buddhist and Islamic periods and is internationally known as the “guest book of the Silk Route”.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           About 20,000 of these engravings will be lost due to submergence from the Diamer Basha
                           reservoir. The rock carvings around Shatial will not be submerged, but are not protected and
                           endangered by on-going developments by construction works and other activities related to the
                           project. A joint mitigation plan implemented by Basha and Dasu project is recommended to
                           rescue, document and protect these rock drawings and inscriptions from further destruction. This
                           might be also an opportunity to stimulate tourism development by establishing a museum and
                           information center in Chilas or Shatial.

                           The proposed project is a major investment in Kohistan District. It is expected to contribute
                           significantly to the socioeconomic development in the local areas. Apart from the social programs
                           that will assist the affected population to improve their livelihoods, both in terms of income
                           generation and residential conditions, local population are expected to benefit from employment
                           opportunities during the project construction phase as well as improvement of local infrastructure,
                           public services and livelihood development support. The development and operation of this
                           project is expected to have profound long term impacts on local communities, improving their
                           access to information regarding market and employment opportunities, access to education and
                           health services and more economic opportunities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project environmental assessment considered number of alternatives, which included: (i)
                           without-project alternative; (ii) site selection of main structure and hydraulic and electrical
                           infrastructure; (iii) alternatives for the type of structure - (a) Roller Compacted Concrete structure
                           (RCC), (b) Concrete Faced Rock fill structure and (c) an Earth fill structure; (iv) alternatives for
                           the lay-out of intake and tail race tunnels; (v) alternative sources of construction material; (vi)
                           alternatives for the selection of generating equipment; (vii) alternative construction schedules; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (viii) alternatives for resettlement.

                           These are briefly described below:

                           (i) Without Project Alternative: The “without project” alternative is not realistic, because Pakistan
                           will build additional generating plants to eliminate power shortages. Indeed, given the increasing
                           prohibitive costs of fuel oil-based electricity generation, development of Pakistan’s hydro
                           resources at a variety of scales represents the only reasonable prospect of eliminating these
                           shortages. Indeed, until such time as power shortages are significantly reduced and system
                           reliability increased the incremental output of Dasu would serve primarily to reduce these
                           shortages – the benefits of which are largely the same as that of the “without project alternative”
                           counterfactual: i.e., substituting grid electricity for diesel self-generation and kerosene for lighting.

                           Energy Efficiency and Demand Side Management: In Pakistan there exist a series of options such
                           as demand side management and improved utilization efficiency, and reduced transmission and
                           distribution losses that have high economic returns and are already being undertaken by various
                           Pakistani organizations. However, these are complementary to, rather than mutually exclusive
                           substitutes for Dasu and they will be implemented regardless of whether Dasu is built or not.

                           Alternative Hydropower Projects: Pakistan has a large potential of renewable and clean energy


                                                                       Page 13 of 23
                         resources in the form of hydropower. Out of an estimated potential of 46,000 MW so far only
                         about 6,500 MW or 14 percent is utilized. The majority of the hydropower potential can be found
                         in the Upper Indus Basin. Compared to various ongoing and planned hydro schemes in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         country, DHP has the lowest cost per kWh generated and the least environmental and social
                         impacts because of its nature (run-of-river).

                         Other Sources of Renewable Energy: Alternate renewable sources such as wind and solar power
                         cannot be developed to a scale comparable to DHP since they will be three times more expensive
                         than DHP. Both of these options need to be developed to the extent technically and financially
                         feasible. They are complementary, but not substitutes for DHP. Moreover, from the perspective of
                         mobilizing the necessary finance for the power sector, they do not compete for the same sources of
                         finance: wind and small hydro can be 100% financed from local commercial banks, whose
                         resources are simply not available for large hydro projects. It is not anticipated that, DHP would
                         crowd out the ability of the GoP, Provincial Governments and/or private sector to finance small
                         and medium scale investments in renewable energy.

                         Thermal Generation: Investing in hydropower development can provide additional generating
                         capacity more cheaply and cleaner than any thermal alternative, with almost no long-term fuel
                         cost. The domestic gas resources in Pakistan are limited, oil is mostly imported and exploitation of
                         Thar coal is still under investigation. Development of hydropower potential can contribute in
                         reducing the cost of electricity generation, reducing the sector deficit by injecting positive cash
                         flow, saving foreign exchange by displacing imported fuel and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

                         (ii) Site selection of main structure and hydraulic and electrical infrastructure: DHP was initially
                         identified as a potential hydropower project in 1981 and the location of the project was projected
                         about 7 km upstream of Dasu bridge. The feasibility study of DHP (2009) was carried out in the
                         assumption that the Dasu project would be implemented after completion of the Diamer-Basha
                         dam. In this study several locations between 3 to 9 km upstream from Dasu bridge were
                         investigated. During the studies the initial six locations for the main structure were reduced (on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         geo-technical grounds) to three technically feasible alternatives. The final selection of the site was
                         done after extensive consultations with the affected population. The selected site appeared to be
                         technically and economically more feasible and had considerable lower environmental and social
                         impacts, with lower needs of resettlement of people. The site alternative also considered local
                         community request and made it possible to preserve the attractive historic 400 year old mosque in
                         the village of Seo, an important cultural and religious site. The alternative was widely supported
                         by the residents from the area.

                         (iii) Alternatives for the type of structure: Three types of main structure were considered during
                         the feasibility study, (i) a Roller Compacted Concrete structure (RCC), (ii) a Concrete Faced Rock
                         fill structure and (iii) an Earth fill structure. The feasibility study recommended a RCC structure
                         on basis of availability of construction material locally, lower cost and technical advantages. No
                         significant differences in environmental impacts were expected between the three alternatives.

                         (iv) Alternatives for the lay-out of intake and tail race tunnels: Three different types of waterways
                         (intake and tail race tunnels) were considered during the feasibility study. However this study
                         didn’t evaluate the stability of the various types of rock and the possible impacts of the presence of
                         the Khoshe fault, a geological contact near to the proposed underground power house. The Khoshe
                         fault is not an active fault, with a weak or fractured rock structure. However its presence could
                         possibly create water leakage and influence the design and construction cost of the tunnels. During

                                                                    Page 14 of 23
                         detailed design four alternatives were studied. The layout for alternative 1, in which the power
                         house is located upstream of the Khoshe fault, was worked out further during the feasibility study.
                         The tail race tunnels are all crossing the fault, with possible negative impacts. In alternative 2 the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         powerhouse is located downstream of the fault. In alternative 3 any crossing with the fault is
                         avoided, but the tail race tunnels are curved, which is a disadvantage. Alternative 4 is a slight
                         modification of Alternative 1, in which the tail race tunnels are straight without any bend. This
                         alternative is selected because of higher efficiency, since a straight tunnel has much lower head
                         losses due to friction.

                         (v) Alternative sources of construction material: Coarse aggregates: About 9.2 million ton of
                         coarse aggregate will be required for the construction of the dam. Four quarries were identified on
                         the left bank with suitable material and with easy access (along the old KKH that will be
                         submerged after filling of the reservoir). After studies the quarry at Kaigah (8 km upstream of
                         dam) was selected since (i) the quarry is located in the future reservoir area, thus avoiding
                         additional land acquisition and resettlement, and (ii) enough level space is available for an
                         aggregate processing plant and for storage of aggregates and transportation facilities (conveyor
                         belt), and (iii) after filling of the reservoir the quarry will be covered with alluvial sediments,
                         avoiding visible exposure in the landscape. All potential borrow sites are concentrated on the left
                         bank side, since the right bank side of the Indus is very steep and susceptible for landslides and not
                         suitable for quarrying and not accessible at an early stage of the project. After detailed studies it
                         appeared that three of four sites were unsuitable due to insufficient space needed for installation of
                         crushers and transport facilities. The site at Kaigah nullah remained as the only technically feasible
                         alternative. Adverse environmental impacts: The selection of this site may have consequences for
                         the Kaigah Community-managed Game Reserve, which is bordering the old KKH and the quarry
                         site. In the Game Reserve (5,000 ha) some limited trophy hunting is allowed. The site is managed
                         by the community of Kaigah village, who have been trained in wildlife conservation management
                         and who obtain an annual share of the sales of hunting licenses. During construction the operation
                         of a quarry at Kaigah could negatively affect presence of wildlife in the area. The community also
                         may suffer from loss of income, since hunters might stay away. These negative impacts however
Public Disclosure Copy




                         seem are considered to be unavoidable, since there are no realistic alternatives at hand. Sand:
                         About 5 million ton of good quality sand is required for construction. River sand is available in
                         small quantities and is often unsuitable. Suitable sand deposits are located far way at some 80 km
                         downstream (Maira) and 120 km upstream from Dasu (Chilas). Use of these deposits is expensive
                         because of high transportation cost and would negatively affect the aquatic ecology of the Indus.
                         For this reason it was decided to use manufactured sand from the Kaigah quarries. Kaigah is
                         already selected for preparing coarse aggregates and the same facilities can be used for
                         manufacturing fine aggregates. Pozzolan: Natural pozzolan is available in the area at three
                         different sites. However all three sites have insufficient quantities of pozzolan and often of
                         variable quality. The material available from these sources has negligible cementaceous value and
                         thus it can only serve as fine material and filler. Therefore, based on the recommendation of the
                         POE the fine material will be manufactured locally.

                         (vi) Alternatives for the selection of generating equipment: The feasibility study proposed to
                         install eight turbines of 540 MW each for the generation of a total of 4,320 MW. These turbines
                         are huge in size and difficult to transport. It appeared that the current condition of the KKH
                         presents an important limitation to the selection of suitable equipment. A comprehensive study
                         was made to find out the maximum weight and width of generating equipment, which could safely
                         pass the KKH. This was tested during trial transports towards the Basha dam. Another factor
                         which was considered was the possible influence of future changes in the flow regime of the Indus

                                                                    Page 15 of 23
                          due to climate change. Three combinations of generating equipment were evaluated: (a) 8 units of
                          540 MW, (b) 10 units of 432 MW, (c) 12 units of 360 MW. Option (c) was selected as the most
                          feasible option on basis of energy production and transportation requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (vii) Alternative construction schedules: The DHP requires huge and committed investments. A
                          staged development is the most practical way to achieve early power generation with relatively
                          low investment cost (committed finance from World Bank). This approach could also facilitate in
                          dealing with uncertainties in future investment. Both WAPDA and World Bank agreed on a two
                          staged development of DHP, with each stage divided into two phases. The development of stage
                          two is assumed to be implemented after completion of the Diamer-Basha project construction,
                          which will largely reduce the sediment load into the Dasu reservoir and thereby prolonging the life
                          of DHP.

                          (viii) Alternatives for resettlement: Various alternatives for resettlement were discussed with the
                          affected communities. After elaborate discussions a combination of various options will be
                          selected, and the following two are the main options:

                          Option 1: Community-based relocation close to the current settlements, but at a higher location,
                          with site and services to be developed by the project. This option includes the possibility of a self-
                          managed relocation in Dasu Tehsil or in Kohistan District, with additional compensation and
                          benefits prior to relocation. About 90 percent of the community preferred this option.

                           Option 2: Relocation to “down country” (outside Kohistan), with extra compensation and benefits
                           prior to relocation. A minority of about 10 percent of the affected community preferred this option.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address the adverse impacts and maximize project benefits, WAPDA has developed a series of
                           interventions on the basis of field surveys and extensive consultations with local communities with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the aim to restore and improve livelihoods of the affected population, and support local
                           socioeconomic development. These interventions are packaged into a Social Resettlement
                           Management Plan (SRMP) that includes the following key interventions:

                          Resettlement: The project will require the relocation of 6,953 people in 767 households. Various
                          potential options have been explored for their resettlement, including group resettlement within the
                          river valley, self-resettlement outside the project area, individual household resettlement within the
                          project area and group resettlement within existing community land at higher elevation.
                          Assessment of these options led to the adoption of a multi-option approach for resettlement under
                          DHP. Moving up to higher elevation within their existing territory is the approach preferred by
                          the majority of the relocating households. The project design team and the communities followed
                          up on this preference and identified 27 potential resettlement sites. These resettlement sites will
                          be further assessed and designed in detail for their development. The project team will continue to
                          work with the relocating groups and households over their relocation plan, including other
                          possible resettlement options. All these issues have been addressed in the RAP and in the RPF, for
                          interventions not fully identified.

                          Livelihood development: The objective is not only to restore, but also improve the livelihoods of
                          the project affected population. Analysis indicates that the project is not expected to have major
                          adverse impacts on household income of the affected population due to the economic and


                                                                     Page 16 of 23
                         livelihood pattern and spread of the affected households. The development approach consists of
                         short term interventions for income restoration and a ten-year program for sustainable livelihood
                         development. The short-term interventions will start early prior to civil works, focusing on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         affected households, assisting them in investing their land compensation money into household-
                         based income generation schemes. An NGO experienced in rural development will be engaged to
                         mobilize the communities and assist individual households to design and implement household-
                         specific income-generation schemes. WAPDA will design and implement a parallel livelihood
                         support program to facilitate household-level income generation activities. The project will
                         establish a Social Development Fund to continue and expand the short-term interventions beyond
                         the project construction period. This program will be developed during the course of project
                         implementation.

                         Gender assessment and interventions: Based on the gender assessment conducted, the project has
                         proposed a three-prong approach. The first is to educate project staff, including construction
                         forces to raise awareness and increase sensitivity on gender. The second is to educate men, such
                         as local leaders, religious leaders and husbands on the importance for women to access project
                         benefits, creating conducive environment for women to benefit from the project. The third is to
                         identify existing and future entry points and use them as much as possible to benefit women.
                         These are described in the gender strategy and will be detailed during the course of project
                         implementation. It is also cautioned that, given the sensitivity, all interventions related to women
                         will need to be discussed and agreed with the communities first before putting to implementation.

                         Management of Construction-related Impacts: The construction of the project will bring in a large
                         influx of “migrant population” into Kohistan District, including the construction workers, project
                         management staff, service-providing followers and employment seekers. This may give causes of
                         conflicts over resources, differing cultural conducts and behavior, public health, safety and
                         security issues. WAPDA has prepared a management framework to proactively prepare to address
                         these types of issues. Interventions include awareness raising among local administration and
                         communities over the in-migrants, contractors’ proactive planning about the management of their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         work forces, including their health plans and code of conduct, strengthening of local institutions to
                         manage conflict and security issues.
                         Public health action plan. The plan is developed on the basis of an assessment of possible project
                         public health impacts, local public health services capacity and gaps to provide the services
                         required under the project. The plan aims to minimize risks and address possible harmful effects
                         on public health under the project. It will focus on i) dealing with public health issues among the
                         affected population in relocation during the pre-construction period, ii) measures to minimise and
                         address adverse effects on the health of migrant, resident population and the construction
                         workforce during the construction phase and iii) measures to promote future health benefits
                         immediately after completion of the project. Interventions include establishing health baselines,
                         information, education and communication programs, preventive, curative and promotive health
                         activities, monitoring, diagnosis and treatment of specific diseases, emergency response actions
                         and support to strengthen local medical institutions.

                         Approach to address downstream fishery impacts. A study was carried out to evaluate potential
                         impacts on fishing communities downstream of Dasu Dam. The study covered four districts over
                         200 km stretch between the proposed Dasu Dam and Tarbela Reservoir. The study established
                         baseline conditions of the fishing communities, reviewed their present fishery activities, income
                         levels and assessed possible impacts during and after project construction. The study indicates
                         that the development of Dasu Hydropower Project will have some but relatively small impacts on

                                                                   Page 17 of 23
                         fishery activities downstream as most of the fishery activities occur along the tributaries rather
                         than the main stem of Indus River. The recommended measures include maintaining minimum
                         flow for the low flow season and establishment of local scale fish hatcheries and training
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs.

                         Local area development support: In addition to impact mitigation and improving livelihoods of the
                         affected communities, the project has proposed to set up an Area Development Fund of $30
                         million to support local area development in Kohistan District. Possible interventions could
                         include improvement and expansion of education and health facilities, road and communication
                         infrastructure, provision of vocational training and livelihood extension services, and improvement
                         and upgrading of infrastructure facilities in Dasu Town. The management and operation of the
                         fund will be designed in detail during the initial phase of the DHP.

                         The National Transmission And Despatch Company (NTDC) is responsible for the planning and
                         construction of the Dasu Transmission Line. A general corridor has been selected and the
                         alignment is still under study and yet to be finalized. NTDC has conducted a socioeconomic
                         survey within the alternative corridors to establish the socioeconomic baseline. The survey team
                         conducted initial rounds of consultations in the project districts and carried out screening of
                         possible project impacts. Possible impacts include land acquisition for the tower posts, damages
                         to crops and orchards, disruption of local access routes and restrictions on the land use within the
                         transmission line corridor. NTDC, with IFI support, has developed and adopted a Land
                         Acquisition Resettlement Framework (LARF). The LARF has been reviewed and cleared by ADB
                         and World Bank for compliance with their resettlement policies. This LARF will apply to Dasu
                         Transmission Line. Once the transmission line corridor is finalized, resettlement action plans will
                         be prepared in line with the LARF. The Environment Social Impact Cell of NTDC will be directly
                         responsible for the planning and implementation of the resettlement action plans.

                         In the past ten years, WAPDA has implemented quite a few World Bank funded mega
                         infrastructure projects. Ghazi Bharotha stands completed while Tarbela 4th Hydropower is under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation. WAPDA has therefore developed its capacity to supervise environmental and
                         social safeguards’ aspects for projects like Dasu. Further, the ESA prepared for the project
                         presents a fairly detailed and well laid-out implementation plan both for ESMP and SRMP. This
                         plan draws on lessons learnt from previous Bank engagements like Ghazi Bharotha and Tarbela
                         4th. As described in the ESA and SRMP, the overall responsibility for the implementation of the
                         project rests with the Project Management Unit (PMU). Within the PMU there will be an
                         Environment and Social Management Unit (ESMU), responsible for implementing the EMP and
                         the SRMP. The ESMU will include representatives of all actors responsible for EMP/SRMP
                         implementation. The responsibilities of the ESMU are: (i) supervision, facilitation and
                         coordination of environmental and social measures; (ii) ensure that contractors follow PEPA
                         regulations and other requirements mentioned in the EMP; (iii) identify any issues of non-
                         compliance and report these; (iv) suggest mechanisms to link contractor performance in relation to
                         the EMP to the timing of financial payments, incentives or penalties; (v) interaction with
                         stakeholders for their concerns about the construction activities; and (vi) implementation of
                         contingency plans. The ESMU will be supported by a team of national and international experts
                         under an implementation support TA. A team of local experts from different departments of
                         Kohistan District will operate alongside ESMU. Operational NGOs are planned to be recruited to
                         facilitate SRMP implementation at community and household level.

                         The ESMU will ultimately be responsible to the WEC, stationed in Lahore. It is proposed that

                                                                   Page 18 of 23
                         WEC takes a leading role in the ESMU by charging a senior WEC representative with overall
                         responsibility for ESMU during the construction phase. The potential for institutional
                         strengthening and capacity building of WEC has been identified. Currently WEC is understaffed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         WEC operating at proposed sanctioned strength would be adequately resourced to deliver the
                         commitments set out in this EMP and SRMP. The head of the ESMU unit reports directly to the
                         Director PMU.

                         Composition of ESMU: The proposed composition of the ESMU team is as follows: (i) a Senior
                         Engineer level WAPDA officer with environmental science background; (ii) an HSE Specialist to
                         be appointed by WAPDA; (iii) a Social Scientist to be appointed by WAPDA; (iv) an
                         Environmental and Social Monitor to be appointed by the Design/Supervising Consultant; and (v)
                         an Environmental and Social Supervisor to be appointed by the Contractor.

                         For the Transmission line component of the project, NTDC has fully functional environmental and
                         social impact cell (ESIC). However, considering the scope and extent of the project, capacity
                         development measures for ESIC have also been suggested and will be detailed during ESA studies.

                         Other than the proposed plan for the implementation of ESMP, the ESA presents outline for the
                         capacity development of the WAPDA staff through following activities:

                         Capacity Building and Training: Capacity building will be aimed at strengthening the WAPDA
                         organization in Dasu in the field of environmental management and social development. Members
                         of the environmental/social unit responsible for supervision of environmental and social mitigation
                         measures would be trained in environmental management, environmental quality control, ecology,
                         environmental awareness, participatory approach and social development. Training would not be
                         restricted to WAPDA staff, but selected project staff involved in construction and operation of the
                         project would also be trained. The contractor will also be required to impart environmental and
                         social trainings to its staff, to ensure effective implementation of the EMP and SRMP. A budget of
                         US$ 0.6 million has been earmarked for capacity building and training. In addition to the project-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specific capacity building described above, WEC will be strengthened to actively partake in the
                         environmental and social management of the WAPDA projects, particularly towards the effective
                         ESMP implementation of the DHP, as well as the ESA studies and EMP and SRMP
                         implementation of the forthcoming hydropower projects such as the Basha dam. Additional funds
                         of US$ 0.3 million have been allocated to establish a GIS/MIS facility and for institutional
                         strengthening of WEC.

                         Panel of Experts: WAPDA will continue using services of an independent panel of environment
                         and social experts to advise ESMU and other project entities on all environmental and social
                         matters including effective implementation of EMP and SRMP, particularly on unanticipated
                         situations, impacts, and their mitigation. The Panel will review on a regular basis the various
                         reports and documents produced by EMU, Supervision Consultants and contractors; periodically
                         visit the site to have first-hand information on the environmental and social impacts and EMP/
                         SRMP implementation; and provide report to WAPDA on the overall environmental and social
                         performance of the project. An amount of US$ 0.43 million has been included in the Project cost
                         for this purpose.

                         Audits: Internal Environmental Audits will be held once during construction phase and once at the
                         end of the construction activities. The objective of the audits is to review the effectiveness of
                         environmental management. It is proposed that WEC would carry out these audits on s ix-monthly

                                                                  Page 19 of 23
                           basis. External audits on the implementation of the EMP and SRMP will be made by an
                           independent industrial environmental management specialist on an annual basis. These audits
                           would be used to re-examine the continued appropriateness of the EMP and SRMP and to provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                           advice on any up-dates required.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The stakeholder analysis conducted as part of the project planning process identified the primary
                           and secondary stakeholders, analyzed their respective views, expectations, roles and
                           responsibilities regarding the DHP. Local consultations and jirga (assembly of elders) meetings
                           were conducted before the starting of the field surveys of the project design work to share
                           preliminary project design information and seeking views and recommendations from local
                           communities. Relevant government agencies including ministries, various departments and civil
                           administration were also closely consulted. WAPDA has held extensive consultations with the
                           project stakeholders, beneficiaries and affectees. In total, three jirga meetings, 34 community level
                           meetings, 1487 one-on-one interviews were held during the planning phase so far. Four national
                           consultation workshops were held, one each in Islamabad, Peshawar, Lahore and Karachi. The
                           purpose of the consultations was to share with the stakeholders the scope and ToR of the ESA and
                           cumulative impact assessment studies and to include their concerns in the mitigation plan. Another
                           round of consultation was done in February 2014 to share with the stakeholders the major issues
                           identified and proposed mitigation plan developed by WAPDA to alleviate the concerns raised by
                           them during the previous round of consultation. This consultative process will continue through
                           the design and implementation of the various environmental and social action plans where the
                           affected population will drive the formulation and implementation of the resettlement program, the
                           livelihood development program. The Public Consultation and Participation Plan (PCPP) of the
                           SRMP presents consultations carried out during the planning phase of the project and its strategy
                           as well as plan for consultation during the project implementation. The draft ESA and SRMP
                           reports have been disclosed locally and at the Bank InfoShop on January 23, 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           A communication strategy is developed to guide communications with stakeholders during the
                           project implementation to timely disseminate information among key stakeholders, enhance
                           transparency, promote and increase participation of stakeholders in decision-making. The strategy
                           focuses on ensuring internal communications among staffs of the project and relevant government
                           institutions, timely provision of project implementation information to stakeholders, re-enforcing
                           project participation and grievance redress mechanisms. The Dasu Project Office will coordinate
                           the implementation of this strategy through a communications unit at head-office level and another
                           unit at the project-site. These units will be staffed with communications experts

                           A four-tier “bottom up” system of grievance redress committee (GRC) will be established under
                           the Project. It includes Village Level GRC, Union Council Level GRC, District-Level GRC and
                           Project Level Independent GRC. The Project Level GRC will be led by a retired civil judge. A
                           grievance redress cell will be established under the Deputy Project Director. The Grievance
                           Redress Plan presents details of the composition, tasks and responsibilities of GRCs at various
                           levels as well as procedures and timeline, covering – for example, filing of cases, review and
                           hearing, records and documentation, and notification of outcomes. The GRC mechanisms
                           established for this Project will be disclose d to the affected persons prior to Project approval. All
                           documents related to GR cases will be maintained in the Deputy Director Office for review or
                           verification by WAPDA. Annual evaluation of GRC activities will be conducted and its result
                           posted in the Project website.


                                                                      Page 20 of 23
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         23-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         23-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Disclosed as part of environmental assessment.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement



                                                                   Page 21 of 23
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                    Page 22 of 23
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Masood Ahmad
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Zia Al Jalaly (RSA)       Date: 22-Apr-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Julia Bucknall (SM)       Date: 22-Apr-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 23 of 23
