                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC9324

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Iraq                             Project ID:      P149803
                            Project Name:      Irrigation and Drainage Improvement Project (P149803)
                            Task Team          Amal Talbi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          20-Jan-2015                      Estimated        19-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Irrigation and drainage (70%), Agricultural extension and research (20%), Sub-
                                               national government administration (10%)
                            Theme(s):          Water resource management (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%),
                                               Rural policies and institutions (10%), Decentralization (1 0%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    140.00                     Total Bank Financing:        140.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        140.00
                              Total                                                                        140.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to “increase access to irrigation and drainage
                           services in targeted areas” . This increase will be accomplished by rehabilitating and improving the
                           irrigation and drainage schemes.
                           C. Project Description
                         Irrigation and drainage plays a major role in Iraq by reducing poverty and creating shared prosperity,
                         and the proposed project therefore helps the Bank achieve its twin goals. About 30 percent of the
                         rural poor depend on agriculture for employment and livelihoods. In addition, by improving the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         irrigation and drainage, the farmers at the end of the canal, which are the poorest ones, will get
                         access to water and increase their production capacity. Improving the performance of irrigated
                         agriculture (in terms of productivity, farm income and employment generation) will contribute to
                         improving the livelihoods and incomes of farming households and, in turn, will contribute to
                         reducing poverty in the project areas. Second, poor farming households tend to have the least
                         capacity to cope with the adverse consequences of a reduced or intermittent access to water (due to
                         upstream increased use, climate variability, and climate change). Investments to improve irrigation
                         and drainage services will provide more reliable access to irrigation water and thus would improve
                         the resilience of farming households, especially the poor.

                         The design of this proposed project is based on a balanced approach to continue to build on the still
                         needed emergency rehabilitation of the irrigation and drainage systems to benefit communities and
                         create jobs (component (A)), while at the same time developing the strategic discussion on broader
                         water resources management and the sustainability of water (and irrigation) infrastructure
                         investments (component (B)). This balanced approach has been requested by the client and is in line
                         with the Iraq CPS and with lessons learned in water infrastructure projects in other fragile countries.
                         Indeed, there is a need to have tangible results for communities on the ground while supporting
                         sustainable management and development of the limited water resources.

                         Hence, the proposed Project contains the following two components:

                         •       Component (A): “Rehabilitation and improvement of approximately ten irrigation and
                         drainage systems and on-farm land reclamation” (the estimated cost MUS$105). This component
                         will improve irrigation and drainage schemes; including canal lining, improvement of open drainage
                         systems, pilot areas on land reclamation with land leveling. This component is also expected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strengthen the capacity of the Ministry in monitoring and evaluation of projects (including this
                         proposed project) and will also support the operating costs of the project management team (PMT).

                         •        Component (B):“Strengthening Water Resources Management” (the estimated cost is MUS
                         $35). This component will include studies and pilots in the areas of: (i) water resources monitoring;
                         (ii) re-use of the drainage water in the main outfall drain (MOD); and (iii) assessment and evaluation
                         of dams and reservoirs safety.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project would be located in different governorates in Iraq namely Anbar, Babil, Basrah, Dohuk,
                         Erbil, Kirkuk, Maysan, Salahuldine, Sulaymaniya, and Wasit.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed project is designed to have beneficial impacts on the local communities in terms of
                         enabling farmers in targeted irrigated areas to increase their agricultural productivity in selected areas
                         and to improve the sustainable management of water resources.

                         The project is categorized “A” because component (B) includes activities that can be associated with
                         Category A type of project, most notably, the assessment and evaluation of dams and reservoirs
                         safety.
                           The Ministry of Water Resources (MOWR) will be responsible for the overall implementation and
                           coordination of the project. A preliminary capacity assessment has been conducted during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           identification mission held in April 2014 and revealed that the existing Project Management Team
                           (PMT) does not have staffing for undertaking the monitoring and reporting of environmental and
                           social safeguards issues. In essence, the Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is
                           weak and will be strengthened during project preparation and implementation. This strengthening
                           will be in form of extensive training on Bank's environmental and social processes including how to
                           implement ESMP. In addition, there will be recruitment of part-time environment and social experts
                           to work in the PMT and who will also receive continuous support and guidance from the Bank’s
                           environmental and social specialists.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nina Bhatt (GURDR)
                           Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GENDR)
                           Amer Abdulwahab Ali Al-Ghorbany (GENDR)
                           Ibrahim Ismail Mohammed Basalamah (GURDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              OP 4.01 is triggered as the project could have
                           BP 4.01                                              impacts on the environment due to the
                                                                                rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems
                                                                                and land reclamation as well as potential pilots
                                                                                on water resources management. To identify
                                                                                and manage potential adverse impacts on the
                                                                                environment from project funded interventions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                –such as those mentioned above- the borrower
                                                                                will prepare an, Environmental and Social
                                                                                Impact Assessment (ESIA)/ Environmental and
                                                                                Social Management Plan (ESMP) for site-
                                                                                specific schemes/activities. Environmental and
                                                                                Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                                prepared for other schemes/activities to be
                                                                                financed under components (A) and (B) for
                                                                                which specific sites are not yet known. All the
                                                                                proposed environmental assessment instruments
                                                                                will be prepared, reviewed, approved and
                                                                                disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to
                                                                                appraisal. Under component (A), a list of
                                                                                irrigation schemes are being discussed with the
                                                                                Ministry of Water. Those schemes that already
                                                                                have detailed design, will be subject to ESIA/
                                                                                ESMP prior to appraisal and for those for which
                                                                                only participating Governorates have been
                                                                                identified, will be subject to the ESMF. Where
                                                                                ESMF is applied, the ESIA will need to be
                                                                 prepared, approved, and disclose before any
                                                                 construction works would start on the ground.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   OP 4.04 might be triggered for schemes under
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 component (A) for sites which are to be
                                                                 identified. If a natural habitat to be impacted by
                                                                 project activities, the client needs to provide a
                                                                 management plan appropriate to the nature of
                                                                 the habitat.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    This policy is not triggered.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           Yes   OP 4.09 is triggered as the rehabilitation of
                                                                 irrigation systems and land reclamation will
                                                                 result in expanding agricultural land and may
                                                                 lead to increase the use of pesticides. The client
                                                                 will develop a separate Pest Management Plan
                                                                 (PMP) and following the Bank approval of the
                                                                 PMP, the plan shall be disclosed in-country and
                                                                 at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   TBD   OP 4.11 might be triggered. During preparation
                         BP 4.11                                 the team will assert wither or not the policy
                                                                 applies. However, chance find provision will be
                                                                 incorporated in all works’ contracts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    This policy is not triggered.

                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The OP 4.12 is triggered as the project involves
                         4.12                                    activities that might have temporary land
                                                                 acquisition during the rehabilitation and
                                                                 reclamation of piloting areas under component
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 (A). Land reclamation may restrict access
                                                                 during works (for example during activities
                                                                 such as leveling) and may result to temporary
                                                                 land acquisition during that period. For schemes
                                                                 for which activities are known, the borrower –if
                                                                 required– will prepare site specific Resettlement
                                                                 Action Plan (RAP). Resettlement Policy
                                                                 Framework (RPF) will be prepared for other
                                                                 schemes for which specific sites are not yet
                                                                 known. The proposed instruments will be
                                                                 prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-
                                                                 country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                                                                 Those schemes that already have detailed
                                                                 design, will be subject to RAP - if required-
                                                                 prior to appraisal and for those for which only
                                                                 participating Governorates have been identified,
                                                                 will be subject to the RPF. Where RPF is
                                                                 applied, the RAP -if required- will need to be
                                                                                                                                 prepared, approved, and disclose before any
                                                                                                                                 construction works would start on the ground.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         Yes                           OP 4.37 is triggered as component B may
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 include subcomponent on the assessment and
                                                                                                                                 evaluation of dams and reservoirs safety along
                                                                                                                                 with preparation of required dam safety
                                                                                                                                 instruments. With regard to component (A) if an
                                                                                                                                 irrigation schemes drawn water from a dam (i.
                                                                                                                                 e., associated with a dam) then the specific
                                                                                                                                 requirement for ensuring the safety of the
                                                                                                                                 existing dams will be covered as per OP4.37.
                                                                                                                                 Further details will be studied during project
                                                                                                                                 preparation.
                                 Projects on International                                         Yes                           OP/BP 7.50 is triggered given the location of
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            the irrigation and drainage schemes along the
                                                                                                                                 Tigris and Euphrates or their tributaries.
                                                                                                                                 However, an exception to notification will be
                                                                                                                                 requested as the project will only finance the
                                                                                                                                 rehabilitation of existing irrigation and drainage
                                                                                                                                 schemes and hence is likely to falls under the
                                                                                                                                 exception set forth in paragraph 7 (a) of OP
                                                                                                                                 7.50. Taking the nature and scale of the
                                                                                                                                 proposed investments into account, the project
                                                                                                                                 will: (i) not adversely affect the quality or
                                                                                                                                 quantity of water flows to the other riparians;
                                                                                                                                 and (ii) not be adversely affected by other
                                                                                                                                 riparians’ water use.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             This policy is not triggered.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Dec-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The required safeguard instruments for the project are: (i) ESMF; (ii) ESIA/ESMP; (iii) RPF (and
                                      RAP if required), and (iv) PMP.

                                      All the safeguards instruments will need to be approved by the Bank and disclose in-country and
                                      at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.

                                      The final reports of required studies may be completed and disclosed by January 7, 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Amal Talbi

                                 Approved By:


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)      Date: 11-Aug-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)   Date: 19-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
