                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA1004
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pacific Islands                    Project ID:    P131655
                            Project Name:      Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program (P131655)
                            Task Team          John Virdin
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          07-Oct-2014                        Estimated   22-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GENDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Other environment and natural
                                              resources management (20%), Other public sector governa nce (20%), Rural
                                              policies and institutions (20%), Regional integration (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      32.97           Total Bank Financing:                  32.97
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                32.97
                              Total                                                                                      32.97
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective of the PROP is to enable the participating Pacific Island Countries to
                           capture greater economic benefits from sustainable management of the region’s oceanic and coastal
                           fisheries, and the critical habitats that sustain them. By supporting regional collaboration and the
                           adoption of rights-based approaches to resource access and use, the PROP will directly contribute to

                                                                       Page 1 of 22
                         the larger goals of regional integration and sustainable wealth creation among PICs.

                         In order to achieve the PDO, the program will support continued and strengthened collaboration
Public Disclosure Copy




                         among PICS, and between PICs and other states, to reduce the open access conditions and
                         management inefficiencies that have led to overexploitation of the oceanic and coastal fishery
                         resources, and to build on the experience and knowledge being generated in the region to strengthen
                         institutional capacity and improve management effectiveness. The project will also assist in the
                         development and implementation of more effective management and monitoring, control and
                         surveillance (MCS) tools at national and regional levels, and, in the process, generate significantly
                         increased economic and social benefits for the region that can be sustained over the long term.
                         3. Project Description
                         In order to achieve the above objective, the program will include the following components, sub-
                         components and activities available for all participating countries. These will form a menu of
                         activities the Program could support in each country, which would be chosen based on the specific
                         local context. Some activities will be implemented at the national level, while others will be
                         implemented at the regional level to capture economies of scale. All activities in this menu would
                         contribute to the shared regional objective of the PROP, even if implemented nationally. As such, the
                         Program follows the subsidiarity principle, whereby a common approach is coordinated at the
                         regional level, but implemented both regionally and nationally in order to show concrete results on
                         the ground. The legal agreements with each country therefore reflect the specific activities of PROP
                         Phase I described in Annexes 3 through 7.

                         Component 1: Sustainable Management of Oceanic Fisheries

                         The objective of this component is to help participating Pacific Island countries strengthen the
                         management of the region’s purse seine and long-line tuna fisheries.

                         Oceanic fisheries hold great economic value and even greater potential for the Pacific, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         particularly the three tuna fisheries: tropical purse seine, tropical long-line and southern long-line
                         fisheries. To date these fisheries are relatively healthy compared to other tuna fisheries throughout
                         the world, due largely to their relative isolation. However, they are now reaching their long-term
                         sustainable limits, and future returns will have to come by earning more from current harvests, rather
                         than increasing them. This is eminently possible but, because the fish are moving across borders, it
                         will require continued collective action from countries to sustainably manage the resource. To date
                         only in the purse seine fishery has this begun to happen, and not yet in the two long-line fisheries.

                         The case of the purse seine fishery largely targeting skipjack tuna is encouraging (this represents
                         over half of the tuna catch in the Pacific). The PNA countries introduced in 2009 a vessel day
                         scheme (VDS) to manage access to the fishery. It works as follows: each year the PNA countries set
                         the total catch limit needed to maintain healthy fish stock, and translate that catch limit into
                         individual vessel fishing days, which are allocated to countries based on an agreed formula, and then
                         the countries sell the days. The vessels days are valuable because they limit catch to sustainable
                         levels of production and this scarcity has value that can be traded. Prior to the introduction of the
                         VDS, PNA countries captured little of the value of the tuna caught in their waters. As a result of
                         introducing the VDS and subsequently a benchmark price, the average price of a vessel day increased
                         from US$1500 in 2010 to US$6000 in 2014, and total revenues to PNA countries increased from US
                         $60 M in 2010 to an estimated US$265 M in 2014 (still less than 10% value of catch). This is only
                         the value of access – and not potential additional benefits from local value added. Nor is this the end


                                                                      Page 2 of 22
                         of the story – a number of experts believe that the price of vessel days can continue to climb, and this
                         fishery could sustainably return over US$450 million per year to Pacific Island countries.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In order for the Pacific Island countries to capture this potential, the VDS will need to e volve and
                         strengthen significantly over its second five years. Specifically, compliance with the system will
                         need to be increased to strengthen its integrity (as for example some countries have exceeded the
                         number of days allotted to them at the expense of the health of the resource), its scope expanded to
                         cover as much of this regional fishery as possible, and its flexibility, transparencyand efficiency
                         increased (for example by pooling days among multiple countries, or selling them via auction).
                         Compliance in particular will be a growing challenge, as the increase in the price of access will
                         provide greater incentives for free-riding (i.e. illegal and unreported fishing). A recent two-week
                         surveillance survey carried out by FFA and SPC boarded 206 fishing vessels in Pacific Island waters,
                         and found 27 infractions (13 percent). Given the large size of countries’ waters in the Pacific, data to
                         date is uneven, and estimates of the value of fish caught illegally in the region range from in the US
                         dollar millions to over a billion.

                         For the tropical tuna and southern albacore long-line fisheries, a similar system to the VDS would be
                         introduced to enhance the management of access, significantly enhancing the sustainability and value
                         of this natural capital asset, and subsequently the benefits that it can provide to Pacific Island
                         countries. The PNA member countries already adopted an agreement for such a system for the long-
                         line fisheries in 2011, though it has not yet entered into force (the two remaining member country
                         signatures necessary are expected shortly).

                         Building on results to date in the PNA, such a process of enhancing the sustainable management of
                         Pacific Island tuna fisheries could be envisaged as follows:

                         Strengthen the capacity of national and regional institutions to sustainably manage Pacific Island
                         tuna fisheries:
                         o        Improve compliance with the VDS for the purse seine fishery: Maintain robust limits on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         fishing (by ensuring compliance with vessel days and associated links to total catch limits) – so total
                         catch stays within recommended limits, allowing the fish stock to stay healthy. Tuna is the region’s
                         natural capital asset, and the bigger the fish stocks the more valuable access to them will be –
                         particularly as much of the rest of the world is overexploiting its tuna. Conversely, selling vessel
                         days outside of agreed levels in the VDS, or excessive capital stuffing within vessel day allocations
                         (e.g. using bigger and more efficient vessels to increase catch per vessel day) not only depresses the
                         price of other vessel days on the market but also threatens the long-term sustainability of the natural
                         resource.

                         o        Expand the coverage of the purse seine fishery VDS and extend a similar system to the long-
                         line fisheries, to include all tuna caught in Pacific Island countries’ national waters. As a result, a
                         greater portion of the region’s resource would be utilized via this management regime.

                         o        Increase efficiency and flexibility of the purse seine fishery VDS and similar systems for the
                         long-line fisheries. With a healthy fish stock and valuable asset, many additional opportunities will
                         continue to emerge to increase the returns to countries by increasing the efficiency of access to fleets
                         via systems such as the VDS, including: (a) pooling vessel days among countries to allow operators
                         to enter multiple countries’ waters at once, (b) selling days through competitive tenders and auctions,
                         and (c) extending the lifespan of access over multiple years, so operators and investors have more
                         visibility and security. To address any concerns about the stability of revenue flows, adjustments to

                                                                      Page 3 of 22
                         the VDS and similar systems can be made with better data sharing and more transparency, for
                         example setting aside a reserve of vessel days for countries that need them, to be purchased at the
                         benchmark price.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ensure an equitable distribution within Pacific Island countries of the benefits of sustainably
                         managed tuna fisheries:
                         o        A healthy natural asset and an efficient and robust access regime provide a stable
                         environment for capital investments in value chain improvements and market specialization,
                         increasing the opportunities Pacific Island countries will have to leverage access fees and agreements
                         for local investment in value added and processing, e.g. through preferential sale to joint ventures.
                         With a robust management system for fish supply like the VDS for purse seine tuna fishery, more
                         and more local investments become possible, such as IFC’s recent investment to help expand
                         processing capacity of SolTuna in the Solomon Islands. Of course not all Pacific Island countries are
                         the same and some will have different comparative advantages, so investment in value addition may
                         take different forms in different contexts, and may very likely contribute towards regional hubs for
                         different services. In some cases trade-offs will need to be made at national level between collection
                         of economic rents from access to the resource and investment in local value added activities.

                         o       Additionally, countries could explore options to create community VDS f unds to target the
                         benefits of returns from access directly to coastal communities.

                         To help Pacific Island countries realize these opportunities, the following activities could be
                         supported by the PROP:

                         1.1 Strengthen the capacity of national and regional institutions to sustainably manage Pacific Island
                         tuna fisheries
                         These activities would support strengthening the vessel day scheme (VDS) for the purse seine fishery
                         and extending a similar management system to the long-line fisheries, in order to sustainably
                         increase the benefits to participating countries from access to these fisheries. More specifically, this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sub-component would finance the following activities:

                         •       Nationally-Implemented Activities in Participating Countries
                         o       Disbursements linked to indicators for implementation of effective management measures.
                         This activity would disburse funds directly to implementing agencies of national governments to
                         reimburse against pre-identified eligible expenditures for operating costs linked to regionally-agreed
                         indicators for strengthened and effective management of the tuna fisheries. Such eligible
                         expenditures will be tracked, and PROP safeguard instruments would also apply to these
                         expenditures. Disbursements would be made annually to national government implementing agencies
                         in each participating country to reimburse these eligible expenditures, based on independent third-
                         party verification that the following indicators have been met (expenditures for each indicator are
                         priced equally):

                         �        Improving compliance with the VDS for the purse seine tuna fishery:
                         o        The number of days fished in a country’s waters does not exceed its agreed annual allocation
                         of fishing vessel days (PAE), while the TAE remains within sustainable levels
                         o        100% of fishing vessel days are recorded annually according to agreed criteria
                         o        100% of fishing vessel days used and sold are disclosed annually to the PNAO Fisheries
                         Information Management System (FIMS) and other parties as part of a comprehensive verification
                         system for the VDS

                                                                      Page 4 of 22
                         �        Expanding the coverage of the purse seine fishery VDS or similar zone-based limit systems
                         for the long line fisheries, to include all tuna caught in the country’s national waters:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        100% of tuna catch within a country’s national waters is encompassed within the VDS or a
                         compatible system (specific target set for each country, gradually)

                         Additionally, though not linked to disbursements, these expenditures would also support
                         participating countries to increase efficiency and flexibility as appropriate:

                         �       Increasing efficiency and flexibility of the purse-seine fishery VDS and similar systems for
                         the long-line fisheries:
                         •       (Yes/no) more flexible measures are applied, (such as creating multi-zone and multi-year
                         days, development of competitive VDS marketing arrangements, long-term contracts, creation of
                         secondary markets, etc) that increase the value of a vessel day above the baseline (gradually phased
                         in)

                         o       Goods, works and services needed for achievement of the disbursement-linked indicators.
                         This activity would provide support to participating countries for procurement of specific goods,
                         works and services needed to meet the disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) for strengthened
                         management of the tuna fisheries, such as establishing fisheries monitoring centers and strengthening
                         observer programs for example.


                         •        Regionally-Implemented Activities:
                         o        Technical assistance to PNAO to support implementation of the recommendations of a
                         regional review of the VDS & PNAO. This activity would provide targeted technical assistance to
                         support PNAO in the implementation of the recommendations agreed by its members to take ac tions
                         that will strengthen the VDS in the purse seine fishery and / or across related long-line fisheries
                         during the 2014 regional review of the policy framework of the VDS and the accompanying
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governance and organizational structure to of the PNAO to administer it.

                         o        Technical assistance to SPC to support the information base for the VDS and similar systems
                         for the long-line fisheries. This activity would provide targeted support to SPC to strengthen the
                         analytical and information base needed for the VDS and similar systems for the long-line fisheries,
                         including setting reference points and control rules for fishing activities that link to resource
                         sustainability.

                         o        Coordinated technical assistance to countries to strengthen the VDS for the purse seine
                         fishery and expanding this system to the long-line fisheries. This activity would support technical
                         assistance provided by FFA in coordination with the PNAO, to participating countries for
                         implementation of the PROP. This activity would support a technical team to lead and coordinate a
                         number of assessments, studies, trainings, mentoring etc. as requested by participating countries, in
                         order to achieve the PROP’s objectives. Such assistance is expected to include, among others,
                         conducting economic analyses and preparing briefing materials to increase the understanding among
                         stakeholders of the benefits of a robust VDS, assisting in the development of any modifications to
                         legal frameworks that may be needed (e.g. to enforce the VDS), and a conducting a rolling regional
                         review of the functions and services required to manage tuna fisheries and identify opportunities for
                         regional, sub-regional and national level location and provision of fisheries management services (e.
                         g. management, science, monitoring and surveillance and enforcement hubs, etc.).

                                                                     Page 5 of 22
                         o        Technical assistance and operating costs to identify surveillance and enforcement tasks and
                         needs for countries to collaborate to ensure compliance with the VDS, and a network of compliance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         experts to support countries’ in this effort. This activity would build upon the current regional
                         fisheries monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS) strategy and effort at FFA in order to support:
                         (i) a regional identification of the key surveillance and enforcement tasks for ensuring compliance
                         with the VDS, and the comparative advantage of various countries to conduct these tasks in
                         collaboration, as part of sub-regional and regional efforts; and (ii) a regional unit and network of
                         compliance experts that could provide on-demand support to participating countries for surveillance
                         and enforcement of the VDS.


                         1.2 Ensure an equitable distribution within Pacific Island countries of the benefits of sustainably
                         managed tuna fisheries
                         These activities would support Pacific Island countries to make informed decisions and investments
                         to ensure an inclusive distribution of the benefits from sustainably managed tuna fisheries. This
                         would include collaboration with IFC to leverage access values to a healthy resource, into local
                         investments up the value chain where feasible, that can increase employment. Similarly, this would
                         include piloting local VDS funds to channel access revenues directly to fishing communities, which
                         could have the additional benefit of reducing pressure on and reinforcing better management of,
                         coastal fisheries.

                         •        Regional Activities
                         o        Regional technical advisory services for the establishment of hubs throughout the Western
                         Pacific for services and value addition. This activity would support technical advisory services to
                         identify the competitive advantage of participating countries to establish regional hubs for various
                         services and value addition along the chain (e.g. fish quality assurance, processing, distribution and
                         providing services), linked to reforms for strengthening the VDS. Additionally, this activity would
                         include ongoing support to participating countries to develop the various opportunities identified, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to secure the necessary finance and private partners in order to implement them.

                         o       Pilot Community VDS funds. This activity would support FFA to provide technical
                         assistance to conduct participatory scenario analyses to design pilot community VDS funds whose
                         objectives would be secure a share of tuna access revenues for fishing communities in participating
                         countries, by purchasing vessel days. This would include formal establishment of pilot community
                         VDS funds based on the results of the scenario analyses, though capitalization with Bank financing is
                         not envisaged.

                         Component 2: Sustainable Management of Coastal Fisheries

                         The objective of this component is to support participating countries to sustainably manage defined
                         coastal fisheries, focusing on those with the greatest potential for increased benefits, i.e. coastal
                         fisheries such as bêche-de-mer (BDM) that (i) can generate export earnings for the country, and/or
                         (ii) support livelihoods, food security and dietary health. Towards this objective, this component
                         includes activities to: (i) empower stakeholders to sustainably manage targeted coastal fisheries in
                         participating countries, working at the smallest scale feasible in order to generate a response from the
                         fish stocks (e.g. in some cases this might work at the single or multi-community scale around defined
                         reef fisheries); and (ii) link sustainable coastal fish products to regional markets.



                                                                      Page 6 of 22
                         Coastal and lagoon fisheries throughout the region are critically important to many Pacific island
                         States with few other sources of protein. It is estimated that fish provide 50 – 90 percent of animal
                         protein intake in rural areas and 40 – 80 percent in urban areas. Most of the fish eaten by rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities (particularly on the coral atolls and smaller islands) come from subsistence fisheries,
                         with little or no cash cost to the consumer. Subsistence fisheries generally employ 10 to 20 times as
                         many people as commercial fisheries.

                         A diverse range of coastal fishery opportunities exist in the region: in some cases exploitation
                         pressure is low and the management goal is to encourage development of the fishery while protecting
                         resource sustainability for the future. In others, especially where there is easy access to markets,
                         over-fishing has already occurred and the fishery is performing sub-optimally. In these cases there is
                         a need to rebuild resources and effectively control the fisheries based on them to achieve optimal
                         biological or economic yields. This is perhaps most true for the high-value BDM fishery. BDM is a
                         product that is harvested in all Pacific Island countries, almost exclusively for export to Asian
                         markets and Asian communities elsewhere. The BDM fishery is analogous in some ways to the
                         purse seine tuna fishery, in that a handful of Pacific Island countries now control a large share of a
                         global commodity for which demand exceeds supply. A 2013 study estimated the value of BDM
                         exports from 5 Pacific Island countries (Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Fiji and
                         Tonga) to average US$17.4 million over the past 10 years, and that this value could have been at
                         least doubled through improved management (Hambrey et al, 2013). An earlier study estimated
                         average annual BDM exports from Australia and the Central Western Pacific islands during 2004–
                         2008 at about US$52 million (Purcell et al., 2009). That study notes that ‘many of these fisheries are
                         suffering unsustainable levels of exploitation, to the point of local extinctions of some species and
                         consequently impacting the livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of fishers’.

                         To strengthen the management of targeted coastal fisheries such as BDM, this component would
                         largely be implemented nationally, with regional coordination activities to link products to markets.

                         2.1       Sustainable Management of Targeted Coastal Fisheries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         16. These activities would be implemented nationally in each participating country by the relevant
                         Government agency. The agency would provide dedicated technical assistance and small goods and
                         operating costs to communities to strengthen management and value addition around targeted coastal
                         fisheries, in many cases recruiting a partner such as a local non-government organization (NGO).
                         This technical assistance, small goods and operating costs would be carried out via the following
                         activities:

                         o         Identify the coastal fisheries targeted for support, including collection of baseline
                         information, i.e. initial biological and socio-economic assessments as needed to determine resource
                         potential and likely costs and benefits of different scenarios for rebuilding or improved management.
                         This program of extension support to improve management and returns from targeted coastal
                         fisheries will identify those fisheries and sites for support following a period of awareness-raising
                         and wide advertising to give interested communities a chance to come forward. Those sites with
                         valuable coastal fisheries and strong local commitment will be selected based on the following
                         criteria:
                         - The fishery or fisheries to be managed are well-defined (i.e. within a distinct geographic boundary,
                         for a particular species or group of species, or for a stock);
                         -         Each site must have the potential to accrue positive economic benefits to stakeholders
                         through improved fisheries management;
                         -         Each site must not encompass more than 3 to 4 small to moderate-sized communities, which

                                                                      Page 7 of 22
                         must be neighboring communities;
                         -       Each site must have strong local leadership, be socially cohesive, and ideally have a
                         stakeholder group or association formed that could be recognized with authority to formulate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management measures on behalf of stakeholders; and
                         -       Each site must provide formal confirmation that fishers in the targeted fishery are fully
                         committed to participate in the management and project.

                         o       Support the development or strengthening of stakeholder groups and associations to
                         participate in the sustainable management, and in some cases rebuilding, of these fisheries, including:
                         ensuring legal recognition and empowerment of the groups and their management options, providing
                         extension and training to support organization and operation of the groups.

                         o       Assist these stakeholder groups to develop and implement improved management
                         approaches appropriate to the circumstances and needs of the fishery, relying mainly on the
                         development or strengthening of Community-Based Management (CBM) systems, or on co-
                         management arrangements involving communities, government and other stakeholders. In others,
                         particularly for high-value export products, CBM may not provide all the tools needed for effective
                         management and there may need to be additional fishery monitoring, control and surveillance (MCS)
                         carried out at provincial or national level. The stakeholder groups would be supported assess the
                         current situation and options for strengthening management of the resource and subsequently returns,
                         in some cases developing rebuilding plans for the fish stocks, drawing upon good experiences
                         throughout the region, such as the locally-managed marine area (LMMA) network. Ongoing training
                         and support would be provided to stakeholder groups for development and implementation of
                         management measures (such as identification and development of ecosystem-based management
                         measures, monitoring of fish catch and effort, etc.), supporting restocking or artificial resource
                         enhancement where feasible and justified, and providing any enforcement support needed to ensure
                         compliance (especially at the point of export).

                         o        Link products from the fisheries managed by stakeholder groups to regional markets,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including providing technical assistance and training for skills development, as well as small goods
                         and works for local value addition. This support would likely focus on development and coordination
                         of processing and packaging technologies, development of value-added products, market
                         diversification including certification and eco-labeling, compliance with food safety and other
                         technical requirements of target markets, sharing of trade and market information, capacity-building
                         in small business and enterprise management, and cooperation in marketing arrangements and
                         information-sharing across communities and countries.

                         o        Monitoring to assess changes in the status of the resource and the economic status of
                         activities based on it, evaluate the performance of the management strategies adopted, and allow the
                         adaptation and improvement of these strategies.

                         2.2 Linking Sustainable Coastal Fish Products to Regional Markets
                         These activities would be implemented regionally, in collaboration with SPC:

                         o        In parallel with national efforts to restore BDM fisheries, mediate the formation of a regional
                         or sub-regional BDM fishery grouping to advance the economic interests of participating PI
                         countries. Regional technical assistance and convening would be provided to harmonize economic
                         and other management arrangements, developing minimum terms and conditions of resource access,
                         establishing a regional register of responsible/ compliant BDM industry participants, maximizing the

                                                                      Page 8 of 22
                         leverage available through collective bargaining and action, and promoting exchange of technical
                         information in support of national-level management initiatives. The proposed arrangement would
                         mainly be of interest to the main BDM-producing Pacific Island countries (those of Melanesia) but,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as with PNA, countries with lower levels of production would also benefit from the bargaining power
                         generated by the larger producers. The proposed BDM arrangement will almost certainly be built on
                         an existing regional or sub-regional grouping of countries, and may ultimately be extended to cover
                         other coastal fishery resources, particularly trochus, another high-value export product.

                         o        Ongoing technical support to countries with BDM and coastal fisheries management (e.g. a
                         ‘BDM task force’), including support to assess potential bio logical, economic and fiscal
                         management tools for BDM and other export-oriented coastal fishery products, which could be
                         applied at the national level as part of an integrated suite of management arrangements that involve
                         both CBM and MCS. This would also include periodically updated assessments of BDM production,
                         price and market trends and other industry monitoring and intelligence; and development of fishery
                         monitoring tools that can be deployed at national level to enable performance assessment of fishery
                         management and development activities, and training of national staff from participating countries in
                         their use. These tools may possibly be based in part on the fishery monitoring ‘dashboards’ already
                         developed by the Bank for other countries/ regions.

                         Component 3: Sustainable Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery Habitats

                         The objective of this component is to help identify revenue streams to sustainably finance the
                         conservation of critical habitats that underpin oceanic and coastal fisheries in the region. While a
                         number of initiatives have been launched by communities and countries throughout the region to
                         protect and conserve critical fishery habitats, the key obstacle has consistently been a lack of
                         mechanisms to capture the benefits these habitats provide, and sustainably finance the costs of this
                         effort. This obstacle is also a key area identified in the Pacific Oceanscape Framework. For this
                         reason, the PROP will provide targeted technical assistance and support at the regional level to help
                         identify the benefits of conservation and establish mechanisms that can capture these benefits. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aim would not be to provide sustainable financing for all regionally-significant fisheries habitat
                         conservation efforts, but rather to provide the catalytic upstream finance needed to identify, develop
                         and achieve consensus on mechanisms to capture the benefits of conservation and help unlock
                         significant financing, for example from the GEF, international foundations, etc. For this reason, the
                         component would include activities that establish: (i) Pacific Marine Conservation Development
                         Financing Mechanisms to support the growing number of large marine protected areas (MPAs) in the
                         region; and (ii) a pilot Pacific Blue Carbon regional program for small to medium scale fishery
                         habitats. This component would be coordinated by the Oceanscape Unit within the Pacific Islands
                         Forum Secretariat (both staff and consultants as needed), with technical guidance from the Marine
                         Sector Working Group and CROP agencies.

                         3.1 Establish Pacific Marine Conservation Development Financing Mechanisms to support large
                         marine protected areas
                         This sub-component will help enhance the productivity of Pacific oceanic and coastal fisheries by
                         providing the upstream technical assistance needed to establish sustainable financing mechanisms for
                         conservation of the natural habitats upon which they depend. Increasingly one of the most common
                         and significant fishery habitat conservation measures in the region is the introduction of large-scale
                         MPAs. In many cases, the key obstacle to the success of these measures is the identification of the
                         costs and benefits of their introduction and operation, and establishment of mechanisms to capture
                         these benefits (which are global in nature in many cases) and sustainably finance operating costs. As

                                                                     Page 9 of 22
                         such, the PROP will include assistance to help targeted countries determine the costs and benefits of
                         existing and proposed MPAs, and to identify options to capture the benefits, for example through the
                         development of ecosystem service markets and trading of costs and benefits with adjacent coastal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         States and distant water fishing States. Where large-scale MPAs are designed to deliver both
                         ecological and sustainable net benefits to the countries, the PROP would support the development of
                         mechanisms to capture the benefits and provide a sustainable stream of finance for operating costs,
                         for example through conservation trust funds, and/or markets for the ecosystem services (e.g. through
                         the VDS, or tourism green fees). This would build upon precedents outside the region, such as the
                         conservation trust fund established in Brazil, the Brazilian Biodiversity Fund (Funbio). Activities to
                         develop and establish such mechanisms would include:

                         o        Assessment of existing and potential new regional sites for large scale marine protected
                         areas, to be supported by the PROP. An analysis of both the scope and distribution of the ecological
                         and economic costs and benefits to the Pacific islands region from its large oceanic ecosystems, and
                         identification of existing and potential new marine protected areas that could further build the Pacific
                         Islands Oceanscape Framework. The analysis would consider short and long term impacts and focus
                         on the shared interests of the Pacific Islands region (i.e development, food security, sustainability).
                         The assessment would establish clear standards for measuring costs and benefits of large scale
                         marine protected areas (MPAs) and clear criteria for financing assistance with their establishment
                         and/or operation, and engage with regional leaders, regional fisheries management organizations, and
                         global institutions to support and recognize these criteria. These criteria will then provide important
                         reference points for the financing activities of Pacific marine conservation development financing
                         mechanisms. PIFSec’s Oceanscape Unit would carry out this review with the Marine Sector Working
                         Group, including database analysis with SPC and the Government of Australia.

                         o        Technical assistance for the establishment of Pacific Marine Conservation Development
                         Financing Mechanisms for those sites to be supported by the PROP. This will include the technical
                         assistance necessary to establish Pacific marine conservation development financing mechanisms,
                         including design, establishment and administration, governance, etc. This would include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of the principles, rationale and criteria, and the identification of funding opportunities.
                         Technical assistance will identify opportunities to engage commercial and non-profit NGO partners
                         in the development of the financing mechanisms. A consultation workshop with MSWG participants
                         and potential commercial and non-profit partners would be held to review and develop an agreed
                         draft for review and subsequent endorsement by Forum leaders.

                         o       Technical assistance, training and exchange of lessons learned to individual Pacific Island
                         countries hosting large MPAs. This activity will provide technical assistance, legal and regulatory
                         support, and fund institutional strengthening activities that enable host States to establish and manage
                         large scale marine protected areas and participate in the Pacific marine conservation development
                         financing mechanisms. This activity would also provide national governments with communication
                         materials, technical assistance and iconic speakers to broaden government and stakeholder
                         understanding of sustainability limitations, ecosystem services, and conservation benefits.

                         3.2 Establish a pilot Pacific Blue Carbon Regional Program for the conservation of small to medium
                         scale fishery habitats
                         In complement to support for rebuilding or strengthening coastal fisheries (see component two), this
                         sub-component will provide technical assistance to help design a Pacific Blue Carbon Regional
                         Program to secure climate finance to create conservation incentives for coastal communities to
                         conserve mangrove habitats, seagrass beds and coastal wetlands that support fisheries. This sub-

                                                                      Page 10 of 22
                         component will work at the regional level to assess opportunities to pair up with established,
                         standards-based climate finance mechanisms like the terrestrial framework to p ay for carbon stored
                         in natural coastal habitats that would otherwise be lost to habitat degradation or deforestation (e.g.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         REDD+), identify opportunities in the voluntary carbon market, and build a long term Pacific Blue
                         Carbon Regional Program to support the technical surveys and background work needed to capture
                         these opportunities. Following the design of the Pacific Blue Carbon Regional Program, the activity
                         will help identify at least 3 pilot communities in participating countries where climate finance might
                         realistically be secured for conservation of natural coastal habitats (i.e. ‘blue carbon’), where clear
                         tenure and stakeholder benefits are ensured in order to avoid implementation and enforcement issues
                         that are associated with top-down regulation, uncertainty over tenure, and lack of engagement by
                         stakeholders. Technical assistance will then be available to these communities to support these blue
                         carbon projects to become viable. Analysis would build on lessons learnt from existing blue carbon
                         projects. More specifically, these activities would include:

                         o        Assessment of opportunities to pair up with established, standards-based climate finance
                         mechanisms to pay for carbon stored (REDD+), identification of opportunities in the voluntary
                         carbon market and development of a Pacific Blue Carbon Regional Program ($.05m). The
                         assessment and strategy will support Pacific engagement in blue carbon trading and biodiversity
                         offsets and ultimately develop local-regional markets for Blue Carbon. PIFSec’s Oceanscape Unit
                         would coordinate this review with the Marine Sector Working Group, engaging CROP agencies and
                         retaining consultants as necessary.

                         o         Development of criteria and identification of 3 to 5 potential pilot trial communities and
                         projects for Blue Carbon funding. This activity will develop and confirm criteria for Pacific
                         communities and marine conservation projects and identify potential pilot trial communities in
                         participating countries for blue carbon, where clear tenure and stakeholder benefits are ensured in
                         order to avoid implementation and enforcement issues that are associated with top-down regulation,
                         uncertainty over tenure, and lack of engagement by stakeholders. PIFSec’s Oceanscape Unit will
                         coordinate this activity, consulting with the Marine Sector Working Group to confirm criteria and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         initially identify potential pilot communities and projects, engaging CROP agencies and retaining
                         consultants as necessary.

                         o        Baseline research and development of marine conservation strategies and funding proposals
                         for pilot trial sites. With pilots identified, significant amounts of baseline scientific research on
                         carbon sequestration capacities and habitat mapping will be conducted as a pre-requisite for any blue
                         carbon projects to become viable. This sub-component will include the technical assistance, scientific
                         and survey expertise, and legal and regulatory support in order to enable participating communities,
                         partners and governments for pilot trials to assess their blue carbon potential, limitations and
                         opportunities and participate in blue carbon markets. Analysis would assess costs and benefits and
                         potential blue carbon values, and work with communities to identify key stakeholders, decision
                         making frameworks and management requirements. In some cases, additional technical assistance
                         may be needed for participating countries to strengthen and expand their policy, legislative and
                         regulatory frameworks for habitat conservation, tenure, and participation in blue carbon markets.

                         Component 4: Regional Coordination, Implementation Support and Program Management
                         The objective of this component is to provide regional coordination, implementation support and
                         program management, to ensure a coherent approach to program implementation and wide
                         dissemination of results and lessons learned; as well as regional and national implementation support
                         and training as needed for theprogram to achieve its objectives. Towards this objective, this

                                                                      Page 11 of 22
                         component would include the following activities:

                         •       Regionally-Implemented Activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         o       Program support unit located within FFA. This unit would work with participating countries
                         as needed on project financial management and procurement. This unit will also support monitoring
                         and evaluation, working closely with the participating countries to collect, compile, analyze and
                         disseminate the results of the PROP as measured by the key results indicators.

                         o        Global outreach and knowledge sharing by FFA. This would provide funding for FFA to
                         exchange lessons learned and share results on behalf of the countries with other highly migratory
                         fisheries around the world.

                         o        Oceanscape unit located within the Pacific Island Forum Secretariat. This unit would be
                         responsible for drawing upon program monitoring and evaluation, and coordination with other
                         country, regional and development partner initiatives, to support the Pacific Oceanscape Framework.
                         Program support would be provided in collaboration with the Government of Australia, and would
                         include financing for a full-time staff person in the Secretariat’s Oceanscape Unit, as well as support
                         for convening meetings and learning exchanges around implementation. The PROP and other
                         initiatives in support of the Pacific Oceanscape Framework would form a regional learning portfolio
                         which could have a demonstration effect throughout the islands in regard to shared challenges and
                         opportunities. This could also include support for a sub-committee of Finance Ministers from the
                         region to monitor implementation progress of the PROP, and report annually to Forum leaders.

                         •       Nationally-Implemented Activities (Implemented by relevant Government agency in each
                         participating country)
                         o       Program management, monitoring and evaluation in each participating country, including
                         technical advisory support and support for fiduciary management and controls, and data collection,
                         analysis and evaluation for progress according to the key results indicators. Opportunities to
                         collaborate and coordinate with existing World Bank program management and technical support or
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that provided by bilateral donor agencies will be pursued to help ensure coherency and effectiveness
                         of project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The eleven PICs which are member countries of the World Bank are eligible to participate, as all
                         share the transboundary fisheries and fish resources. These are areas characterized by the diversity of
                         their marine ecosystem. They are also among the most vulnerable to effects of sea level rise. There
                         are several hundred islands spread over this vast area and populated by a mere 9 million people.

                         The first five projects in the series - which corresponds to the PROP Phase 1 - are planned for the
                         countries of the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI),
                         the Solomon Island, Tuvalu and a regional IDA grant to the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency
                         (FFA). Each of these countries participates in the management of the shared purse seine tuna
                         fisheries and so is essential to achieving the Program’s overall objective, and each country has
                         demonstrated by its interest in the PROP a willingness to continue to improve management of these
                         resources.

                         A second phase is envisaged in 2015 for a second group of the remaining eligible countries, with a
                         third and subsequent operations to follow. Taken together, the series of operations is expected to


                                                                     Page 12 of 22
                         span 9 years, at the end of which it will have covered all eleven eligible PICs.

                         Examples of the type of the proposed activities (salient physical characteristics relevant to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         safeguard analysis) under PROP Phase I, which have the potential to incur adverse environmental or
                         social impacts:

                         Component 1:
                         Component 1, Subcomponent 1 specifically for Solomon Islands might include the construction of an
                         operational center for surveillance of the fisheries, and two outlying enforcement centers for fisheries
                         surveillance. The construction work may generate minor site-specific and time-bound adverse
                         environmental impacts that can be readily mitigated through standard mitigation measures, if
                         screened properly.

                         Component 2:
                         Component 2, Sub-component 2 may include support to restock beche-de-mer if it is deemed a viable
                         method to sustainably restore stocks. If so, hatchery facilities based on native brood stock would be
                         used. And, support would include supplying fishers with juveniles to restock near shore habitats.
                         This activity will not involve introduction of non-native species nor involve the purchase,
                         distribution, use or disposal of bactericides during implementation. However, investments in the area
                         of small enterprise development associated with bêche-de-mer valued added processing may include
                         installation of small scale civil works (e.g., solar dryers) for drying.

                         Component 3:
                         Component 3 investments related to the TA for sustainable financing of MPAs, and potentially blue
                         carbon. Activities under Component 3 Subcomponent 1 will support research to assess the unique
                         physical and ecological aspects of the MPAs that would generate ecosystem services (like spawning
                         or feeding grounds for tuna which migrate beyond EEZs of host nations) and that could be
                         incorporated into a system of payment for environmental services. Subcomponent 2 will include TA
                         in order to assess blue carbon potential and participate in blue carbon markets, and will help identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential blue carbon sites. Small scale infrastructure works are not expected to be financed by the
                         project. In case of downstream establishment of the MPAs, which could potentially restrict access to
                         resources, IAs will select appropriate safeguard instrument(s) according to the responsibilities
                         defined in the ESMF (and in particular the Annex on Process Framework).
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Valerie Hickey (GENDR)
                         Olha Krushelnytska (GENDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The aim of the program is to help improve
                         BP 4.01                                               environmental and resource quality in the Pacific
                                                                               Islands Region in order to increase the economic
                                                                               benefits generated by the goods and services from
                                                                               healthy ocean ecosystems. As such, the overall
                                                                               impact of the program is expected to be highly
                                                                               positive and none of the eligible investments on



                                                                      Page 13 of 22
                                  the menu of options include activities that would
                                  generate significant risk or irreversible adverse
                                  impacts in the coastal or oceans fisheries targeted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  by the program. However, some investments
                                  under Components 1 and 2 may generate minor to
                                  moderate site specific and time bound adverse
                                  environmental impacts that can be readily
                                  mitigated through standard mitigation measures,
                                  when screened properly.

                                  Additionally, Component 3 (Sustainable
                                  Financing of the Conservation of Critical Fishery
                                  Habitats) might result in creation of the Marine
                                  Protected Areas (MPAs), in which case any
                                  potential access restrictions will be addressed
                                  through a detailed Process Framework (Annex E).

                                  The project also envisages TA for sustainable
                                  financing and potential of protected areas, which
                                  may lead to potential minor environmental impact
                                  downstream. The Interim Guidelines on the
                                  Application of Safeguard Policies to TA
                                  Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and TFs
                                  Administered by the Bank is applied. Mechanism
                                  for administering safeguards in TA activities will
                                  include integration of safeguard policy
                                  requirements into the Terms of Reference of
                                  studies. As such, the safeguard documentation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  prepared for the project applies equally to the TA
                                  component(s) and Terms of References for the
                                  TA activities will be approved by the Bank to
                                  ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the
                                  Bank safeguard policies.

                                  At this stage in program design, the specific
                                  investments that may generate minor to moderate
                                  adverse impacts include: small scale
                                  infrastructure works to allow for inspection of
                                  fish catch at landing sites and restocking of
                                  beche-de-mer and establishment of the associated
                                  small scale drying facilities. Potential adverse
                                  impacts will be limited to waste management,
                                  construction noise, and health and safety of
                                  workers.

                                  Environmental and Social Management
                                  Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide



                         Page 14 of 22
                                                                          investments that may generate any adverse
                                                                          environmental impact. Screening form will be
                                                                          used to screen for environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes            Program activities will not involve significant
                                                                          loss or degradation of natural habitats. Most of
                                                                          the program activities will be in the marine areas
                                                                          (coastal and ocean) of the Pacific Island which
                                                                          are known sites rich in biodiversity. All program
                                                                          activities are designed to enhance positive and
                                                                          sustainable returns to these important habitats.

                                                                          The Program level ESMF contains measures to
                                                                          properly manage the risk of any unforeseen
                                                                          adverse environmental impact on natural habitats,
                                                                          including critical natural habitats, as well as
                                                                          measures to enhance the program's positive
                                                                          environmental outcomes.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes            As the project (sub-component 3.2) will include
                                                                          the technical assistance, scientific and survey
                                                                          expertise, and legal and regulatory support in
                                                                          order to enable participating countries to pilot
                                                                          trials to assess their blue carbon potential,
                                                                          limitations and opportunities and participate in
                                                                          blue carbon markets, and would create
                                                                          conservation incentives for coastal communities
                                                                          to conserve the mangrove habitats, the policy is
                                                                          triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          The program level ESMF includes a screening
                                                                          form to ensure that the negative impacts on
                                                                          mangrove forests of any downstream activities
                                                                          under Component 3.2 are addressed, and any
                                                                          positive impacts are enhanced. TOR for the
                                                                          studies proposed under sub-component 3.2 will
                                                                          integrate policy requirements of OP 4.36.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project will not purchase, distribute, apply or
                                                                          dispose of pesticides, including bactericides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The project will not involve any major civil
                         BP 4.11                                          works. It will support the construction of an
                                                                          operational center for surveillance of fisheries,
                                                                          and two outlying enforcement centers for
                                                                          fisheries surveillance (under Component 1) in
                                                                          Honiara, Solomon Islands. Additionally, small
                                                                          scale infrastructure works are foreseen to allow
                                                                          for inspection of fish catch at landing sites and



                                                                 Page 15 of 22
                                                                         restocking of beche-de-mer and establishment of
                                                                         the associated small scale drying facilities. Given
                                                                         the small scale works involved, the policy is not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         expected to be triggered. A chance finds
                                                                         procedure is included in the ESMF and EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes            Although OP4.10 does not apply in all
                                                                         participating countries, this policy has been
                                                                         triggered as the project has a regional scope, and
                                                                         because specific sites and activities were not
                                                                         identified at the project preparation stage. It is
                                                                         possible that the project willaffect Indigenous
                                                                         Peoples to some extent. Given the objectives of
                                                                         the project, and the extensive consultations
                                                                         designed into the project, it is expected that any
                                                                         impact would be positive. Notwithstanding, as the
                                                                         project beneficiaries are expected to be
                                                                         overwhelmingly indigenous peoples, the approach
                                                                         adopted will be to incorporate the elements of an
                                                                         IPP into overall project design. Guidance for
                                                                         incorporating elements of the IPP into overall
                                                                         project design is included in Annex B.
                                                                         In PROP Phase I, the only country where the
                                                                         policy will be triggered is the Solomon Islands.
                                                                         Countries for the next phases are not defined yet.
                                                                         Annex B of the ESMF provides guidance on
                                                                         incorporating elements of an IPP into overall
                                                                         project design.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes            Project activities may require small-scale coastal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.12                                            land acquisition. It is expected that market-based
                                                                         or voluntary donation will be the common
                                                                         approach. Any voluntary land donations will meet
                                                                         the World Bank requirements through the
                                                                         application of the Voluntary Land Donation
                                                                         Protocol appended to the ESMF in Annex D.

                                                                         Although it is considered unlikely, certain
                                                                         program activities may involve the involuntary
                                                                         acquisition of land and/or removal of assets.
                                                                         Accordingly, the policy will be triggered and a
                                                                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF, presented
                                                                         in Annex C) has been prepared. Subsequently,
                                                                         Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans will
                                                                         ensure that all affected persons are compensated
                                                                         for involuntary acquisition of land and/or removal
                                                                         of assets at full replacement cost.
                                                                         In case of downstream establishment of the
                                                                         MPAs, which could potentially restrict access to


                                                                Page 16 of 22
                                                                                 resources, IAs will select appropriate safeguard
                                                                                 instrument(s) according to the responsibilities
                                                                                 defined in the ESMF (and in particular the Annex
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 on Process Framework).

                                                                                 To address potential restriction of access to
                                                                                 resources, a Process Framework (PF) has been
                                                                                 prepared in compliance with requirements stated
                                                                                 in OP 4.12 (See Annex E of the ESMF).
                                                                                 Neither this project nor the possible downstream
                                                                                 investments from project’s TA will involve
                                                                                 building dams nor depend on an existing dam.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Neither this project nor the possible downstream
                                                                                 investments from project’s TA will involve
                                                                                 building dams nor depend on an existing dam.
                            Projects on International           No               Following discussion with LEGEN and the RSA,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 it was agreed that there will be no impacts from
                                                                                 this project or its possible downstream
                                                                                 investments on international waterways as
                                                                                 described under OP 7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Any project activities in areas which may be
                            7.60                                                 disputed will be declared ineligible and not
                                                                                 included in the project.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall impact of the program is expected to be highly positive and none of the eligible
                              investments on the menu of options include activities that would generate significant risk or
                              irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts.

                             The environmental and social impacts of each project will generally depend on the type of
                             activities under each phase of the PROP. Each project would include investments for both
                             ‘physical’ goods and services, as well as ‘soft’ activities such as technical assistance. Most of the
                             physical investments would be made at the national level, while ‘soft’ activities would be
                             implemented at both the national and regional level.

                             Examples of the type of the proposed activities (salient physical characteristics relevant to the
                             safeguard analysis), which have the potential to incur adverse environmental or social impacts are
                             as follows:
                             - Component 1, Subcomponent 1 specifically for Solomon Islands might include the construction
                             of an operational center for surveillance of the fisheries, and two outlying enforcement centers for
                             fisheries surveillance. The construction work may generate minor site-specific and time-bound
                             adverse environmental impacts that can be readily mitigated through standard mitigation
                             measures, if screened properly.


                                                                        Page 17 of 22
                          - Component 2, Sub-component 2 may include support to restock beche-de-mer if it is deemed a
                          viable method to sustainably restore stocks. If so, hatchery facilities based on native brood stock
                          would be used. Support would include supplying fishers with juveniles to restock near shore
Public Disclosure Copy




                          habitats. This activity will not involve introduction of non-native species nor involve the purchase,
                          distribution, use or disposal of bactericides during implementation. However, investments in the
                          area of small enterprise development associated with bêche-de-mer valued added processing may
                          include installation of small scale civil works (e.g., solar dryers) for drying.
                          - Component 3 investments related to the TA for sustainable financing of MPAs, and potentially
                          blue carbon. Activities under Component 3 Subcomponent 1 will support research to assess the
                          unique physical and ecological aspects of the MPAs that would generate ecosystem services (like
                          spawning or feeding grounds for tuna which migrate beyond EEZs of host nations) and that could
                          be incorporated into a system of payment for environmental services. Subcomponent 2 will
                          include TA in order to assess blue carbon potential and participate in blue carbon markets, and will
                          help identify potential blue carbon sites. Small scale infrastructure works are not expected to be
                          financed by the project.

                           The scale and likelihood of adverse impacts arising from these activities is limited, and the types
                           of mitigation activities well-known and proven. As such, the program is found to be Category B
                           interventions.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential impacts of the program will be identified during the preparation of the project
                           activities for each PROP member country. The ESMF provides guidance for the project
                           implementation agencies on the preparation of appropriate safeguard instruments to respond to the
                           potential impacts found during the preparation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           These will be considered within each project (each member country) in consultation with all
Public Disclosure Copy




                           affected stakeholders and knowledgeable and interested peoples.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The ESMF was prepared under the PROP to outline the process by which potential adverse
                           impacts will be identified and robust instruments prepared as part of each project.

                          In Phase 1, Program implementation will involve a single agency as the national focal point entity
                          and one or two regional agencies involved in implementing regional activities and overall program
                          coordination and monitoring. These include:
                          •       Fisheries Ministries, Departments, Authorities or Agencies
                           For Phase I they include:
                          a.      Solomon Islands Ministry of Fisheries & Marine Resource (MFMR)
                          b.      Fisheries Department of Tuvalu’s Ministry of Natural Resources (TFD)
                          c.      Marshall Islands Marine Resources Authority (MIMRA)
                          d.      National Oceanic Resource Management Authority (NORMA) in Federated States of
                          Micronesia
                          •       Regional organization involved in fisheries (FFA in the first instance, and SPC, SPREP
                          and others later on);
                          •       The Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS) in regard to coordination and monitoring of


                                                                    Page 18 of 22
                          regionally executed activities.

                          There are 11 Pacific Island Countries eligible to join PROP. Each possesses differing levels of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          familiarity with Bank Safeguards Policies and Procedures; however the level of institutional
                          capacity across the region as a whole is quite weak.

                          FFA, representing its member countries participating in the PROP, including the countries
                          participating in Phase I, has experience with World Bank safeguards because of the link to IDA-
                          financed operations. Additionally, all four national implementing agencies have a general
                          knowledge on bank safeguard policies as they were briefed on the PROP safeguard requirements
                          during the preparation mission.

                          Nevertheless, the World Bank will provide necessary training and development of staff to each
                          Project implementing agency in the first year of the implementation to build their capacity and
                          provide implementation support during the actual determination of the range of activities to be
                          included in the “menu” of each country’s support.

                           Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA)
                           Activities in Bank- Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank will apply for
                           the TA provided by the project. Accordingly, Terms of References for the TA activities will be
                           approved by the Bank to ensure the consultancy outputs comply with the Bank safeguard policies.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The ESMF require an inclusive, participatory community needs assessment process, screening
                           criteria, and forms to document broad community support and consensus on priority subprojects.
                           Subproject Consultation and Action Plans will be developed in the early part of implementation.
                           Community consultations will be facilitated and documented by suitably qualified personnel in the
                           Project Management Unit. Ongoing monitoring and community consultations by such personnel
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will assess whether broad community support is maintained during implementation.

                          Project stakeholders include both men and women from affected communities whose livelihoods
                          are implicated and/or who depend on migratory fisheries; the private sector (fishing industry from
                          harvesting through to value chains / processing and investment); the public sector (national
                          ministries, regulatory and trade promotion authorities); and international bodies including regional
                          fishery bodies. The numbers and specificity of stakeholders can only be determined once the
                          precise nature and location of the activities under each project are identified.

                          Consultations on the Environmental and Social safeguard policies where conducted on August 15,
                          2014 in Majuro, RMI with representatives from the fisheries agencies of FSM (NORMA), RMI
                          (MIMRA), Solomon Islands (MFMR) and Tuvalu (TFD), as well as the representatives from the
                          FFA, PNAO and SPC. At this meeting, NORMA, MIMRA, MFMR, TFD and FFA (implementing
                          agencies) agreed on the process of preparing and incorporating safeguard instruments in the
                          implementation arrangements. After the consultations, countries worked with the FFA and agreed
                          on the final version of the ESMF, which was formally submitted to the Bank on September 23,
                          2014 by the FFA on behalf of all IAs. In addition to the regional consultation in RMI, national
                          consultations were held in Tuvalu and Solomon Islands – to ensure stakeholder awareness and
                          feedback in regard to the specific country context within the Component 2 (which is not applicable
                          to FSM). Consultation minutes are attached in the ESMF.


                                                                    Page 19 of 22
                           ESMF Disclosure: The ESMF is made available through the World Bank website (www.
                           worldbank.org), as well as through the websites of the FFA (www.ffa.int).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Disclosure occurred in two phases:
                           •        Disclosure of assessment documents (e.g. social assessment and environmental review)
                           and draft safeguard documents (e.g. PF, IPPF, and RPF) during projects preparation and prior to
                           final review and approval of the PROP. Disclosure during projects preparation aims to seek
                           feedback and input from local communities, and as appropriate other stakeholders, on the activities
                           proposed under the project and safeguard measures and documents.
                           •        Disclosure of final safeguard documents prior to project finalization to inform local
                           communities of implementation measures concerning safeguard issues.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Oct-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                   23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Marshall Islands                                                  23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Solomon Islands                                                   23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Tuvalu                                                            23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Oct-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                   23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Marshall Islands                                                  23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Solomon Islands                                                   23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Tuvalu                                                            23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       23-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    23-Oct-2014

                                                                    Page 20 of 22
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Micronesia, Federated States of                                  23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Marshall Islands                                                 23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Solomon Islands                                                  23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                           Tuvalu                                                           23-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?


                                                                     Page 21 of 22
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: John Virdin
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Regional Safeguards Name: Peter Leonard (RSA)                            Date: 25-Oct-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/   Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                          Date: 25-Oct-2014
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 22 of 22
