                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA8351
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Albania                            Project ID:    P144029
                            Project Name:      Power Recovery Project (P144029)
                            Task Team          Arturo S. Rivera
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          05-May-2014                        Estimated   29-May-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     ECSEG                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (40%), Social risk mitigation (30%), Other economic
                                              management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     150.00           Total Bank Financing:                  150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       150.00
                              Total                                                                                       150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve reliability of supply and financial viability of the
                           power sector.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed operation will support the implementation of the Government's Power Sector Recovery

                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         Plan, which is centered around four main pillars: i) enhancing security of supply through
                         diversification of generation sources and strengthening regional integration; ii) improving system
                         efficiency in the distribution sector by reducing losses and improving cash collection; c) supporting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvements of the electricity market and d) introducing priority power reforms in the power sector
                         to create a competitive market that will attract private investment while reducing fiscal risks for the
                         government.

                         The project consists of four components: i) enhancing reliability of supply, ii) Improving distribution
                         infrastructure, iii) Transmission meter/data center upgrade; and iv) Introduce priority power sector
                         reforms and project implementation support. Details are provided below.

                         Component 1 –Securing short term power supply
                         Albania lacks firm generation capacity to manage weather volatility, furthermore, the Komani HPP
                         on the Drin cascade—a peaking plant-- is under maintenance and has a capacity gap of about MW
                         150/yr over a 3 year period. The project will provide for up to US$ 30 million for power imports to
                         compensate for the loss of generation due to maintenance at Komani HPP, or due to the event of
                         lower than expected rainfall during the life of the project.

                         Component 2 – Improving distribution infrastructure
                         This component will support GoA’s and Distribution Company’s plan to reduce losses, improve cash
                         collection and reliability in the MV and LV level. The distribution company has finalized a study,
                         conducted by international consultants, assessing the areas of high losses and low collections. The
                         report also includes a proposed action plan to reduce losses over the next six years. The investments
                         are estimated at about $275 million over the next six years (2015-2020).
                          
                         The investments will be focused on: i) upgrading the sub-transmission distribution system to improve
                         reliability; ii) targeted investments in the medium voltage grid (6-20 kV); iii)metering system
                         investment for the low voltage network; and iv) supporting of the distribution company management,
                         billing and collection system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Five proposed subcomponents will include:

                         a)       Upgrading of the sub-transmission distribution system: Investments in the sub-transmission
                         level are required to upgrade system reliability in Tirana center by reinforcing two existing 35/MV to
                         110/MV SubStations.
                         b)       Targeted investments in the medium voltage grid (6-20kV): The proposed investment will
                         include MV cable lines and MV/LV distribution cabins, as well as associated LV metering facilities
                         at cabins.
                         c)       Metering system investments in the low voltage network: Recent CEZ Sh reports show that
                         approximately 250,000 customers have damaged meters or have no meters at all. Under this
                         subcomponent the project will provide financing for the purchase and installation of: (i)
                         approximately 230,000 single and three-phase meters; (ii) low voltage concentric cables; (iii)ABC
                         cables; and (iv) three-phase regular conductor cables.
                         d)       Upgrading billing and collection system.
                         e)       Management advisory services:

                         Component 3 –Transmission meter/data center upgrade
                         In 2011, GoA moved high voltage industrial customers to the deregulated market, this had the effect
                         of reducing the GoA’s obligation to provide, through KESH/WPS for hydro power under a regulated

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         tariff, and put Albania at the forefront of market reforms as per EU directives. The next step in the
                         market reform is to open the market for medium voltage commercial customers, further reducing the
                         public obligation to guarantee supply for regulated tariff customers. In order to facilitate this
Public Disclosure Copy




                         process, the project will support OST’s to: (i) install meters for medium voltage customers and IPPs
                         and the establishment of a data/meter center at OST, and (ii) facilitate the establishment of a market
                         platform for future eligible suppliers and consumers, and IPPs.

                         Component 4 –Introduce priority power sector reforms and project implementation support
                         GoA recognizes that investments alone will not be sufficient to turn the sector around without critical
                         power sector reforms that will address structural, institutional and operational issues of the sector. In
                         addition to project implementation support, this component will finance technical assistance required
                         to initiate priority reforms to enable the recovery of the power sector.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project locations differ among the project components. the investments on distribution such as
                         metering, cabling, rehabilitation of existing substations, etc. will be conducted in different parts of
                         the country and site specific environmental assessment documents will provide information on the
                         physical characteristics of the site locations. The investments related to transmission company, OST,
                         will mainly consist of metering renovation within the buildings. There is no specific footprint
                         relevant to safeguards. None of the components will affect HPPs or the Drin cascade.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (ECSSO)
                         Esra Arikan (ECSEN)

                          6. Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              During the concept stage of the project, intake
                          BP 4.01                                              rehabilitation of the Vlore Thermal Power Plant
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               has been considered under Component 1. During
                                                                               preparation, it has been decided that no works
                                                                               related to Vlore TPP will be included in this
                                                                               project, therefore the environmental impacts of
                                                                               the project is now only related to Component 2,
                                                                               which is improving the distribution system.
                                                                               Component 2 will consists of investments on
                                                                               distribution such as meters, cables and potential
                                                                               rehabilitation of selected existing substations.
                                                                               These will have temporary and limited
                                                                               environmental impacts and are expected to be
                                                                               Category B in nature.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               Improvement of the distribution system
                                                                               (rehabilitation and construction of substations)
                                                                               under Component 2 and/or transmission system
                                                                               (mainly renovating meters) under Component 3
                                                                               will be conducted within the city and any sub-
                                                                               project which is planned on green land will not be
                                                                               financed by the project.


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               Chance find procedures will be applied for all
                            BP 4.11                                              excavation related studies under the project scope.
                                                                                 Any project which may have effects on protected
                                                                                 sites and/or culturally important sites, will not be
                                                                                 eligible for financing under this project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes              The proposed project is most likely not expected
                            4.12                                                 to include neither land acquisition nor
                                                                                 resettlement; Some activities are foreseen to
                                                                                 improve cash collection in distribution and
                                                                                 efficiency in distribution. Activities to improve
                                                                                 the efficiency of distribution envisages also
                                                                                 investments in rehabilitation of old sub-stations
                                                                                 and distribution power transformers as well new
                                                                                 ones for which locations are to be determined.
                                                                                 Although the land needed would be small a RPF
                                                                                 (Resettlement Policy Framework) is
                                                                                 recommended to guide potential need for small
                                                                                 land acquisition or potential right of way
                                                                                 management.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               The project will not have any impacts on the flow
                                                                                 scheme of the Drin basin. The sub-component for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 power supply imports would not involve any
                                                                                 physical works or changes in the operating
                                                                                 regimes of the dams, but only financing the
                                                                                 import of electricity to meet seasonal gaps in
                                                                                 power production.
                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              In accordance with World Bank environmental policies and procedures (OP/BP/GP 4.01) the
                              project has been assigned “Category B”, as the types of potential impacts are limited with the
                              footprints of the investments and should be relatively easy to assess and mitigate through careful
                              selection of sites and good construction practices. For the distribution network component of the


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           project, an environmental and social management framework (ESMF) has been prepared by CEZ
                           Sh since the exact footprints of the sub-projects are not determined yet. The ESMF was designed
                           to provide guidance for screening, assessing, conducting consultations, reporting and monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           practices for the sub-project investments under the management of CEZ Sh. Environmental
                           assessments of the sub-projects will be carried out in accordance with both Albanian National
                           Legislation and World Bank environmental assessment (OP 4.01) requirements. As mentioned
                           above, it is expected that the sub-projects will be 'Category B' on nature and partial EAs/ESMPs
                           will be prepared accordingly. Sub-project partial EAs/EMPs will be submitted to WB for prior
                           review and after getting no-objections these will be disclosed in client's websites and will be
                           included in the corresponding bidding documents of the investment projects.

                           It is expected that all distribution investments will be conducted in the urban areas and since the
                           Natural Habitats and Physical/Cultural Properties policies have not been triggered, the ESMF
                           makes it clear that in case a project may have effects on protected sites and/or culturally important
                           sites, it will not be eligible for financing under this project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           This will be evaluated in individual sub-project environmental assessment documents as needed.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Investments related to distribution network will be screened by CEZ Sh for avoiding any impact
                           on natural habitats and physical/cultural sensitive sites, if no alternative is found for a project
                           which may trigger OP 4.11 and 4.04, the project will not be eligible for financing.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project will consist of separate PIUs under CEZ Sh, KESH and OST for the implementation
                           works of the project components. There will be another PMU at the Ministry of Energy and Trade
Public Disclosure Copy




                           responsible for the implementation of the TA component and overall project implementation
                           coordination and monitoring. WB environmental specialist will also include provide support and
                           training according to the needs of the PIUs. CEZ Sh, as the implementing agency of Component 2,
                           will share the sub-project ESMPs (environmental and social management plans) with the Bank for
                           no-objection and will disclose the final versions in country and share it with the WB for Infoshop
                           disclosure. OST, as the implementing agency of Component 3, will not be preparing
                           Environmental Assessment (EA) documents assuming the investments will be Category C in
                           nature. PIUs will also prepare and submit frequent monitoring reports to inform the WB about the
                           status of the EA documents (if under preparation) and the compliance with the relevant EA
                           documents during implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           For the Category B sub-projects of the distribution component, public consultation and disclosure
                           of ESMPs will be conducted in line with the ESMF. The ESMF prepared by CEZ SH, distribution
                           company, has already been consulted with public and disclosed in country and in Infoshop on
                           April 14 and 24, 2014 respectively.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          23-Apr-2014

                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Apr-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Albania                                                          23-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Apr-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Albania                                                          23-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Arturo S. Rivera
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                          Date: 01-May-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (SM)                        Date: 13-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
