                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA8219

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Apr-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Haiti                              Project ID:    P149116
                                                        Parent         P106699
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:     Haiti - Urban Community Driven Development Project - AF (P149116)
   Parent Project    Haiti - Urban Community Driven Development Project / PRODEPUR (P106699)
   Name:
   Task Team         Ali Alwahti
   Leader:
   Estimated         15-Apr-2014                        Estimated   19-Jun-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    LCSDU                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (40%), Other social
                     services (25%), General public administration sector (15%) , Urban Transport
                     (10%), General education sector (10%)
   Theme(s):         Participation and civic engagement (40%), Urban services and housing for the
                     poor (40%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delive ry (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       6.00           Total Bank Financing:                 6.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
     IDA Grant                                                                               6.00
     Total                                                                                   6.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?


                                             Page 1 of 13
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve access to (and satisfaction with): a) basic and social infrastructure and services; and
   b) income generatingopportunities for residents of targeted disadvantaged urban areas. This
   objective will be achieved through a participatory processin which community-based
   organizations propose, select, implement, and maintain subprojects.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve access to, and satisfaction with: (i) basic and social infrastructure and services,
   including housing repair, reconstruction and community infrastructure improvements needed as a
   result of the emergency; and (ii) income-generating opportunities for residents of targeted
   disadvantaged urban areas.
   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The Parent Project was designed as a Community Driven Development operation with most funding
earmarked for community sub-projects and emergency response and reconstruction activities
following the earthquake. All components are implemented through a participatory process in which
Community-Driven Project Development Councils (COPRODEPs) were created to propose, select,
implement and maintain investment sub-projects implemented jointly with Community Based
Organizations (CBOs). The Project provides financing for community sub-projects focused on basic
municipal infrastructure, housing and reconstruction, social infrastructure, and productive/income
generating opportunities.

The Project consists of four Components:

a.       Component 1 finances community demand-driven and municipal sub-projects in 14 targeted
Priority Zones of 6 municipalities. Specific results include: (i) the establishment of 14 Community
Councils (COPRODEP) in targeted areas of Port-au-Prince and three other cities; and (ii) the
financing of 493 sub-projects (467 sub-projects were originally planned). This Component has fully
disbursed;
b.           Component 2 finances technical assistance such as training-of-trainers, capacity building,
technical workshops, and consultant services aimed at strengthening governance, participatory
development, supervision, and coordination of project beneficiaries and stakeholders. This
Component has disbursed less than one-third of the originally projected funds;
c.           Component 3 finances incremental costs associated with the project’s implementation,
administration, supervision, monitoring and evaluation. This Component has fully disbursed;
d.       Component 4 finances housing and community recovery and reconstruction activities,
specifically debris removal, housing repair and reconstruction through cash grants, infrastructure
improvement, as well as advisory services, international and local technical assistance to support
urban development and housing strategies. Several significant activities were completed over the last
6 months, particularly regarding infrastructure improvement. These include: (i) rehabilitation of
more than 50 street corridors; (ii) repair or reconstruction of 1,200 houses, allowing about 1,740
families to return to safe neighborhoods with safe housing options, or to receive a rental subsidy; (iii)
completion of the design of a multi-family complex; (iv) completion of technical designs of key
roads to be rehabilitated; and (v) commencement of works for the first large road. As a result of


                                             Page 2 of 13
investments under this Component, approximately 24,800 households are benefiting from
community-wide upgrading, including basic infrastructure and services. Seventy-four (74) percent
of the funds under this component are committed and 56 percent disbursed.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Parent Project intervened in disadvantaged urban areas, such as Cité-Soleil, Port-au-Prince, Cap-
Haitien, Gonaives, St. Marc under Components 1 and 2, while under Component 4, the Parent
Project intervened in informal neighborhoods in the Port-au-Prince area severely affected by the
earthquake. . These targeted disadvantaged urban areas are traditional flash-point communities and
were seriously damaged by the January 12, 2010 earthquake.

Under the proposed Additional Financing, the geographic scope of subproject activities would be
extended to include secondary cities in the North, Center and Artibonite Departments considering: (i)
the importance of secondary cities for poverty reduction and balanced economic development in the
country; and (ii) the need for synergy with two upcoming Bank projects, whose areas of intervention
overlap with that of the proposed operation: Cultural Heritage Preservation and Tourism Sector
Development Support Project (P144614) (North and Nord-East departments), and Center and
Artibonite Regional Development Project (P133352), both FY2014. Specifically, the proposed AF
would expand to include Dondon, Milot, Hinche and Mirebalais.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Amadou Konare (AFTN1)
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (LCSSO)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
 BP 4.01                                            policy is triggered due to the potential for adverse
                                                    social and environmental impacts under the
                                                    project's main components.

                                                    Due to demand-driven nature of and the lack of
                                                    specifics on the sub-projects’ sites and scale at
                                                    this time, a framework approach, as in the parent
                                                    project, has been proposed, whereby the
                                                    government would prepare and Environmental
                                                    and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The
                                                    proposed PRODEPUR AF will scale up
                                                    PRODEPUR’s activities. The type of activities to
                                                    be financed would be the same as those currently
                                                    included in the project. Therefore, the project
                                                    category under PRODEPUR AF remains
                                                    unchanged as B. The existing parent project’s
                                                    ESMF has been updated to reflect the
                                                    environmental and social characteristics of the
                                                    new project intervention areas.

                                                    The ESMF provides clear guidance and measures,



                                            Page 3 of 13
                                            with the associated implementation arrangements,
                                            with clear roles and responsibilities, along with
                                            capacity strengthening measures for effective
                                            implementation and monitoring of the ESMF. It
                                            also provides cost outlays and a timetable for
                                            preventing and mitigating potential impacts. In
                                            particular, the ESMF provides steps for screening
                                            all subprojects, outlines procedures for preparing,
                                            reviewing, clearing, disclosing and monitoring
                                            subproject-specific ESIAs/ESMPs. As a condition
                                            of investment, it has been agreed that no civil
                                            works will commence, without proper compliance
                                            with the above procedures.

                                            A separate, additional Social Assessment will not
                                            be undertaken for the proposed AF, given the
                                            experience of BMPAD in the areas of project
                                            implementation. Both the Cultural Heritage
                                            Preservation and Tourism Sector Support Project
                                            (P144614) (for Milot and Dondon) and the Center
                                            and Artibonite Regional Development Project
                                            (P133352) (for Mirebalais and Hinche) are
                                            undertaking Social Assessments in these areas.
                                            The findings of these assessments will be shared
                                            with BMPAD.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) policy is
                                            triggered because the area around the National
                                            Historic Park (Parc National Historique) is known
                                            to be one of the few remaining natural habitats
                                            left in Haiti. The area surrounding the PNH
                                            qualifies as a critical natural habitat under OP
                                            4.04. At least 15 species of plants and animals
                                            listed as critically endangered, endangered, or
                                            vulnerable on the IUCN Red List have been
                                            recorded in the area. Birdlife International
                                            formally recognizes the site as an Important Bird
                                            Area.

                                            This suggests that the Bank will not finance any
                                            subproject or activity with potential adverse
                                            impacts on this type of natural habitats, according
                                            to OP/BP 4.04 policy and guidelines. This has
                                            implications for the cities of Dondon and Milot,
                                            which are situated within and on the perimeter of
                                            the National History Park. The ESMF has been
                                            updated to screen out activities that may
                                            negatively impact the site, and details criteria for



                                    Page 4 of 13
                                                identifying and managing all other social and
                                                environmental impacts to the site, including any
                                                indirect impact associated with project’s
                                                investments.

                                                For project intervention in the Northern part of
                                                country, a three-prong screening procedure has
                                                been devised: (i) All investments will be screened
                                                by the MDODs; (ii) the resulting screening forms
                                                will be reviewed and either revised or validated
                                                by BMPAD in conjunction with the Institut de
                                                Sauvegarde du Patrimoine National (ISPAN), in
                                                accordance with the presidential decree of 21
                                                June 2010 that establishes the National Historic
                                                Park and ISPANs authority thereover; and (iii) the
                                                Bank, through the safeguards specialists on the
                                                project, would be provided with the list of sub-
                                                projects or activities selected for investment for
                                                their concurrence. During supervision missions,
                                                the safeguards specialists on the Team will
                                                purposely assess compliance with required
                                                safeguards for sub-projects in Dondon and Milot.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes           The Forests (OP/BP 4.36) policy is triggered
                                                because evidence from the existing baseline
                                                information, suggests poor management practices
                                                of the park in general and minimal safeguards for
                                                forest products, in particular. Without proper
                                                activity/sub-project screening, selection,
                                                validation procedures, and the implementation of
                                                required safeguards, the PNH and its forest could
                                                further be negatively impacted by project’s
                                                activities. Screening for potentially negative
                                                impacts on forests will be done in-tandem with
                                                potential impacts on natural habitats, using the
                                                same three-prong screening approach described
                                                under OP/BP 4.04 above.
Pest Management OP 4.09           No            None of the proposed AF’s components triggers
                                                the Pest Management Policy.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           The Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
BP 4.11                                         policy was triggered in the original project in the
                                                event that the civil works might directly and/or
                                                indirectly affect cultural property in existing
                                                neighborhoods, such a known local structures or
                                                sites of historic or cultural importance. The highly
                                                participatory nature of the project coupled with
                                                the screening procedures outlined in the ESMF
                                                ensures that communities would be able to


                                        Page 5 of 13
        identify if any proposed sub-project will have an
        impact on cultural property as defined by the
        policy.

        Sub-project proposals require the identification of
        any such activities and require the CBO
        proposing the sub-project to specify adequate
        mitigation measures. This process is captured in
        the ESMF, which also includes guidance on
        preparing chance find clauses for contractors in
        bidding documents for any construction activities
        supported by the project

        Two of the sites that will be financed under the
        AF, Milot and Dondon, are situated within and on
        the perimeter of the National History Park, a
        UNESCO World Heritage Site. The ESMF has
        been updated to screen out activities that may
        negatively impact the site.

        In addition, dispositions taken for subsequent sub-
        project-specific safeguards instruments will entail
        ensuring that ESIAs/ESMPs consultants and
        contractors are able to do the due diligence, or are
        teamed up with Physical Cultural Resources
        (PCR) experts to ensure that impacts on PCR are
        assessed and mitigation measures commensurate
        to those impacts, including proper handling of
        chance finds are implemented in the design, in
        accordance with national and World Bank
        policies.

        The Project team and implementers shall ensure
        that the proposed mitigation measures are derived
        from Projects and subproject specific ESIAs/
        ESMPs, and more specifically: (i) have been
        discussed and agreed upon by concerned parties;
        (ii) include an assessment of the capacity to
        implement the measures; and (iii) are acceptable
        within the national regulatory and legal
        framework, including laws and regulations
        concerning cultural heritage and the antiquities.
        These processes and other dispositions related to
        PCR are discussed in the ESMF, which also
        includes guidance on preparing chance find
        clauses for contractors in bidding documents for
        any construction activities supported by the



Page 6 of 13
                                               project.

                                               A separate Physical and Cultural Resources
                                               Framework (PCRF) that was prepared and
                                               disclosed for the Cultural Heritage Preservation
                                               and Tourism Sector Support Project (P144614)
                                               will be re-disclosed, as part of PRODEPUR AF’s
                                               safeguard documents. The PCRF provides
                                               appropriate guidance for project implementation
                                               in a PCR-rich area. All sub-projects within the
                                               perimeter of the Natural Historic Park will require
                                               prior authorization by the Institut de Sauvegarde
                                               du Patrimoine National (ISPAN) in accordance
                                               with the presidential decree of 21 June 2010 that
                                               establishes the National Historic Park and
                                               ISPANs authority thereover.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No            There are no indigenous peoples as defined by the
                                               policy present in the project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes           The planned activities under the proposed AF are
4.12                                           not expected to result in land acquisition or
                                               involuntary resettlement. Community subprojects
                                               under Component 1 will screen out activities that
                                               would require resettlement or that would result in
                                               restriction of access to natural resources in
                                               protected areas, and the sub-grants for emergency
                                               reconstruction will finance settlement (housing
                                               and community infrastructure) rehabilitation and
                                               reconstruction in-situ. To allow flexibility to
                                               respond to emergencies or changing priorities, OP
                                               4.12 will continue to be triggered in the AF. In
                                               the event that minor involuntary resettlement
                                               would be required, a Resettlement Action Plan
                                               will be prepared in accordance with the OP 4.12
                                               along the same principles of the original
                                               Resettlement Policy Framework, as well as from
                                               the lessons learnt from the RAPs that were
                                               developed and implemented in the original
                                               project for urban upgrading activities. The RPF
                                               has been updated to include the new project areas
                                               and re-disclosed. A formal ex-post evaluation of
                                               those RAPs will be carried out by 30th June 2014.
                                               This policy reflects the following principles:
                                                #       Prior to the approval of eligible
                                               beneficiaries, BMPAD with the assistance of the
                                               MDOD and the relevant COPRODEP need to
                                               ensure that the sites, boundaries and ownerships
                                               of the land plots need to be clearly identified,


                                       Page 7 of 13
                                                        reconfirmed by their neighbors and verified by
                                                        the housing facilitators (the community-based
                                                        mapping exercise).
                                                          #      In cases where there are disputed claims,
                                                        conflict resolution will be facilitated by BMPAD
                                                        and the MDOD community outreach workders
                                                        through the conflict resolution mechanism in the
                                                        Community Reconstruction Center.
                                                         #       In case there is resettlement, agreement
                                                        on the compensation scheme and its payment or
                                                        realization will be settled prior to the
                                                        commencement of that particular housing
                                                        rehabilitation or reconstruction.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No              The policy is not triggered since project will not
                                                        invest in dams nor will any project activities rely
                                                        on the operations of existing dams.
   Projects on International            No              The policy is not triggered since project activities
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 will not affect any known International
                                                        Waterways.
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  The policy is not triggered since project activities
   7.60                                                 will not affect any known disputed areas.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     As in the Parent Project, there are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible social
     negative impacts expected. The key social issues relate to Component 4 and include: (a) the
     accurate identification of families that lived in each house in the project intervention area prior to
     the Emergency, (b) determining their property tenure status, (c) developing assistance options that
     adequately address the situation of all categories of affected families/houses, especially renters and
     sub-renters (d) addressing the needs of vulnerable groups, (e) possible discovery of human
     remains during the process of debris removal, and (f) addressing temporary physical relocation
     that may be necessary as a result of house repair or reconstruction.

     In order to address the above issues adequately, the program will: (a) continue to rely on
     community-based processes to identify and address issues, (b) continue consultations with the
     community throughout program preparation and implementation based on dissemination of prior
     relevant information, (c) develop clear entitlement criteria and assistance options for all categories
     of affected families, especially renters and sub-renters, (d) promote special measures to address the
     needs of vulnerable groups, (e) put in place an agreed, community-endorsed protocol to deal with
     possible discovery of human remains during debris removal, (f) when required, develop an
     adequate resettlement plan to address possible relocation of beneficiaries in the realization of
     public works, (g) carry out community-based mapping prior to ascertain property tenure status of
     beneficiaries; and (h) establish a durable conflict resolution mechanism to address any complaints,
     disputes or grievances that beneficiaries may have during the design and implementation of the


                                                Page 8 of 13
  program. The conflict resolution mechanism will be housed in the Community Reconstruction
  Center and will be available to resolve conflicts arising from any component or activity supported
  by PRODEPUR. In addition, close coordination and consultation of key stakeholders will
  contribute to identifying any additional, critical social issues, and to solicit suggestions on how to
  best address them.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Based on the ongoing experience with sub-projects to date, long-term impacts are expected to be
  positive. The project is likely to result in significant improvements in building social capital,
  infrastructure and capacity in target areas. While Martissant and Cite Soleil were selected using
  standard eligibility criteria on (i) poverty level; (ii) population density; and (iii) current and past
  levels of violence and target the most disadvantaged populations, Mirebalais, Hinche, Milot and
  Dondon were selected to complement large scale infrastructure investments under other Bank
  financed operations in order to enhance social inclusion and community capacity. Moreover,
  through environmental management activities and related technical assistance, it is expected to
  result in significant environmental improvements.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  An assessment of safeguards implementation, in compliance with applicable Bank operational
  policies, has shown gradual improvement, based on the sustained training of the various
  stakeholders (i.e., MDODs, CBOs, COPRODEPs and contractors) involved in the project’s
  safeguards function over the past several months. Other streamlining procedures, such as the
  designation of safeguards Focal Point in each MDODs, reinforcing a reporting culture in both
  BMPAD and the MDODs, have but proven to be effective measures in mainstreaming safeguard
  considerations in project’s implementation. Alternatives to the technical and institutional measures
  discussed above would be considered unsustainable for any development effort that seeks to be
  environmentally and socially friendly.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As the national executing agency of the project on behalf of the Government of Haiti (GoH),
  BMPAD has been responsible for overall project coordination and oversight of the Parent Project,
  the first additional finance and will continue to be responsible for the proposed AF. BMPAD will
  also continue to delegate day-to-day project execution to the MDODs. BMPAD will nonetheless
  continue to provide continuous oversight of (i) the environment and social impact screening
  process; (ii) the sourcing of materials to ensure that national policies and environment best
  practice are followed; (iii) the implementation of investment-specific mitigation measures; and (iv)
  the execution of information campaigns and consultations. BMPAD will also continue to provide
  training to the MDODs, COPRODEPs and CBOs on environment and social impact assessment
  and impact management.

  To date, BMPAD has provided more than a dozen and a half safeguards trainings to the MDODs,
  CBOs and COPRODEPs under PRODEPUR and PRODEP (the related rural CDD project). These
  trainings have consisted of training-of-trainer events in (a) basic management, administration,
  accounting, safeguards and financial management for COPRODEPs and municipal government
  officials; (b) capacity building and technical assistance to strengthen governance, participatory
  development, supervision, and coordination capacity at the municipal-government level and to
  relevant ministerial staff; (c) workshops with service providers to harmonize social and


                                             Page 9 of 13
environment practices to assist CBOs and COPRODEPs in carrying out project activities; (d)
training of Bureau de Monétisation staff to effectively supervise the identification and
management of environment and social impacts and their associated mitigation measures.

To mainstream environmental and social safeguard considerations in project’s implementation,
monitoring and supervision and to further enhance compliance with applicable safeguard policies,
each of the MDODs has designated a Focal Point (FP) for safeguards, following the Project’s Mid-
Term Review (MTR). The objective of this disposition was to ensure that guidance and oversight
is provided at all time on safeguards within each MDOD. These safeguards FPs and contractors
have undergone several training sessions on Bank safeguard policies, sub-project screening
process, selection, implementation and monitoring and other safeguards enhancement measures,
such as reporting, in the months that followed the MTR. These and other dispositions have proven
to be very effective in improving safeguards performance.

With this operation, the Project is not only building on many years of experience implementing
Bank-funded projects, but also on lessons learned from implementation of those operations. This
provides the Project Team and relevant actors a good framework for smooth implementation of
safeguards measures. The safeguard instruments include further provisions for capacity
strengthening at all levels for the successful implementation of the project safeguard measures, in
compliance with national and World Bank safeguard policies.

Moreover, as the project is set out to intervene in the Northern part of country, an area of global
importance, both from its biodiversity and physical cultural resources standpoints, a three-prong
screening procedure has been devised: (i) all investments will be screened by the MDODs; (ii) the
resulting screening forms will be reviewed and either revised or validated by BMPAD in
conjunction with the Institut de Sauvegarde du Patrimoine National (ISPAN), in accordance with
the presidential decree of 21 June 2010 that establishes the National Historic Park and ISPANs
authority thereover; and (iii) the Bank, through, the safeguards specialists on the project would be
provided with the list of sub-projects or activities selected for investment for their concurrence.

As such, BMPAD has exhibited sufficient capacity to und ertake safeguards implementation under
the parent project and the first additional finance. Application of safeguards in the context of the
proposed operation is bound to further improve, in light of sustained efforts by the MDODs,
BMPAD and the Bank Team to streamline safeguards implementation, monitoring and oversight
arrangements over the many months following the MTR.

BMPAD’s comprehensive Operational Manual (Manuel d’Opération, or OM) includes relevant
provisions gleaned from the ESMF of the parent project. The OM has since been updated twice:
with the first additional finance and more recently with the proposed additional finance. The
provisions of the OM concerning safeguards have thus far been satisfactorily applied.

Support will also be provided by World Bank supervision teams. The supervision missions will
always include the environmental and social safeguards specialists on the team. To ensure
effective World Bank supervision, BMPAD will prepare and update detailed reports on the
implementation of activity/sub-project-specific EMP and/or RAP, whichever is applicable, before
World Bank supervision missions. During supervision missions, the safeguards specialists on the
Team will purposely assess compliance with the sub-projects’ safeguards in Dondon and Milot.
Appropriate budget for supervision will be included in the Project financial evaluation.



                                          Page 10 of 13
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders include communities, mayors and other communal representatives, NGOs
  (MDODs), and related government agencies. The preparation and update of the safeguard
  documents (i.e., ESMF, RPF and subsequent sub-project-specific instruments), under the parent
  and first additional finance, followed a broad-based and in-depth consultative approach that
  included interviews with relevant project stakeholder groups.

  The Communication and Dissemination campaigns devised under both the parent project and the
  first additional finance have particularly proven to be successful in engaging and develop
  stakeholder interests and ownership in projects’ design, implementation and outcomes. BMPAD
  and the MDODs, have worked through the COPRODEPs to consult with local communities
  regarding the proposed project activities, potential adverse impacts, proposed safeguard
  instruments. In addition, a communication strategy was developed that has shown to be effective
  in promoting a genuine, community-led process that was perceived as fair and meaningful by all
  stakeholders. This included consulting on project timelines, eligibility criteria, and assistance
  packages. The disclosed projects documents were readily available to stakeholder and interest
  groups in the country Disclosure of the projects.

  It is expected that same consultative approach and processes will be followed in the context of the
  revision of the updated ESMF, following the Bank’s comments. The updated ESMF will be
  disclosed to affected peoples, other stakeholders and interest groups, both locally and through the
  InfoShop, upon completion.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Apr-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   11-Apr-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Haiti                                                            08-Apr-2014
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Apr-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2014
"In country" Disclosure
  Haiti                                                            14-Apr-2014
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                           Page 11 of 13
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Sector Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?


                                           Page 12 of 13
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Ali Alwahti
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)                        Date: 16-Apr-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Catalina Marulanda (SM)                      Date: 16-Apr-2014




                                            Page 13 of 13
