                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1001

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Oct-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Oct-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Madagascar                      Project ID:      P151785
                            Project Name:      MG-Electricity Sec Operations & Governance Improvement Project(ESOGIP)
                                               (P151785)
                            Task Team          Maria Isabel A. S. Neto
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       17-Feb-2015                        Estimated        30-Apr-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEEDR                               Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), State-owned
                                               enterprise restructuring and privatization (40%), Debt man agement and fiscal
                                               sustainability (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     65.00                     Total Bank Financing:        65.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                65.00
                              Total                                                                      65.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve performance, management, and
                           governance of the power sector of Madagascar by simultaneously addressing three key areas for
                           sustainable development: (i) planning (including access) and implementation of outcomes; (ii)
                           operations for electric service provision; (iii) financial viability.
                         C. Project Description
                         20.      The estimated total financing required for the currently proposed Madagascar ESOGIP is
                         approximately US$80.0million. This program includes urgent and priority activities for the power
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sector in Madagascar. Depending on Government’s priorities, IDA’s funding availability, and
                         potential interest from other donors, part of this program may be financed by another party, or scaled
                         down. As of now, other donors have expressed they would not be able to contribute immediately.

                         21.     The proposed project has 3 components, described below:

                         Component 1: Strengthening power sector planning and development (US$1.80 million)

                         22.      This component aims to: (i) ensure planning of the optimum investments needed to develop
                         the power sector in Madagascar, from electricity generation to the effective connection of end users,
                         is carried in a fully systematic manner; (ii) define mechanisms to ensure effective implementation of
                         the outcomes of the planning process; (iii) strengthen in a sustainable manner the capacity of the
                         government agencies responsible for planning the power sector and implementation of the outcomes
                         of the planning process. In order to meet these objectives, the component will include:

                         1.1.    Preparation of a Least Cost Power Development Plan (LCPDP) for the electricity sector

                         23.      As most countries do, the Government of Republic of Madagascar (GRM) must keep
                         permanently updated its own roadmap for the development of the electricity sector in the country in
                         the next 15-20 years. For that purpose, the competent government entity (Ministry of Energy) needs
                         to lead the preparation (eventually based on the review and update of existing versions) of a Least
                         Cost Power Development Plan (LCPDP) for that period, in order to define the investments needed in
                         all the segments of the electricity supply chain (from generation, transmission, and distribution to
                         consumers’ connection). The LCPDP should be prepared starting from recent reliable demand
                         forecasts (an update of existing projections would be needed), based on priorities in areas to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         electrified and type of electricity services to be provided (including transitory stages until full
                         electrification is achieved). Other key inputs are the scenarios to be defined by the GRM in terms of
                         energy mix for electricity generation (hydropower and other traditional resources, renewables, etc.).
                         This sub-component will finance the consultancy services required for the preparation of the LCPDP.
                         The Studies and Planning Department in the Ministry of Energy will be responsible for and lead the
                         preparation of the LCPDP, with technical support from JIRAMA, ADER and ORE.

                         1.2- Definition of a strategy and action plans to increase electricity access countrywide

                         24.      In countries with low electrification rates like Madagascar, a key component of the planning
                         process, which in general is addressed separately and complements the LCPDP, is the definition and
                         effective implementation of the action plans to increase access to electricity services
                         (“electrification”), until full coverage is achieved. The definition of a strategy for electrification of
                         the country is a government responsibility, and should comprise setting priorities, ensuring funding
                         (grants, loans, national budget, tariff revenues, etc.), defining optimum technical solutions for
                         specific situations, and putting in place implementation arrangements (roles and responsibilities of
                         government agencies, the national utility, etc.). Best technical solutions and implementation
                         arrangements for electrification in urban and peri-urban areas could be different from the most
                         adequate for rural areas.
                         25.     This sub-component will finance the consultancy services required for the definition of a
                         strategy and action plans to increase electricity access in the whole Madagascar.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.3- Strengthening institutional and operational capacity of government agencies responsible for
                         planning

                         26.     This sub-component will include actions aimed at strengthening the institutional and
                         operational capacity of the Ministry of Energy and other government agencies responsible for
                         planning and implementation of the electrification strategy, to ensure that they are able to effectively
                         carry out those critical tasks on a long term basis.

                         1.4-Assessment of the existing pricing systems for electricity services, identification of
                         improvements needed to achieve financial viability and approaches for implementation

                         32.      This component will finance the execution of studies needed to improve the pricing system
                         for electricity services in Madagascar in order to ensure the financial viability of the power sector of
                         the country.

                         33.      The “steady state” to be achieved in terms of financial viability of the power sector is the
                         application of a tariff system, eventually complemented by a social safety net aimed at protecting low
                         income consumers (ie, targeting subsidies to those who cannot afford to pay cost-reflective rates),
                         resulting in allowed revenues (AR) of the utilities that ensure full recovery of total costs of efficient
                         service provision. However, it may be necessary to adopt a phased approach, as the application of the
                         “steady state” system may not be viable in the short term in a low-income country like Madagascar,
                         additionally facing high electricity generation costs. On the one side, it could be a gap between the
                         current low average tariff level and that required to recover efficient costs of service provision.. On
                         the other side, the cost reflective average tariff level could also be higher than the current average
                         ability to pay for electricity service of the consumers in the country. The assessment of the current
                         average ability to pay for electricity service of consumers in Madagascar is a key component of any
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plan aimed at improving the pricing system. The study will thus assess the affordability and
                         willingness to pay electricity services of customers in Madagascar.

                         34.     Once the new tariff system is defined, it becomes critical to design and effectively
                         implement a socially and politically acceptable “glide path” for its effective application, which
                         should be done together with the deployment of a social safety net aimed at protecting low income
                         users unable to pay cost reflective rates.

                         35.     Taking into consideration the preceding comments, the component will include the
                         development of consultancy services to address the following tasks:
                         •       Assessment of current average ability to pay for electricity services
                         •       Determination of the most adequate methodology for tariff setting to be applied in the short
                         and medium term.
                         Design of a socially and politically acceptable “glide path” for the effective application of the
                         proposed methodology and related tariff charges, eventually complemented by a social safety net
                         aimed at protecting low income users unable to pay cost reflective rates.The assessment should also
                         address the level of support needed from the government budget and its affordability to the
                         government.
                         Component 2: Improving operational performance and governance of JIRAMA in key business areas
                         (US$76.0 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         35.    This component will comprise the preparation and effective implementation of a Business
                         Plan (BP) for JIRAMA for a 3-year period, focused on improving efficiency, transparency and
                         accountability of performance of JIRAMA in the key operations areas (electricity supply,
                         commercial functions, management of corporate resources) on a sustainable manner, with specific
                         emphasis on better service quality and loss reduction.

                         33.     The key components of the BP will be:

                         •        Definition and implementation of an optimum organizational structure, including: (i)
                         description of functions and responsibilities of positions at all levels and definition of skills required
                         for each position; (ii) selection of staff to occupy positions at all levels through competitive and
                         transparent (publicly disclosed) processes with support of specialized consultants.
                         •        Incorporation of management information systems (MIS) to make more efficient, transparent
                         and accountable the development of processes and activities in all business areas: operation and
                         maintenance (O&M) of assets for electricity supply and attention of customers’ claims; commercial
                         functions; and management of corporate resources. Incorporation of the MIS must be complemented
                         with the improvement and update of their respective databases (customers, assets, etc.) supported by
                         a geographic information system (GIS).
                         •        Implementation of a revenue protection program (RPP) for sustainable reduction of non-
                         technical losses in supply (unmetered consumption) through systematic remote recording and
                         monitoring of consumption of large users. The initial phase of the RPP should include all customers
                         supplied in medium voltage (MV; around 700, representing 42% of ph ysical sales in 2013), as well
                         as the largest low voltage (LV) users.
                         •        Execution of urgent investments in rehabilitation/upgrade of facilities for electricity supply
                         (generation, transmission, distribution) and metering needed to improve service quality to acceptable
                         levels
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Reinforcement of transmission facilities (Ambohimanambola interconnection substation):
                         US$ 5.5 million
                         •        Rehabilitation/upgrade of distribution networks (5 to 35 kV): US$ 26.6 million.
                         •        Installation of 5 x 6 MW new generation capacity running on heavy fuel-oil (HFO) to meet
                         demand at Antananarivo to be installed at the site of an existing power plant in Ambohimanambola,
                         including power transformers, switchgear and cables for connection to the network: US$ 30 million

                         Component 3: Project management (US$1.5 million)
                         34.      This component will support project management related issues through the recruitment of
                         FM, procurement and social and environmental safeguards experts as the need may be, preparation of
                         project safeguards studies, financing of audit, office equipment and incremental operating costs.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will have a nationwide coverage with a specific focus around the large cities in throughout
                         the country.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Madagascar has its environmental institutional and regulatory frameworks managed by the National
                         Office of Environment (NOE). The regulatory framework clearly spells out the environmental (and
                           social) permitting procedure and the obligations of project developers as regards the implementation
                           of the environmental and social management plan (ESMP) following the principles and procedures
                           mentioned under MECIE (Mise en Compatibilité des Investissements avec l’Environnement). The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Directorate of Environmental Assessment (‘’Direction des Evaluations Environnementales) within
                           NOE office has the overall responsibility of enforcing the environmental (and social) assessment
                           procedure through the approval of required instruments, namely the Environmental and Social
                           Impacts Assessments (ESIAs) and the monitoring of site specific Environmental and Social
                           Management Plans (ESMPs). Moreover, this department is considered to have adequate capacity and
                           relatively fair technical experiences in the processing of World Bank operational safeguards policies
                           s. Nevertheless, the project will be owned and operated by the Ministry of Energy and JIRAMA (The
                           national Power and Water public company) whose experience and capacity in environmental
                           management are not known yet. An initial mission was undertaken in June 2014 to scope out the
                           likely project components and to identify possible environmental and social safeguard risks
                           associated with subprojects being funded under the project and evaluate the capacity of JIRAMA and
                           the Ministry of Energy to address comply with the World Banks safeguards requirements. It is
                           anticipated that: (i) all of the physical components will be implemented by JIRAMA, (ii) The
                           JIRAMA already led environmental and social impact studies for the rehabilitation of some
                           infrastructures following the 1998 national environmental law; (iii) the capacity of JIRAMA to
                           understand and implement safeguards requirements is weak and requires further strengthening. To
                           that extent, during appraisal the team will discuss the necessary requirements for this strengthening;
                           this would likely involve the hosting of a social and environmental safeguards unit comprised of 1
                           social scientist and 1 environmental scientist to act as Social and Environmental Focal Points of the
                           project. These will work closely with ONE and be trained and mentored, throughout the project
                           lifecycle by World Bank safeguards specialists in the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
                           Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Under component 2, the proposed project plans
                           BP 4.01                                              to conduct civil works to rehabilitate/construct
                                                                                or upgrade existing facilities for electricity
                                                                                supply (generation, transmission, distribution).
                                                                                The project also proposes to reinforce the
                                                                                transmission facilities (Ambohimanambola
                                                                                interconnection substation); rehabilitation/
                                                                                upgrade of distribution networks (5 to 35 kV)
                                                                                with installation of new generation capacity
                                                                                running on heavy fuel-oil (HFO) and supply and
                                                                                installation generating units running at the site
                                                                                on an existing power plant in
                                                                                Ambohimanambola, including power
                                                                                transformers, switchgear and cables for
                                                                                connection to the network. The main foreseen
                                                                                environmental and social adverse risks and
                                                                 effects are related to: (i) noise over the
                                                                 acceptable standards for residential areas; (ii) air
                                                                 pollution and contribution to greenhouse gas
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 emission from the generating units smokes; (iii)
                                                                 liquid waste (used oil) generation inducing the
                                                                 pollution of surrounding area and underground
                                                                 water ; (iv) occupational health and safety risks
                                                                 in case employees are not equipped with
                                                                 appropriate protective materials; (v) any
                                                                 machinery accidental risks; (vi) sellers
                                                                 temporary resettlements along the transmission
                                                                 line during the works, resettlement risks for any
                                                                 transmission line extensions, …etc.
                                                                 Considering the nature and magnitude of
                                                                 potential environmental and social impacts from
                                                                 relatively limited scale of rehabilitation and
                                                                 upgrade works, in addition, activities supported
                                                                 by the proposed operation are expected to have
                                                                 some site specific adverse environmental and
                                                                 social impacts.
                                                                 An ESMF will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                 disclosed before appraisal. For the power plants,
                                                                 ESMPs will be prepared, consulted upon and
                                                                 disclosed before appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    There is no vegetation coverage in the potential
                                                                 project site location. The current land
                                                                 occupation picture shows human settlements
                                                                 and degraded land in the surrounding areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    There is no vegetation coverage in the potential
                                                                 project site location. The current land
                                                                 occupation picture shows human settlements
                                                                 and degraded land in the surrounding areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    The project will not purchase or use pesticides

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   A “Chance-Finds” approach, embedded in the
                         BP 4.11                                 ESMF will be adopted to ensure adequate
                                                                 management of such encounter.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    There are no indigenous peoples living in the
                                                                 project targeted areas.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   Some sellers occupied along transmission lines
                         4.12                                    which may need temporary displacement during
                                                                 the works or risks of resettlement with the
                                                                 transmission line extensions. A Resettlement
                                                                 Policy Framework will be prepared, consulted
                                                                 upon and disclosed before appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The project will not include construction or
                                                                                                                                 utilization of dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International        No                                                             N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             N/A
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jan-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Since project has yet to define the exact sites of investments and the technical studies are not yet
                                      available at this stage of project preparation, the Borrower will prepare frameworks for Bank’s
                                      review before appraisal stage : Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                                      Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), and a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                      (RPF).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Maria Isabel A. S. Neto

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 15-Oct-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Practice Manager/   Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                                                                                                  Date: 15-Oct-2014
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
