                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA6929
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                              Project ID:    P148868
                            Project Name:     Odisha Disaster Recovery Project (P148868)
                            Task Team         Deepak Singh
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         21-Jan-2014                        Estimated   20-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    SASDC                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Housing construction (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                              sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (30%), Social risk mitigation (10%), Rural services
                                              and infrastructure (50%), Climate change (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     218.60           Total Bank Financing:                153.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 65.60
                              IDA reallocated as a credit                                                             153.00
                              Total                                                                                   218.60
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To restore and improve housing and public services in targeted communities of Odisha, and increase
                           the capacity of the State entities to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis of
                           emergency.



                                                                      Page 1 of 14
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Resilient Housing Reconstruction and Community Infrastructure US$167.3 million
                         Sub-component 1.1: Housing reconstruction – US$164.3 million. For the reconstruction of about
Public Disclosure Copy




                         30,000 houses in the designated rural areas in the coastal belt 5 km from the High Tide Line (HTL)
                         in the districts of Ganjam and Puri, and 5km from the Chilika Lake boundary as defined by the
                         Survey of India in the district of Khordha.

                         The project will broadly adopt two approaches based on beneficiary preferences, ground conditions
                         as based on the GoO’s Housing Reconstruction Guidelines. The two primary approaches will
                         include: (i) Owner Driven Construction of Houses (ODCH) and (ii) Contractor Built. The preferred
                         option for in-situ construction will be owner driven construction housing, while that at relocation
                         sites will be contractor led.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Selected community infrastructure - US$3.0 million For public infrastructure
                         improvements to complement the housing reconstruction. These improvements may consist of public
                         service infrastructure including roads, water supply, solid waste management, power grid extensions
                         and community infrastructure such as community and health centers, playgrounds, etc.

                         In relocated housing sites, with contractor-driven arrangements, these investments would be
                         integrated in the design of layouts and will be built together with housing, as stated in Subcomponent
                         1.1. For villages with in-situ housing reconstruction a Village Development Plan will be prepared to
                         support communities in the selection of investments within a fixed amount allocated to the village,
                         based on population.

                         Component 2: Urban Infrastructure in Berhampur – US$30.0 million
                         Berhampur, the largest city in Ganjam district, was most severely hit by Cyclone Phailin. This
                         component will finance investments to improve public services in Berhampur while at the same time
                         reducing the vulnerability of its population. Improved public infrastructure will reduce vulnerability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through improved drainage to reduce floods, and increasing the resilience of public service
                         infrastructure. The Berhampur Municipal Corporation (BeMC), under the aegis of Department of
                         Housing & Urban Development (H&UD), will be responsible for implementation.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Upgrading of slums - US$15 million. For infrastructure to improve the living
                         conditions of households in slums in the city of Berhampur. These improvements include streets,
                         access to improved water and sanitation, drainage, septic management, and street lighting. The level
                         of service to be provided will be determined by the available trunk infrastructure, the physical
                         conditions, size of the settlements, and the available resources. The project will be carried out in
                         about 80 settlements covering about 30,000 population.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Public service infrastructure - US$11.7 million. For priority infrastructure at the
                         city level to improve service delivery and living conditions. The BeMC has carried out an assessment
                         of damage and needs after Cyclone Phailin from which an investment plan is being prepared.
                         Investments include priority roads and trunk water supply infrastructure among others.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Community participation - US$1.7 million. This component will help facilitate
                         community participation, ensuring a participatory approach in the planning of settlement level
                         infrastructure.



                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Sub-Component 2.4: Technical Assistance - US$1.7 million. For providing support to the BeMC
                         towards preparation of improved city-wide sectoral master plans and priority Detailed Project
                         Reports (DPRs). These will include drainage, sewerage, street lighting and other relevant areas
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identified.

                         Component 3: Capacity Building in Disaster Risk Management - US$5 million
                         The objective of this component is to support the GoO to further strengthen their disaster
                         preparedness and response capabilities. It will finance the following activities: i) Establishing a
                         dedicated GIS and Decision Support Center within the OSDMA ii) Capacity augmentation of the
                         OSDMA by providing them specialized dedicated manpower and through need-based hiring of
                         technical experts in the areas of disaster risk management, hydro-met systems, risk assessment and
                         financing, structural engineering, remote sensing, GIS, others to provide timely support to various
                         project activities; and iii) Enabling the affected marginalized communities to cope with survival risks
                         posed by natural calamities through community-based initiatives.

                         Component 4: Implementation Support - US$16.3 million
                         This component will finance the incremental operating costs of the Project Management Units
                         (PMU) in OSDMA and the Department for Housing and Urban Development, and the PIUs in
                         OSDMA and the BeMC. In addition, the component will include consultancies required for the
                         preparation and supervision of specific activities, trainings, exposure visits and knowledge exchange
                         programs. It is divided into two subcomponents: (i) Sub-Component 4.1: Implementation Support for
                         PMU-OSDMA - US$12.5 million; (ii) Sub-Component 4.2: Implementation Support for PMU-
                         H&UD - US$3.8 million

                         Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response- US$0 million
                         Following an adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the respective governments
                         may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This
                         component would draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the
                         Government of Odisha to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project components to partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could
                         also be used to channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in the three coastal districts, Ganjam, Puri and Khordha of Odisha, the eastern
                         state of India. The State comprises of 30 districts and has a total area of 155,820 sq. km.
                         Morphologically, Orissa is divided into five parts the coastal plains, the middle mountainous country,
                         the rolling upland, the river valleys & the subdued plateaus. The mountainous region of Orissa
                         covers about three-fourths of the area of the State. The forest cover in the State is 48,903 sq. kms of
                         which 7,060 sq. kms is very dense forest. The moderately dense forest extends over 21,366 sq. kms
                         while open forest is over 20,477 sq. kms. The forest cover in the State constitutes 31.38% of the
                         geographical area. The coastal plains of Orissa stretch from the Subarnarekha in the North to
                         Rushikulya in the South. The Orissa coast, which is 480 km long and 10 to 100 km in width, forms a
                         part of east coast of India. The coastal territory is drained by a number of rives like Mahanadi,
                         Brahmani, Baitarani, Devi, Budhabalanga, Subarnarekha and Rushikalya.

                         The State of Odisha is vulnerable to multiple natural hazards. Due to its sub-tropical littoral location,
                         the state is prone to various hydro-meteorological hazards such as tropical cyclones, storm surges
                         and tsunamis. Although the coastline of Odisha is only about 17% (480 km long) of the Indian east


                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                         coast, it has been affected by nearly 35% of all cyclonic and severe cyclonic storms that have crossed
                         the east coast and associated storm surges that have often inundated large tracts of coastal districts. In
                         addition, while large parts of the state are under Earthquake Risk Zone-II (Low Damage Risk Zone),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Brahmani Mahanadi graben and their deltaic areas come under Earthquake Risk Zone-III
                         (Moderate Damage Risk Zone) and this covers 43 out of the 103 Urban Local Bodies in the state.
                         Furthermore, the state is also vulnerable to flash floods and landslides.

                         The areas proposed for investment under Component 1 and 2 are located in the districts of Ganjam,
                         Khordha, and Puri. The Ganjam and Puri districts have shoreline of 210.4 km out of the state 480
                         km long coastline. Except for Puri district, the remaining districts have two geographical regions viz-
                         a-viz north-eastern ghat on west side and south eastern coastal plain on east side; with distinct soil
                         type of laterite sandy soil in eastern ghat (hill and table land) and fertile alluvial on coastal plain
                         including Puri district. These districts cover forest area of 2487 sq.km (Ganjam – 1993 sq.km,
                         Khordha – 394 sq.km, Puri 100sq.km) accounting to 5.09% of total forest area (48903 sq.km) in the
                         state. One of environmentally valued area i.e. Chilika Lake geographically area is spread in these
                         districts and is the largest brackish water lake of India. The lake is wintering ground for migratory
                         birds, home to a number of threatened species of plants and animals; and due to its ecological
                         importance it has been designated as wetland of international importance under Ramsar convention.
                         The lake is separated by a sandy ridge from Bay of Bengal. There are many rivers flowing through
                         the districts and most of these rivers are part of Rushikulya and Mahanadi River Basin. These rivers
                         are only navigable during the rainy season and during summer they are beds of sand with tiny
                         streams or none at all.

                         The project will also support slum up-gradation in Berhampur city coming under Ganjam district that
                         was also affected due to subsequent flooding after the cyclone. Within Berhampur city there are 254
                         slum settlements accommodating 28,270 households and a population of 126,541 accounting to
                         33.41 % of the total population. Many of them are located around the 47 water bodies (a few of them
                         privately owned) in the city, mainly in the form of tanks and along the natural or built drains. In the
                         absence of sewerage system in the city, these water courses also carry septic tank effluents or the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         untreated human waste. The slums are therefore vulnerable to flooding and associated health hazards.
                         Shelters in slums vary in construction from reeds and mud walls with thatched roofs to brick walls
                         with AC or GI sheets as roof. The latter are vulnerable to strong winds and the former to heavy rains.
                         Nearly 50% of the slums have one stand post per slum that is supplied piped water supply. The
                         supply hours are 3 to 5 hours per day. However, during the summer, water is often supplied through
                         tankers. Remaining slums rely on bore wells or hand pumps or fetch water from nearby source. There
                         is no sewerage and no individual latrines. Community latrines are available in a few slums and open
                         defecation is common in several others. While a few slums have concrete access roads, paved streets
                         and street lights are inadequate and do not serve all slums.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (SASDI)
                         Satya N. Mishra (SASDS)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             Some key environmental concerns that would
                         BP 4.01                                               require consideration in the project include: (a)
                                                                               existing blockages of natural drainage system/
                                                                               channels resulting in water logging in some areas;


                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                                                                         (b) absence of sanitation facilities and open
                                                                         defecation; (c) waste water stagnation and
                                                                         associated health hazards; (d) poor solid waste
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         management practices; (e) uprooting of trees; (f)
                                                                         damage to natural habitats/buffers and; (g)
                                                                         erosion in specific areas. While some of the said
                                                                         environmental issues are associated directly with
                                                                         the cyclone and resultant floods, a few others are
                                                                         associated with the over-all quality of life of
                                                                         people in the affected areas. In the aftermath of a
                                                                         disaster, some of these existing environmental
                                                                         issues affect the health and safety of residents (in
                                                                         varying degrees depending on their location) and
                                                                         therefore would require some consideration in the
                                                                         process of reconstruction and redevelopment.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       Yes           Since the project itself is located in the coastal
                                                                         realms of a state that is marked by various
                                                                         degrees of vulnerability and sensitive
                                                                         environmental features, including natural habitats,
                                                                         there are some risks or issues that need to be
                                                                         managed through appropriate planning and
                                                                         upfront care during the site selection process.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered in view of the presence of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                         historical and a number of cultural properties in
                                                                         the project area and measures may be required
                                                                         during the site selection process and during
                                                                         construction phase to ensure that adverse impacts
                                                                         are avoided.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            Tribal habitations with unique socio-cultural
                                                                         identities different from the general population
                                                                         are not found in the Project area; a few scheduled
                                                                         tribe families that may be present are part of the
                                                                         mainstream population.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes           Even as the Project will not involve private land
                         4.12                                            acquisition, OP 4.12 has been triggered to
                                                                         mitigate any adverse social impacts arising out of
                                                                         housing and slum improvement activities.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No

                         Projects on International         No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                 Page 5 of 14
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The planned investments under the project primarily include: (i) construction of resilient houses
                              and supporting community infrastructure in the districts of Ganjam, Khordha and Puri and; (ii)
                              improvement/ upgrading of urban infrastructure/public services (such as community streets, water
                              connections, sanitation facility, solid and waste water management and street lighting) in
                              Berhampur, the largest city in Ganjam district, which was most severely hit by Cyclone Phailin.

                             Environmental Issues: By and large, the nature and scale of activities associated with these
                             proposed project interventions and their impact on physical and natural environment are not likely
                             to be significant or irreversible per se. However, since the project itself is located in the coastal
                             realms of a state that is marked by various degrees of vulnerability and some sensitive
                             environmental features, there are some risks or issues that need to be managed through appropriate
                             planning and upfront care during the site selection process, particularly in case of settlements/
                             habitations located close to the shoreline or high tide line influence area or in low lying area/s.

                             In a more localized context, some key environmental concerns that would require consideration in
                             the project include: (a) existing blockages of natural drainage system/channels resulting in water
                             logging in some areas; (b) absence of sanitation facilities and open defecation; (c) waste water
                             stagnation and associated health hazards; (d) poor solid waste management practices; (e) uprooting
                             of trees; (f) damage to natural habitats/buffers and; (g) erosion in specific areas. While some of the
                             said environmental issues are associated directly with the cyclone and resultant floods, a few
Public Disclosure Copy




                             others are associated with the over-all quality of life of people in the affected areas. In the
                             aftermath of a disaster, some of these existing environmental issues affect the health and safety of
                             residents (in varying degrees depending on their location) and therefore would require some
                             consideration in the process of reconstruction and redevelopment. Additionally, some
                             environmental issues associated directly with construction such as impacts due to construction
                             material sourcing (laterite stone, sand, water, earth, wood) and management of debris/construction
                             waste would also require some management measures.

                             In view of the potential impacts on the environment, Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental
                             Assessment, OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats and OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources have been
                             triggered, and the project is designated as Category B. On the whole, with proper planning and
                             implementation of management measures, the project interventions are not likely to cause large
                             scale, significant or irreversible damage to natural and/or physical environment.

                             Social Issues: The key social issues identified during a “rapid damage and need assessment”
                             included: (i) fulfilling housing needs of the poor affected households, (ii) improving affected
                             slums in Berhampur with civic infrastructure and services such as access roads, water, sanitation,
                             drainage, and streetlights a socially and environmentally sustainable manner; (iii) ensuring
                             community participation in the reconstruction process; (iv) addressing differential impacts on and
                             recovery needs of the affected vulnerable/ marginalized families and groupswomen headed


                                                                        Page 6 of 14
                          households, and disabled persons, (v) enhancing disaster resilience of coastal communities with
                          secure public infrastructure and services in the worst affected areas, and (vi) minimizing and
                          mitigating any adverse social impacts arising out of any project activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The Project does not involve any private land acquisition. However, the two sub-components of
                          the Project likely to have involuntary resettlement risks are: (a) provision of housing and common
                          infrastructure, in situ and in some cases at new relocation sites in affected villages within 0-5 km
                          of the coas tline in Ganjam, Puri, and Khordha districts, (b) slum improvement activities in
                          Berhampur with the provision of common infrastructure and services such as access and street
                          roads, street lights, drainage, water supply, and sanitation in tenable slums. The actual estimate of
                          land required for housing and slum improvement is not known in view of its emergency nature.

                          Housing: As per the Housing Policy Guidelines issued by the Government of Odisha, new houses
                          will be constructed in situ, or at alternative nearby locations with voluntary relocation of the
                          beneficiaries. In cases where relocation is required the Government will identify appropriate
                          government lands, or purchase private lands ‘free of encumbrances’ from willing sellers for
                          housing with common infrastructure, In case of in situ housing, common infrastructure
                          improvements in existing villages will be undertaken through a community resolution if
                          community land is available or private lands (if minor parcels) are available for donation. The
                          government is preparing details of government lands available and identifying potential sellers to
                          purchase private lands where government land is not available for the housing sub-component.

                           Slum Upgrading: The land requirements for slum improvements will be assessed once ‘activities
                           and locations’ have been finalized. The land provision of community infrastructure such as entry
                           access or inner streets shall be carried out within the available carriageway with design
                           modification as necessary. When additional land is required, which is expected to be moderate
                           with necessary design modifications, such lands shall be purchased as urban land may be hard to
                           obtain through voluntary donation. Sanitation facilities shall be provided where feasible and
                           government land is available. Water supply lines will be laid within the existing carriage way of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the streets. Voluntary donation option shall be explored only in cases of minor impact on legal
                           land and structures (open setback in front of a house, boundary wall, or front portion of a slum
                           tenement). In such cases, the land shall be taken through Voluntary Donation with provision of a
                           free alternative house to the donor/affected family irrespective of their tenure. Any residual
                           adverse impacts arising out of housing or slum improvement works will be assessed and mitigated
                           with preparing and implementing resettlement action plans (RAP) in line with the ESMF
                           complying with the OP 4.12.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The long-term impacts will be generally positive as the project will help in reducing the
                           vulnerability of the people from similar disaster contributing to minimizing loss of life’s and
                           damage to properties. This will stimulate or bring economic and social development in the region.
                           Most significantly, the reduction in the vulnerability of coastal communities, in the state to the
                           adverse impacts of cyclones and climate related hazards will be a desirable long term impact.

                          The up-gradation of slum will also improve the built environment of the slum area through
                          integrating its planning with City Master Plan, which will address site selection, infrastructures
                          needs i.e. storm water drain, sewerage, solid waste disposal, drinking water, roads, street light etc.
                          These interventions are likely to minimize the direct exposure of slum population to hazardous


                                                                     Page 7 of 14
                           environments conditions like low lying area, drainage area, railway line, stagnant drains, solid
                           waste dump site etc. Consequently, the living condition of project benefited slum population will
                           be improved.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Further, the experience when gained during the project implementation would help the
                           implementing agencies in the state, to address environmental and social issues more systematically
                           in their regular operations. The projects treatment of environmental and social issues specifically
                           with regard to the approach used for screening sub-projects (which is based on a robust and
                           scientific methodology) has a potential to set an important precedent for non-project activities/
                           areas now and in the future. At the same time, long-term/indirect adverse environmental and social
                           impacts may result from increased development and alteration of land-use patterns in the sub-
                           project area.

                           No substantial adverse long term social impacts are expected as the new residential settlements
                           shall be within the existing villages or in the near vicinity without causing long term difficulties
                           with regard to daily commute or transfer of goods for marine fishing activities. The settlement
                           plans shall be made with a view to reducing disaster risks. In the slums all proposed infrastructure
                           shall be provided in order to minimize future disaster impact.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The site selection of sub-project play an important role in minimizing the overall adverse impact
                           of the disaster either socially, economically or environmentally. The key activities undertaken as a
                           part of the Project, namely housing and slum up-grading will be carried out in situ. In case of
                           housing, where people need to be shifted to safer locations away from the high tide line of the sea
                           in compliance with the Coastal Regulatory Zone regulations, the government will identify
                           alternate sites in consultation with and written consent of the affected/ beneficiary communities for
                           informed and voluntary relocation. Site selection for the housing sub-project is done with written
                           documentation of broad community consent considering a range of factors such as availability of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           land close to the existing habitation, accessibility, economic suitability, etc. Villages where
                           housing involves significant social issues and villages falling within the CRZ with no alternative
                           sites close by, will be considered for Phase II, subject to the findings of detailed environment and
                           social impact assessment studies. The decision for provision of community infrastructure, land
                           required, and mode of land taking shall be agreed through community consultation recorded in the
                           form of a written community resolution to ensure transparency.

                           The environmental and social screening methodology which involves active community
                           participation and use of scientific tools such as GIS and remote sensing techniques has helped in
                           avoiding/ minimizing adverse environmental impacts on sensitive habitats and in finding
                           alternatives, wherever possible. This methodology has been used for National Cyclone Risk
                           Mitigation Project -I in Odisha, one of the beneficiary states and same methodology will be
                           adopted for this project also.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Management of Environmental issues and Risks. The environment management process and the
                           instrument for the project have been designed keeping in mind the varied scope of work under the
                           two components. Accordingly, to effectively plan, design and integrate environmental dimensions
                           into the over-all project/sub-project preparation and implementation, an Environment and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared. While addressing the immediate needs of

                                                                     Page 8 of 14
                         reconstruction post Phailin, the over-all environment management approach for the project
                         proposes the use of a holistic and integrated approach in the project/sub-project planning process
                         to prevent or at least minimize the vulnerability of people and assets from similar disasters/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         situations in future.

                         Housing Reconstruction. For an appropriate management of issues related to the housing
                         reconstruction keeping both medium and long term perspective in mind, the following key
                         activities would be carried out:
                         a)       Identification of housing reconstruction site/s and Vulnerability Mapping. The
                         identification of site/s for housing reconstruction would be informed by results from a
                         vulnerability mapping exercise to ensure that appropriate sites/locations are chosen keeping in
                         mind the risks from future natural disasters. As part of this exercise, consideration of aspects
                         related to local topographic conditions; natural drainage pattern; existing land use/s; vulnerability
                         to erosion, flooding and other hydro-meteorological events would be necessary. This being an
                         emergency operation, the information/mapping already available with OSDMA/GoO will be used
                         for this purpose.
                         b)       Environmental Screening. Once the housing reconstruction sites are identified/short-listed,
                         an environment screening exercise will be carried out. This exercise will help in identification of
                         environmentally sensitive areas such as presence of National Parks/Sanctuaries, Wildlife
                         Corridors, Reserved/Protected forests, Cultural Properties etc. The results from this exercise will
                         help in: (i) finalizing the sites for the housing reconstruction; (ii) identification of the need to
                         obtain any regulatory clearances (such as Forestry and CRZ clearances) for specific site/s
                         (specifically where relocation is involved) and; (iii) establishing the need to carry out any further
                         investigation/ assessment. Based on this, prioritization and phasing of the civil work program for
                         housing reconstruction would be worked out.
                         c)       Public consultation. Consultation with public, particularly the beneficiary groups and the
                         host population (if involved) will be carried out during various stages of the component
                         preparation. This includes consultations and seeking consensus on site identification and selection;
                         housing designs; infrastructure provision and; for understanding any specific social-economic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needs of the community.
                         d)       Integration of Environmental Requirements. The considerations/requirements will be
                         mainstreamed as part of the over-all decision making and execution process – the selection of
                         sites, designs (including supporting infrastructure) and execution/completion of works.
                         Environment, health and safety requirements to be adhered to during construction will be
                         integrated into the Bidding Documents – this will be relevant only for works where a contractor/
                         construction agency will be engaged.

                         Urban Infrastructure Restoration/Improvement in Berhampur. For an appropriate management of
                         issues related to the urban infrastructure restoration/improvement in Berhampur, including the
                         slum improvement sub-component, the following approach has been suggested:

                         At the Over-all/Sectoral/City Level
                         1.       Conduct Environment and Social Sc reening (including vulnerability dimensions) for the
                         proposed sub-projects/settlements to be included under the project
                         2.       Categorization of sub-projects (to be dropped and those to be taken in first/second tranche
                         of the project) based on results from the screening exercise
                         3.       Preparation of Sectoral Master Plans (including consideration of environment and social
                         dimensions and consultation with key stakeholders at various stages prior to their finalization)



                                                                   Page 9 of 14
                         At the Sub-project Level
                         1.      Preparation of Settlement Profile (including information on environment/social aspects)
                         2.      Preparation of physical plan and/or DPR for the selected sub-project/slum/settlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (covering environment and social dimensions as part of the planning process/criteria)
                         3.      Consultation with concerned Community and other Stakeholders (along with proper
                         documentation of the process and outcome)
                         4.      Seeking of regulatory permissions/clearances, if required for specific sub-project/s
                         5.      Preparation of Bidding Document/s and integration of environment, health and safety
                         requirements as part of it

                         Management of Social issues and Risks

                         The Bank Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) has been triggered in view of
                         the fact that the two infrastructure components in some cases may have involuntary resettlement
                         impacts. These include: (a) provision of housing and common infrastructure in affected villages
                         within 0-5 km of the coastline in Ganjam, Puri, and Khordha districts, (b) slum improvement
                         activities in Berhampur with the provision of common infrastructure and services. The Bank
                         Operational Policy on Indigenous People (OP 4.10) has not been triggered as there are no tribal
                         habitations with unique socio-cultural identity vis-à-vis the mainstream population in the cyclone
                         and associated flood impacted areas covered by the Project within 5 km from the seacoast.

                         An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared providing: (a) an
                         entitlements matrix for mitigating any adverse impacts complying with the Bank OP 4.12; and (b)
                         a gender equality and social inclusion (GESI) framework to address the recovery needs of the
                         disproportionately affected vulnerable/ marginalized groups, specifically those living in scheduled
                         caste habitations without the benefit of agricultural land, secure housing and incomes. The ESMF
                         provides guidelines for free, prior, and informed consultation with the communities, ensuring
                         community capacity building and participation, grievance redress, information disclosure,
                         independent monitoring and evaluation. Requirements of land for project activities will be met
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through provision of government land or purchase or voluntary donation of private land without
                         resorting to land acquisition.

                         Voluntary Land Donation Guidelines: The ESMF provides clear guidelines for carrying out and
                         documenting “voluntary land donation” transparently with prior disclosure of norms and
                         community resolutions. These guidelines are provided to ensure that: land is not acquired from
                         poor and vulnerable land owners who are in the small or marginal category farmers, no pressure is
                         exerted, no adverse impact if generated on the owner’s incomes, shelter, business due to such
                         donation, donated land is free of encumbrances and no land with structures is accepted, land is
                         jointly measured and the government bears all costs towards mutation, and that grievance redress
                         mechanism is established to address concerns of the donor.

                         Resettlement Instruments: Social screening will be carried out as per ESMF guidelines at village
                         levels for housing and at cluster levels for slum improvement works. Based on screening, due
                         diligence reports (DDR) will be prepared in case of no IR impacts are recorded. Short or full RAPs
                         will be prepared and implemented for housing and slum improvement works as per ESMF
                         agreeable to the Bank, prior to commencement of civil works.

                         Gender and Social Inclusion: The ESMF provides a framework on Gender Equity and Social
                         Inclusion. These include: (i) giving priority to vulnerable families including women headed

                                                                  Page 10 of 14
                         families and socially excluded families and those having disabled members in selecting housing
                         beneficiaries, (ii) ensuring broad community consent in beneficiary selection and community
                         participation in the housing activities with involving CBOs, NGOs, as required, (iii) promoting
Public Disclosure Copy




                         owner driven and group based housing schemes with technical and social assistance, and (iv)
                         engendering the housing program with inclusion of men and women beneficiaries and (v)
                         supporting recovery and risk reduction needs of the socially vulnerable and marginalized groups
                         through group based initiatives.

                         Borrower Capacity Assessment. Odisha State Disaster Management Authority (OSDMA) is
                         currently implementing National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project – I (NCRMP-I) and will also be
                         implementing Odisha Disaster Recovery Project. Within the state level PMU (OSDMA), an
                         officer (GIS/Nodal Environment Officer) is in place to lead and co-ordinate aspects and issues
                         related to environmental management on the project. The Nodal Environmental Officer has
                         successfully adopted the environmental management process mentioned in the ESMF prepared for
                         the project, thereby minimizing overall impact on the environment. This process has also
                         contributed to screening out of sub-projects requiring statutory clearance, thereby providing a
                         good platform for well-timed procurements of works and preventing delay in awarding of contract.
                         The Nodal Environmental Officer is currently responsible for overall regular over-sight and
                         monitoring of environmental performance of NCRMP –I at field level.

                         In order to replicate the effectiveness of project planning in ODRP, a substantial time and effort of
                         Nodal Environmental Officer is required for coordinating with all line departments in carrying out
                         the environmental and screening, preparation and documentation of ESMF report. In addition, all
                         the Detailed Project Reports prepared by the line/implementing agencies will also be certified by
                         the Environment and Social Experts of the State PIUs. Hence, the substantial amount of time of
                         Nodal Environmental Officer will be required during project preparation. However, to effectively
                         complete preparation of environmental management document, Nodal Environmental Officer
                         needs to be supported with additional one person who can take over on responsibility of over-
                         sighting and monitoring at the field levels for sub-projects implemented under NCRMP-I.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capacity to manage social management issues. OSDMA to effectively plan and implement
                         reconstruction process shall establish program implementation units (PIU) including social
                         management staff at the state, district and block levels. It will hire a Social Development
                         Specialist, community development officers and community mobilizers for the Project. The
                         implementation arrangements for executing the social management plan will include:

                         •        Having in place a ODCH Support Agency to provide technical and social mobilization
                         support to the housing program. The implementing agency shall comply with relevant
                         environmental and social safeguards of the Bank and applicable statutory provisions.
                         •        Ensuring community mobilization and participation in the planning, implementation and
                         monitoring process with third party quality monitoring mechanisms established, in the form of an
                         appointed Third Party Quality Audit (TPQA) agency to provide independent monitoring.
                         •        An Advisory Committee comprising Civil Society Organisation (CSO) representatives and
                         experts in the fields of social housing, engineering and environmental management will be
                         established to provide technical advice to the OSDMA.
                         •        Establishing district and block level social teams with Community Development Officers
                         and Community Mobilizers to work with Community Recovery Committees formed at the village
                         level to plan and implement activities.
                         •        Resettlement officer for the housing activities will be the Social Housing Head at

                                                                   Page 11 of 14
                          OSDMA.
                          •       A separate social management team will be established at Berhampur Municipal
                          Corporation to manage the slum improvement program. The Commissioner of BeMC or his
Public Disclosure Copy




                          authorized representative (such as Slum Improvement Officer) will be the Resettlement Officer for
                          common infrastructure activities, who will oversee social screening, and preparation and
                          implementation of resettlement action plans.
                          •       Social screening will be carried out and RAPs will be prepared and implemented with
                          hiring consultants and NGOs as required.

                           Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): A GRM will be established with clear guidelines set out
                           for grievance uptake, registration, acknowledgement, follow up, resolution and feedback for social
                           housing and slum improvement activities at different levels. For housing activities, the primary
                           level for informal resolution of grievances will be the community recovery committee (CRC)
                           established at the village/slum level. The Field Level Grievance Redress Committee (FLGRC) will
                           established be at the Block (rural)/Ward (urban) level. The senior level GRC (SLGRC) will be
                           established at the District level and at the Municipality Corporation level for rural and urban
                           activities respectively. These GRCs will formally register, acknowledge, follow up, resolve and
                           communicate the decision to the aggrieved party. The uptake points from the grievances will be
                           Block/Ward Office and the District Collector/Municipal Commissioner Office respectively. The
                           grievances can be communicated by letter, e-mail, or phone, which will be registered by GRCs
                           and acknowledged with a receipt/tracking number, and resolve the grievances within two weeks.
                           OSDMA will document and monitor the working of the GRM. The decision of District/Municipal
                           Corporation level GRC will be final and the applicant not satisfied with the decision can seek legal
                           remedies. The Collector /Municipal Commissioner while resolving “group grievances” or
                           grievances having “policy implications” shall refer the matter to the OSDMA for advice.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the program being supported under the proposed operation – Project Beneficiaries (individual/
                           community), local bodies like village Panchayats and municipalities; local NGOs, Odisha State
                           Disaster Management Authority, Berhampur Municipal Corporation, and secondary stakeholders
                           includes selected government department such as Revenue and Forest.

                          Consultations: Stakeholder participation is central to design and implementation of the project and
                          provides for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. A consultation
                          framework has been laid out in the Environment and Social Management Framework to ensure
                          proper consultation and participation of stakeholders at the various stages of Program preparation
                          and implementation. OSDMA conducted a state-level stakeholder consultation at Bhubaneswar on
                          December 2, 2013 to discuss the Project objectives and key concerns of the stakeholders. The
                          consultation was attended by district and block level officials, UNDP, UNICEF, Oxfam, Care-
                          India, and local NGOs. The state level consultation was followed up with community
                          consultations to discuss the project, form community recovery committees, finalize the beneficiary
                          list and obtain written community consent for the housing construction program. This community
                          consultation process will also be carried out in the slum clusters of Berhampur to discuss and roll
                          out the upgrading activities. The ESMF has been prepared with free, prior and informed
                          consultations held including in the tribal villages affected by the cyclone. More such community/
                          stakeholder consultations will be carried out during design and implementation stage. The
                          feedback/inputs from these field based discussions/consultation will be involved during detailed


                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                           plan preparation process for the various sub-project sites, specifically on site selection, design of
                           the facility, technological choices and other such maters identified.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Disclosure. The ESMF is expected to be disclosed by January 7, 2014 and all relevant project
                           documents will be disclosed on OSDMA website and at the field office/ community level in
                           compliance with the Right to Information Act, 2005 and Bank’s safeguards requirements. The
                           OSDMA has uploaded beneficiary lists, village resolutions, and location map for each village of
                           the Ganjam district on its website and will do the same for the rest of the villages. Community
                           level disclosure will cover public disclosure of beneficiary lists, action plans, key instructions, and
                           contact addresses. The project sites will have a display board indicating the project logo, year of
                           construction initiation and completion, name of the funding agency, and the beneficiary list.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            17-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed on OSDMA web site: http://www.osdma.org/HRPdocument.aspx?
                                         vchglinkid=GL042&vchplinkid=PL097
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           India                                                            17-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Disclosed on OSDMA web site: http://www.osdma.org/HRPdocument.aspx?
                                         vchglinkid=GL042&vchplinkid=PL097
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?




                                                                      Page 13 of 14
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Sector Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Deepak Singh
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)                          Date: 17-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (SM)                    Date: 17-Jan-2014




                                                                       Page 14 of 14
