INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
6                                              Report No.: JSDSC1O97
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kyrgyz Republic            Project ID:   P151102
Project Name:   Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)
Task Team       Nathalie Weier Johnson
Leader:
Estimated       02-Jun-2015                Estimated     15-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal       Multi-focal area
Area:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%), Forestry (50%),
General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %)
Theme(s):       Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Other environment and natural
resources management (20%), Biodiversity (10%), Climate change (40%)
U       Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      19.11            Total Bank Financing:   15.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     15.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                4.11
Total                                                           19.11
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
1. Project Development Objective(s)


﻿The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity for sustainable forest
ecosystem management. The Global Environmental Objective is the same as the PDO.
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
O
U         The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity for sustainable forest
ecosystem management.
C. Project Description
a      The forestry sector in the Kyrgyz Republic has the potential to provide additional but more
importantly more sustainable benefits to the national economy and local communities and to help
address local and global challenges brought on by poverty, land degradation and climate change. The
inability of government to support existing forest policies such as the National Forest Program to
Support the Implementation of the Concept of the Development of the Forest Sector (2005-2015) and
the current management structure of the forestry sector perpetuate a cycle of inadequate oversight
and inefficiency. This is due primarily to the centralized top down nature of the management, the
lack of adequate information and investment in the sector, weak capacity, and perverse incentive
structures which may lead to rent seeking behavior.
The WB/GEF project will build upon the work and policy reform agenda that the government has
initiated and which is currently being supported by a number of donors. The donor support however
is in the most part limited to provision of technical assistance and has limited capacity for providing
the necessary institutional capacity building and support and roll out of community based resource
management in the wider landscape. Most importantly these reforms are being spearheaded through
by the State Agency for Environmental Protection and Forestry (SAEPF) themselves.
The project aims to support an ecosystem-based approach to the improved management of the area
controlled by the forest enterprises- leskhozes including forested lands, pasture, and unproductive or
marginal lands. This will be done through support for institutional reform and capacity building, the
introduction of participatory management planning at the leskhoz level and support for the
implementation of those plans in pilot areas. The current implementation of leskhoz management
plans makes it difficult for communities to access these pastures and acts as an impediment to a
coordinated land management strategy.
The project will complement the on-going World Bank project "Pasture and Livestock Management
Improvement Project" by strengthening the management and coordination of pasture under leskhoz
control as well as through adoption of lessons learned from the implementation of the sub-component
'Forestry Enterprise Pasture Management and Investment' which will support the piloting of co-
management arrangements between pasture user unions and the leskhozes. The technical
underpinnings of the project design are informed by the PROFOR 2012 study entitled "The
Development Potential of Forests in the Kyrgyz Republic" as well as preliminary case studies from
pilot leshkozes which are testing the reform model. The results of the ongoing analytical study
"Understanding Communities Roles in the Governance of Forests and Pastures in
Kyrgyzstan" (March 2015) which is examining the institutional, legal and operational capacity
development needs for integrated territorial governance, the opportunities for improved forest
management, and the potential to limit land-based conflict, environmental degradation and improve
local livelihoods, will also be used to elaborate and refine project design.
World Bank involvement in the forestry sector reform is seen as critical because of the expertise the
Bank brings from similar experiences in other countries in the region and around the world and in


﻿reforming state-owned enterprises and because the scale of resources needed to achieve the
objectives of meaningful reform can only be provided through the proposed WB/GEF project.
The project will sponsor interventions in rural areas and support communities through the improved
O
access and management of the natural resource base the communities depend upon. Development of
participatory management plans and support for the implementation of these plans will improve the
sustainable management of natural resources to protect natural resource dependent livelihoods.
Through more inclusive and participatory management planning, the project will also empower the
sometimes disenfranchised rural poor to engage in decisions on the development and use of resources
that they are dependent upon. The process of participatory management planning will also create
opportunities and incentives for the leskhozes to work in partnership with communities to reach the
objectives of improving sustainable forest ecosystem management and rural livelihoods.
The project will utilize experiences and lessons learned from the recent piloted forest sector reforms
to broaden and solidify the institutional frameworks that support community co-management of
forest resources in Kyrgyz Republic. With regard to implementation, the project will support the
development of a framework approach for adaptive management during project implementation to
provide flexibility in defining needs for training, capacity building, investment and TA based on
lessons learned.
The project has three components:
COMPONENT I: Forest Sector Institutional Reform:
Institutional reform and capacity building will be required at the national, local and community level.
To implement and develop the new approaches required for the different models of leskhoz and
community participation, substantial support will be required to develop the framework and to build
capacity at all levels of government as well as within all stakeholder groups. The project will provide
technical assistance and capacity building at the national level to support the development of the
policy, legal, regulatory and institutional framework, based on the lessons learned through the
implementation of the pilot activities. This support will be undertaken in a consultative and
participatory manner, to ensure that all relevant stakeholders' views and opinions are considered and
to develop ownership and support for the way forward.
As part of the development of community based resource management in the participating leskhozes,
the project will support the preparation of new Participatory Management Plans. These management
plans will be based on participatory rural appraisal and technical input with respect to available
natural resources and sustainable levels of production. These plans will include all resources (i.e.
forest timber and non-timber products such as walnuts, pistachios, mushrooms, hunting, and pasture
carrying capacity, provision of water, tourism opportunities, carbon sequestration, etc.) and will
identify the needs and inputs required to implement the plan (i.e. to utilize areas of summer grazing
where there is a need for investment in water points, overnight shelter, etc.). These participatory
management plans will be developed with the involvement of relevant stakeholders (e.g. local users,
user associations, leskhoz staff, local government, as well as the relevant technical departments
within the SAEPF). These plans will identify sustainable economic diversification options based on
the ecological and economic potential. Management planning will be based on integrated ecosystem
approaches to manage multiple objectives of ecological services including biodiversity, tree cover
and sustainable economic use.


﻿This component will also provide the technical assistance and capacity building required to support
the technical development of the National Forest Inventory, Participatory Management Planning
process within the Forestry Departments, and for the establishment, operation and maintenance of the
Forest Management Information System (FMIS). Technical assistance will be provided to users of
O
the FMIS including the Forestry Departments, the leskhozes, local and regional governments, and
local users and user association. The SAEPF will be given specific support in developing a sound
monitoring framework for the ongoing development of the sector.
At the local level, support will be provided for community mobilization to commence the formation
of user associations (if required - in some leskhoz areas, there may already be a Pasture Users Union
which has the capacity and the desire to participate in the development and implementation of part
icipatory management plans) and in generating the enthusiasm for participation in the new processes.
This will also involve working with the relevant local authorities and the leskhoz management.
Support will also be provided to work with local participants and the Department of Forest and
Hunting Inventory and Planning to develop the participatory management plans.
Technical assistance will also be provided directly to the users associations and also individual
applicants for the grants. This assistance will help the applicants prepare business plans and to make
assessment of the financial, and economic viability and the overall environmental sustainability.
COMPONENT II: Strategic Investments and Piloting of Sustainable Management Approaches:
This component will support the implementation of the leskhoz Participatory Management Plans, and
other strategic investments critical for the reform. Depending on the investment needs, different grant
models will be developed and criteria prepared for application, review and award of grants. For
example if investment is needed for common or shared resources (such as water points or overnight
shelters to encourage the use of currently underutilized summer pastures, silvo-pastoral systems in
specific areas, forest improvement activities, plantation forests with short rotation for biomass
production, construction of check dams etc.) user associations could apply for a grant to make these
investments for the community as a whole. It is envisaged that the Participatory Management Plans
will define opportunities for public/private partnerships and where possible and appropriate the out
sourcing of some of the current leskhoz responsibilities (such as seedling production) to the private
a       sector will be proposed. Some grants may be better suited for individual or household applications in
areas such as: sustainable timber management including investment in the value chain, nursery/
seedlings production, agroforestry, production and processing of nuts/fruits, eco-tourism, etc.
Eligibility criteria will be developed to encourage the active participation of the poorer sectors of the
community with special attention given to the inclusion of women.
Ecological and environmental diversification activities including climate smart agriculture and low
carbon pasture management will include emphasis on the potential leverage/attraction of private
financing or other financing sources and long-term enterprise sustainability.
COMPONENT III: Information and Monitoring and Evaluation:
Better and more accessible information at the national and local level on baseline resources, tenure,
supply and demand, poverty, etc. will be required to support the development and implementation of
new leskhoz management plans. Baseline information, maps, surveys, will all be funded under this
component. This component will include an update of the National Forest Inventory (NFI) which


﻿was partially completed in 2009 by FAO. This partial update did not include the use of new remote
sensing or interpretation but relied on old forest boundary definitions with some new field sampling.
This sub-component will provide new satellite imagery to define the extent of forest and pasture
resources under the management of the SFEs. The relatively new FAO sample data will be used in
O
U       conjunction with limited new ground-truthing. The methodology for modem statistically sound
sample based NFI will be established, and the capacity built within the Department of Forest and
Hunting Inventory and Planning to continue the update of the NFI on an ongoing basis and post
project. As part of project monitoring and for the continued improvement of the NFI, a second set of
images will be procured and interpreted in the project's final year.
A forest management information system (FMIS), will be established in the Department of Forest
and Hunting Inventory and Planning to store, analyze, retrieve and report on the data that will be
generated during the implementation of the national forest inventory, the preparation of management
plans and the monitoring of the management plan implementation (and other relevant sector
indicators). This system will be developed to facilitatethe monitoring of management plan
implementation based on various physical, ecological, economic and social indicators. The proposed
system will include a web-based portal which will allow for various levels of access (with password
protection for confidential information) to facilitate greater transparency and online submission of
data, and reporting by users and leskhozes. The system will be modular and would include: remote
sensing of land cover and land use data, on-line reporting of economic activit ies, financial and
administrative data, forest inventory data, biodiversity data, and online reporting of forest law
enforcement activities. The FMIS will support the generation of summary statistics and reports on
critical indicators at local, national, and international levels.
Given the fluid and progressive nature of the proposed support for reform in the forestry sector, the
monitoring and evaluation elements of this project are particularly critical. The M&E framework for
the project will be designed to closely monitor and track lessons learned, both failures and successes
so these can be incorporated into the project implementation plans. The monitoring and evaluation of
the on-going piloting process will be crucial to defining and agreeing on how best to deploy the
resources available under the Credit and GEF Grant.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
As the participating leskhozes will be determined through the course of project implementation,
specific project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguards analysis are yet
to be determined.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Current Borrower's Institutional Capacity in this area is limited and as part of the project, targeted
support will be provided to the PIU on capacity building for Safeguard Policies.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ash Gurkan (GSURR)
Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will support activities in lands managed


﻿OP/BP 4.01                               by the Forest Enterprises (i.e. no natural forests) with
the intention of improving the environmental
management of these areas. Any tree planting
undertaken will avoid the use of invasive non-native
species, as well as monoculture establishment.
Due to the unknown nature of the grant activities/
subprojects under Component 2, the Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be
developed by the borrower to define the procedures
for environmental screening and the development of
the grant/ site specific environmental impact
assessment studies (EIAs) and the site specific
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). The
environmental assessment conducted will cover both
environmental and social risks of the project
including potential tensions between forests and
pasture communities, assessing different scenarios,
opportunities and risks of community-based forest
management, as well as gender-specific roles and
impacts, if any, of proposed forest management
measures.
Should activities under Component 3 include the
rehabilitation of the facilities of SAEPF and other
institutions Environmental Management Plans and
checklists will be developed by the borrower.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          While the project will specifically limit/prohibit
activities in natural habitat areas, the team is
triggering this OP to ensure that the ESMF includes
actions and safeguards in case there are natural
habitats that will be impacted by project
interventions.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         This project is aimed at the improvement of public
and private forest management practices. All forest
blocks/concessions covered by this project are
already under management plans under
implementation.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         Due to the possibility of establishment and support to
nurseries, this OP is being triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project support is aimed at the improvement of
BP 4.12                                  public and private forest management practices as


﻿well as supporting community-based natural resource
management approaches. There is a possibility that
as a result of the participatory management planning
exercise, some short term and maybe permanent
changes to access of pastures, forests and other lands
might be proposed and supported under the project.
"Seed fund" under the Project Component 2 will
provide seed grants to forest enterprise ecological
and environmental diversification activities. These
may include sustainable timber management
including value chain, nursery/seedlings,
agroforestry, silvo-pastoral systems, plantation
forests with short rotation for biomass production,
nuts/fruits and processing, livestock/pasture, eco-
tourism, payments for environmental services as
determined by assessments and community co-
managed enterprise process. Thus the project aims at
bringing changes in the management, protection, or
utilization of forest resources. Community or small-
scale harvesting forest projects by small-scale
landholders or local communities requires adherence
to forest management standards consistent with
World Bank requirements for a forest certification
system or must adhere to a time-bound action plan to
achieve such standards. Any tree planting undertaken
will avoid the use of invasive non-native species, as
well as monoculture establishment.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
*   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
A framework for the ESMF will be prepared by June 1st, 2015 and will be applied to any
LesKhozes identified to be included in the project's activities.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader: Name: Nathalie Weier Johnson
Approved By:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)                    Date: 18-Dec-2014
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/   Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                    Date: 18-Dec-2014
Manager:


