                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA1112
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Feb-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Armenia                           Project ID:    P146199
                            Project Name:      Electricity Transmission Network Improvement Project (P146199)
                            Task Team          Artur Kochnakyan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          26-Jan-2015                       Estimated   30-Mar-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEEDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Other urban
                                              development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      69.16           Total Bank Financing:                 52.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 17.16
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    52.00
                              Total                                                                                    69.16
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objectives (PDO) are to improve the reliability of the power
                           transmission network and system management, and support the Government efforts in ensuring
                           adequate electricity supply
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         The project will have three components:

                         Component 1: Strengthening of the power transmission network. This component will finance:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.1: Rehabilitation of Ashnak substation of High Voltage Electric Networks
                         (HVEN). This sub-component will help reducing the number of equipment failures caused by
                         technical reasons, and, thus, improve the reliability of power transmission network. This 220/110/10
                         kV substation is essential for ensuring reliable power supply to consumers in Eastern and North-
                         Eastern parts of Armenia, including a large dairy products company, an asphalt plant, and a diamond
                         polishing and jewelry production factory, which employ around 3,500 people.

                         This sub-component will finance replacement of all key plant and equipment in the substation,
                         including, but not limited to: complete rehabilitation of 220 kV OSY and 110 kV OSY; replacement
                         of main transformers; complete rehabilitation of 10 kV cubicles and the associated building;
                         installation of the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition System (SCADA) and replacement of
                         protection relays, replacement of house transformers; and construction of a new building for control
                         rooms. HVEN will implement this sub-component.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation of YTPC’s substation. This sub-component will help reducing the
                         incidence of equipment failures at 220/110/35 kV YTPC substation. The substation is used for
                         evacuation of electricity from the modern and efficient CCGT plant with 240 MW of installed
                         capacity. The existing CCGT plant at YTPC accounts for 20 percent of the total annual electricity
                         generation in the country. Therefore, it is essential for ensuring adequate and low-cost electricity
                         supply to all of the 1,040,000 electricity consumers in the country.

                         This sub-component will finance replacement of all key plant and equipment in the substation,
                         including, but not limited to: rehabilitation and expansion of 220 kV Open Switchyard (OSY) and
                         rehabilitation of 110 kV OSY; installation of new main transformers; installation of SCADA and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         replacement of protection relays; construction of a new building for control rooms in OSY;
                         reconnection of disconnected OTLs required for evacuation of power from YTPC. YTPC will
                         implement this sub-component

                         Sub-component 1.3: Project implementation support to HVEN. This will include support in technical
                         supervision of rehabilitation works at Ashnak substation.

                         Sub-component 1.4: Project implementation support to YTPC. This will include support in technical
                         supervision and safeguards compliance of rehabilitation works at YTPC substation.

                         Component 2: Improvement of the power system management. This component will finance:

                         Sub-component 2.1: Establishment of a back-up dispatch center. Establishment of a back-up dispatch
                         center will allow improving the management of the power system. Specifically, it is important for
                         ensuring continuous management and control of the power system in case the primary dispatch
                         center (located in down-town Yerevan) fails due to technical or other reasons. In 2012-2014, the
                         primary dispatch power system was down an average of 22 minutes per year.

                         The back-up dispatch center will allow to immediately restoring the control and management of the
                         power system in case of such failure. If the operation and management of the system is not restored,


                                                                     Page 2 of 8
                         then it may jeopardize reliability of power system operation, which may cause electricity supply
                         outages. The proposed back-up dispatch center will be located in an existing building owned by the
                         MENR.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component will finance renovation of the interior space, procurement and installation of the
                         mimic board, primary and back-up servers, fiber-optic connection with the nearest Haghtanak
                         substation, and other civil works and equipment required for a back-up dispatch center. HVEN will
                         implement this sub-component.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Construction of a new administrative building for HVEN. Construction of a new
                         administrative building will enable HVEN to improve the efficiency of its operations because current
                         administrative building has a very limited space with an average office area of 5 square meters per
                         person (no overstaffing at HVEN) and limited space for transmission system control and
                         management systems. This results in overcrowded offices and low productivity, which impacts the
                         efficiency of operations.

                         The construction of administrative building will be done on an existing land plot belonging to HVEN
                         nearby the existing administrative building. It will include construction of 3-4 story building to
                         provide enough space for staff, equipment, and other functions. HVEN will implement this sub-
                         component. Specifically, HVEN will finance from its own funds preparation of the design, bills of
                         quantities, and bidding documents for the works. The loan proceeds will be used to finance only the
                         construction works and purchase of office equipment and accessories.

                         Component 3: Preparation of a new electricity generation project. This component will finance:

                         Sub-component 3.1: Preparation of a new CCGT project. The power system will need around 500
                         MW of new gas-fired generation capacity to preclude the emergence of a supply capacity gap by
                         2020. The new CCGT is part of the Government’s least-cost power supply plan until 2030. The
                         Government plans to construct the new CCGT with private sector involvement, which will require a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         number of preparatory activities for which no financing is available.

                         This sub-component will include support for preparation of a bankable feasibility study,
                         environmental and social impact assessment, transaction advisory and other technical assistance
                         required for preparation of a new CCGT project. YTPC will implement this sub-component.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Project audit. This will include financing of project audits. HVEN will be
                         responsible for the selection of the auditor. Consolidation of the project annual financial statements
                         to be audited will be made by HVEN based on inputs provided by YTPC.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         (a) YTPC substation: The substation is located on the territory of the YTPC and the territory of the
                         substation is fenced. The substation is accessible from the road which passes nearby the YTPC. The
                         land around the substation carries no vegetation. There is limited agricultural activity to the East of
                         the substation.

                         (b) Ashnak substation: The substation is located nearby the city of Talin in the Aragatsotn marz
                         (region) and is critical for ensuring reliable power supply to customers in Western and North-
                         Western parts of Armenia. The territory of the substation is fenced. It is accessible by a main road,


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         which passes nearby the facility. The vehicles can enter the substation using the small road
                         specifically constructed for accessing the substation from the main road. The land around the
                         substation is used for agricultural activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (c) Back-up dispatch center of Electric Power System Operator. The main part of the premises to be
                         provided for the back-up center is on the second floor of an existing building in the city of Yerevan.
                         An additional small structure will be constructed adjacent to the existing building within the territory
                         around it which is fenced and has an access road from a free-way.

                         (d) Administrative building of HVEN: The new building will be located near the existing
                         headquarters of HVEN in the city of Yerevan. The land plot for the potential new building is already
                         owned by HVEN and is fenced across the circumference.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)
                         Sarah G. Michael (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment          Yes             The project is not expected to have significant
                         OP/BP 4.01                                        irreversible impact on the natural environment,
                                                                           because proposed works will be undertaken within
                                                                           the footprint of the existing infrastructure. The main
                                                                           risk associated with the rehabilitation of power
                                                                           substations is related to the generation of hazardous
                                                                           waste. Environmental Management Plans (EMPs)
                                                                           developed for works at the substations provide
                                                                           detailed instructions for on-site storage of acid
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           batteries and used oils as well as recommendations
                                                                           for safe recycling of oils should HVEN and YTPC
                                                                           opt to treat and sell them for re-use. Construction of
                                                                           an administrative building for HVEN and
                                                                           arrangement of premises for a back-up dispatch
                                                                           center of EPSO will have negligible negative impacts
                                                                           on the natural and social environment, and Checklist
                                                                           EMPs were prepared for those works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No              The two substations, which will be rehabilitated as
                                                                           part of the project, and the sites allocated for the
                                                                           construction of the back-up dispatch center and the
                                                                           administrative building of HVEN are not located in
                                                                           areas of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              The two substations, which will be rehabilitated as
                                                                           part of the project, and the sites allocated for the
                                                                           construction of the back-up dispatch center and the
                                                                           administrative building of HVEN are not located in
                                                                           or nearby any forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              Pesticides will not be applied for vegetation control


                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                                                                              in substations or any other purpose related to the
                                                                              construction or operation phases of the project.
                            Physical Cultural Resources       No              Works to be undertaken will have no impact on any
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.11                                        known historic/cultural monument.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP          No
                            4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/      No              OP 4.12 is not triggered as the rehabilitation of the
                            BP 4.12                                           Ashnak and YTPC substations is expected to take
                                                                              place within the existing fenced footprint of the
                                                                              current substations. No land acquisition or
                                                                              resettlement is expected. Access roads to the
                                                                              substations are in a good condition and will not
                                                                              require repairs and there will be no need to use any
                                                                              land in the vicinity of the substations.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No              Project implementation does not include any works
                                                                              on dams and no part of the project-supported
                                                                              infrastructure depends in its operation on any
                                                                              existing dam.
                            Projects on International         No              The project activities will not use and not influence,
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              in any manner, any national or international surface
                                                                              waters and groundwater resources.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                            BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is not expected to have significant irreversible impact on the natural environment and
                              is therefore classified as environmental Category B. All proposed works will be undertaken within
                              the footprint of the existing infrastructure. Rehabilitation of substations may result in generation of
                              hazardous waste, such as replaced acid batteries and used transformer oils potentially containing
                              PCBs. Waste disposal is a generally challenging task in Armenia due to lack of adequate
                              infrastructure and effective control mechanisms. Some types of hazardous waste, including
                              replaced acid batteries and transformer oils, are being put in storage until the Government finds
                              acceptable and affordable solutions for their permanent disposal. Site-specific Environmental
                              Management Plans (EMPs) developed for works at the beneficiary substations provide detailed
                              information on the conditions of the allocated on-site storage facilities and lay out instructions for
                              safe storage.

                              Small scale civil works for the arrangement of premises for the back-up dispatch center of EPSO
                              and construction of an administrative building for HVEN will be undertaken within fenced plots
                              belonging to beneficiary institutions which urban setting, with minimal likelihood of any
                              environmental and social impacts that will be addressed by adhering to simplified checklist EMPs
                              prepared for these works and by applying general good construction practice.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities

                                                                          Page 5 of 8
                           in the project area:
                           The social impact of this project is positive as it will improve the reliability of electricity supply in
                           the country, enhance power system management, and support the Government efforts in ensuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adequate electricity supply. The project will create benefits for all energy consumers in the
                           country, including vulnerable and impoverished households. Temporary positive impacts will also
                           include economic benefits through the employment of local people during construction work. It
                           should be noted that improvement of electricity supply reliability will be especially beneficial for
                           people who spend most of their time at home such as the elderly, children and women as well as
                           those who have the primary responsibility for cooking and cleaning, typically women.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           HVEN developed EMPs for works planned at the Ashank substation, YTPC substation,
                           administrative building of HVEN and establishment of back-up dispatch center. The project will
                           be implemented by HVEN (works at the Ashnak substation) and by YTPC (works at the YTPC
                           substation). HVEN is an implementing agency for the ongoing Electricity Supply Reliability
                           Project (ESRP), under which it will receive capacity-building on managing environmental and
                           social aspects of its activities. HVEN uses consultant services for day-to-day supervision of
                           safeguards under ESRP, and will use services of a hired safeguards specialist for the purposes of
                           ETNIP. TOR for the consultant was shared with the Bank. YTPC has not been previously involved
                           in implementation of Bank-supported projects and has no in-house capacity to manage application
                           of safeguard policies. Administration of YTPC will be obligated to hire and maintain an
                           environmental consultant of with the background and skills adequate for ensuring good
                           environmental performance during works at the substation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           HVEN, administrations of individual power substations, and all electricity consumers in Armenia
                           supplied with substations targeted under ETNIP are key beneficiaries and stakeholders of the
                           project.

                           The project will support widespread stakeholder information-sharing and consultation. The project
                           activities and potential risks will be communicated in a transparent manner. The project will
                           promote gender-sensitive consultation mechanisms at all stages. A grievance redress mechanism
                           will also be in place to support citizen engagement with the project. This GRM will be operated by
                           HVEN for both substations and allow project affected people and other interested stakeholders to
                           submit all types of complaints, suggestions, or questions related to the project.

                           All EMPs drafted during the project preparation were disclosed in Armenian and English
                           languages through sending hard copies to communities and posting on the web-site of HVEN and
                           MENR. EMPs for the rehabilitation of power substations and for construction of the back-up
                           dispatch center and administrative building of HVEN were open for the feedback from potentially
                           affected communities by advertising locations for accessing hard copies of these documents and
                           contact information for submitting questions and comments. Finalized versions of all safeguard
                           documents were re-disclosed on January 30, 2015 along with documentation on public
                           consultation process.


                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       31-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Armenia                                                              30-Jan-2015
                           Comments: EMP were disclosed on the web-site of the HVEN and hard copies made available
                                         for communities in the vicinity of individual project sites.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Artur Kochnakyan
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Agnes I. Kiss (RSA)        Date: 02-Feb-2015
                            Advisor:
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)   Date: 02-Feb-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
