                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                     Report No.: ISDSA7091

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jan-2014
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Madagascar                        Project ID:    P148749
                                                       Parent         P131945
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     AF-Emergency Support Critical Education Health and Nutrition Services
                     (P148749)
   Parent Project    Madagascar Emergency Support to Critical Education, Health and Nutrition
   Name:             Services Project (P131945)
   Task Team       Jumana N. Qamruddin
   Leader:
   Estimated                                           Estimated   27-Feb-2014
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit: AFTHE                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Health (100%)
   Theme(s):         Nutrition and food security (70%), Child health (20%), Population and
                     reproductive health (5%), Health system performance (5%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      10.00           Total Bank Financing:                10.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                               10.00
     Total                                                                                     10.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?



                                             Page 1 of 7
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to preserve critical education, health and nutrition
   service delivery in targeted vulnerable areas in the recipient’s territory.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent


   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
A multi-sector approach to address emergency needs in food security and nutrition through the
agriculture, nutrition, social protection and environment sectors is proposed through two coordinated
financing mechanisms. In this context, the proposed US$10 million Additional Financing (AF-
P148749) to the existing Emergency Support to Education, Health and Nutrition Services Project
(P131945) is being prepared concurrently with the proposed Emergency Food Security and Social
Protection Project (Agricultural Project - P147514) for an amount of US$65 million to address the
rising risks of food insecurity in the country and its impacts on the well-being of the population.

The proposed AF will finance the costs associated with the geographic scale-up of activities under
the nutrition component of the original Project (P131945). Specifically, the proposed AF will scale-
up support to community nutrition sites for delivery set of “nutrition-specific” or “direct” nutrition
interventions to address child malnutrition in additional regions of the country as well as support
multisectoral activities delivered through the nutrition sector that promote food security at
community and household levels. These activities are complementary, in terms of geographical
targeting and types of activities, with the Agriculture Project which is focusing on improving food
security through restoring agricultural production in severely locust-affected areas as well as
preserving production in the country’s functioning rice-baskets and delivering “nutrition-sensitive”
interventions through the agriculture sector. The AF will be scaled up in four of the same regions as
the Agriculture Project as well as two additional districts affected most severely by the on-going
locust infestation and most at-risk for worsening nutrition outcomes.

The original project development objective (PDO) is “to preserve critical education, health and
nutrition service delivery in targeted vulnerable areas in the recipient’s territory”. There will be no
change in the PDO under the proposed AF. The proposed closing date of the AF is July 31, 2016, the
same date as the original project. The proposed IDA credit to the Republic of Madagascar for an
amount of US$65.00 million aims to maintain basic services in education, health and nutrition. Key
constrains to improving education, health and nutrition outcomes include significant supply side
constraints in the public sector and a sharp increase in private costs of services, due to cuts in public
financing since 2009, as well as a weak governance and management environment. The proposed
operation prioritizes therefore activities that will result in facilitating access to basic education and
health services through a reduction of private cost of services and the easing of supply side
constraints.

Project Description

The project design of the Parent Project (P131945) was kept simple and built on existing activities


                                              Page 2 of 7
that could either be continued or scaled-up. The Parent Project has the following three components:

Component 1: Preserving Critical Education Services which includes a) subsidies to community
teacher salaries, b) support to school grants (Fonds catalytiques locaux, FCL, c) Delivery of a school
health and nutrition package, and d)Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation.

Component 2: Preserving Critical Health Services which includes: a) delivery of a critical package
for pregnant women and children under five at health facility level and b) Project management and
monitoring and evaluation

Component 3: Preserving Critical Nutrition Services which includes a) support basic community
nutrition services in delivering a set of direct nutrition interventions, and b) support project
management and monitoring and evaluation.

The proposed AF will only scale-up Component 3 of the Project Delivery of direct nutrition
interventions which includes:
a)      Supporting community nutrition sites in targeted areas (subcomponent 3a). Specifically
financing will geographically scale-up support to delivery of the package under the Parent Project
outlined in Table 1 below. In addition, the component will finance training community nutrition
agents (CNAs); providing nutrition inputs; building capacity for community nutrition workers in
community education, counseling services, referrals, regular weighing, and culinary demonstrations;
and recruitment of Non-Governmental Organizations to support capacity building and supervision
for CNAs.
b)      Project management and monitoring and evaluation (Component 3b) associated with the
scale-up of activities. Specifically, this subcomponent will continue to finance operational costs for
the community nutrition sites and the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) as well as supervision costs
by the PIU and other relevant entities related to project activities, including the National Nutrition
Office (ONN) and each Regional Nutrition Office (Office Régional de Nutrition) in the targeted
areas including scaling up the use of mobile phones for data collection and information sharing.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Activities will be focused in the regions of Androy, Atsimo Atsinanana, Vatovavy Fitovinany, Haute
Matsiatra and Amoron‘i Mania. In addition, with the proposed AF nutrition activities under
Component 3 of the Project will be scaled-up to the following regions: Vakinankaratra, Itasy, Atsimo
Andrefana.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Paul-Jean Feno (AFTN1)

 6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              While this AF is not financing activities with
 BP 4.01                                             environmental impacts, OP 4.01 is triggered in
                                                     the original project.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No

 Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No




                                             Page 3 of 7
   Pest Management OP 4.09             No

   Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
   BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

   Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
   4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

   Projects on International        No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
   7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The Parent Project is classified as an EA Category B since activities funded under the project are
     not expected to have significant negative environmental and/or social impacts. The Parent Project
     triggered only one World Bank safeguards policy, namely OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
     Assessment) due to the activities under Component 2 of the Project related to interventions
     delivered at health facility level. The parent project does not involve land acquisition leading to
     involuntary resettlement and/or loss of access to resources or livelihoods. In accordance with OP
     8.00 and to guide the environmental and social assessment and mitigation process, an
     Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) was prepared by the
     Task Team, which underwent a thorough Participatory Public Consultation, and was disclosed
     publicly by the Borrower during project implementation.

     Given the proposed Additional Financing is only scaling-up interventions under Component 3 of
     the Parent Project, there are no safeguard policies triggered. Therefore the risks outlined in the
     ISDS and ESSAF for the Parent Project are not relevant for the activities being scaled-up under
     the proposed AF.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     The potential environmental and social impacts of the parent project are foreseen to be of small-
     scale and site specific, thus easily mitigated. No long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen
     during project implementation. The proposed AF will contribute to preserving delivery of basic
     social services in the nutrition sector by making services available, accessible and affordable.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N/A
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


                                               Page 4 of 7
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
While the parent project does not expect to undertake civil works, the ESSAF includes measures
for addressing environmental and social impacts of the repair and rehabilitation of existing
facilities, should it become necessary to undertake them during project implementation. Since the
activities under component two of the parent project aim to increase access to health services, the
production of both medical and pharmaceutical waste in the various care centers and pharmacies in
the country is also expected to increase. Therefore, to ensure due diligence, notably on the
consistent treatment of medical waste and elimination of expired pharmaceutical drugs in the
health sector by the Government of Madagascar and its service providers, the ESSAF indicated
that a national medical waste management plan (NMWMP) would be developed building upon the
2007 national policy (on pharmaceutical drugs elimination guideline). In this context, MWMP
(NMWMP) was developed and disclosed in the country and Infoshop on March 23, 2007. The
NMWMP was updated and re-disclosed on November 17, 2011.

Since Board approval of the Parent Project, the Ministry of Health has undertaken the revision of
the existing National Medical Waste Management Policy to capitalize the results obtained and
lessons learned from the past as well as to update the indicators to be achieved for the next five
years. The Terms of Reference (ToRs) for this revision were reviewed by the different donors and
development partners in the Health sector including the World Bank. The Ministry of Health
adopted a participatory approach for this revision and the updated National Medical Waste
Management Policy. The existing National Medical Waste Management Plan which will serve as a
safeguards instrument for the parent project (activities under component 2) is now undergoing an
update to meet the safeguards requirements outlined in the ESSAF.


The original target date in the Parent Project was to have an updated National Medical Waste
Management Plan (2013-2016) reviewed by the Bank and disclosed by February 13, 2013. But,
the client felt it important to a revised draft National Policy before the Plan was updated. The
Bank has been working with the client over the past few months on updating the NMWMP which
is now under advanced stages of preparation and the aim is to have the NMWMP reviewed by the
Bank and disclosed by January 31, 2014. The main updates to the MWMP are focused on taking
into account the estimated increase in population from 2013 to 2016. Further, the NMWMP’s
operational plan covered the period 2007-2011 so a new operational plan has been drafted for
inclusion in the updated NMWMP which indicates specific activities (along with milestones for
delivery) that will be supported by the Parent Project through the end of 2016.

While the MWMP (2013-2016) still needs to be finalized and disclosed, the health facilities
supported by the Parent Project are the same as those supported under the on-going Second
Multisectoral STI/HIV/AIDS Prevention Project (SMSPP- P090615). The SMSSP operates under
the current MWMP with strong performance on implementation of safeguard activities. The
SMSSP supports a number of key activities including maintenance of incinerators and periodic
training of health facility staff. Safeguards performance under this Project continues to be rated
Satisfactory. Given that these are the same health facilities targeted by the activities under
Component 2 of the Parent Project, the safeguards activities supported by the SMSSP benefit the
Parent Project of the proposed AF.

Given the delay in effectiveness of the Parent Project, the procurement of health commodities
triggering safeguards have also been delayed. Therefore, the disclosure of the updated MWMP and


                                          Page 5 of 7
  the implementation of relevant activities under Component 2 of the Project will remain sequential.

  For continuing management of safeguards under the Parent Project, all safeguards implementation
  related aspects will be led by the existing department of SAGS (Service d'Appui au Génie
  Sanitaire) - which has a Social and Environmental Focal Point (SEFP) to ensure that the MWMP
  is properly addressed throughout project implementation. SAGS is fully operational and has the
  institutional capacity to manage the safeguard aspects related to the Parent Project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The Recipient is familiar with World Bank safeguards policies, through the implementation of
  other World Bank-funded projects. During and throughout the project supervision, the World
  Bank task team will assess the appropriate implementation of the MWMP under the Parent Project
  and subsequently recommend additional strengthening measures whenever required or relevant.
  Information sharing with the public will be part of the capacity building plan, to be accomplished
  with the help of local media and communication systems. As noted above, given that the focus of
  the AF the scale-up of Component 3, no safeguards policies are triggered. As such, the proposed
  AF will not support the implementation of specific safeguards activities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Jan-2014
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Jan-2014
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Madagascar                                                       00000000
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
 report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies



                                            Page 6 of 7
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader: Name: Jumana N. Qamruddin
   Approved By
   Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                      Date: 13-Jan-2014
   Advisor:
   Sector Manager:     Name: Olusoji O. Adeyi (SM)                          Date: 13-Jan-2014




                                             Page 7 of 7
