                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC7473

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Africa                           Project ID:      P126661
                            Project Name:       SAPP-Program for Accelerating Transformational Energy Projects (P126661)
                            Task Team           Mustafa Zakir Hussain
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           12-Sep-2014                      Estimated        21-Oct-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEEDR                            Lending          Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         20.00                 Total Bank Financing:       20.00
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                     20.00
                              Total                                                                         20.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to facilitate the preparation of priority regional energy projects
                           in the Southern African Power Pool region.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project has the following three components:

                           Component A: Setting up the Project Acceleration Team (total cost US$7 million). This component
                         will finance the establishment of a Project Acceleration Team, a high caliber core team in charge of
                         moving forward the preparation of the regional projects identified as priorities to Southern African
                         Power Pool (SAPP) region. The PAT will respond directly to the SAPP Coordination Center and will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         consist of a Coordinator and a number of key personnel covering all the key functions needed to
                         prepare regional energy projects (including technical and financial analysis; legal and transaction
                         advisory; environmental and social management; procurement; financial management; etc.). The
                         PAT will assess and adjust to the type of role it needs to play on a specific project, which may range
                         from taking over selected or all preparation activities to providing financing to the concerned
                         agencies and ensuring that preparation effectively serves the needs of project stakeholders. The PAT
                         will be expected to provide close guidance to government agencies and utilities on the appropriate
                         packaging and allocation of preparation work and the information requirements prior to bidding out
                         projects or components of projects. IDA funding will be used as efficiently as possible and in a way
                         to enable and crowd in private sector funds for project preparation activities. The costs related to
                         renting an office for the PAT and other operating expenses will also be covered under this
                         component.

                         Component B: Project Preparation Funds (total cost US$10 million). The funds in this component
                         will be managed by the PAT and be used for a variety of tasks related to preparation of large and
                         complex energy projects, including technical, economic and financial feasibility studies;
                         environmental and social assessments; preparation of legal documentation and financial transaction
                         advisory services, especially related to PPA negotiations; etc. Significant technical and legal support
                         is likely to be required as well as stakeholder events, roadshows, etc. There will be some flexibility in
                         earmarking funds as long as they are clearly used to improve the quality of project packages and
                         enable sponsors and credit agencies to commit commercial equity and debt. Depending on the stage
                         of the process, the funds may be used independently or jointly with the funds of a project sponsor to
                         advance project preparation. Funds may also be used to support the public sector in its dealings and
                         negotiations with the private sector. No funding will be used to finance infrastructure works.

                         Component C: Analytical support to SAPP (total cost US$3 million). This component will support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         critical analytical work to build a solid knowledge base to investment decisions and help ensure long-
                         term sustainability of investments. A key task will be the update and revision of the SAPP Regional
                         Generation and Transmission Expansion Plan (SAPP Pool Plan) based on a ‘risk scenarios
                         approach’, which will allow to better capture the diverse structural risks associated to regional
                         integration. The analysis will also include a ‘robustness’ assessment, which will help identify options
                         to adjust investment decisions to such risks as well as isolate projects that remain robust under all
                         circumstances and that should thus be prioritized. The SAPP Pool Plan revision will be supported
                         and complemented by a number of studies potentially including: (a) a review of the generation and
                         transmission expansion plans of the various SAPP members, including an assessment of power trade
                         expectations and potential; (b) a mapping of the energy resources available to the SAPP region with
                         a specific focus on renewable resources; and (c) major regional environmental and social impact
                         studies, to improve the understanding and mitigation of the key risks associated to the
                         implementation of large-size and complex energy projects. The exact number and scope of these
                         studies remain to be defined. A key study will concern the link between water use and energy
                         development in the region. Funding may be allocated for follow-on work on these studies to inform
                         preparation of specific projects as well as for dissemination among planners, policymakers and
                         investors.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           The Project will support preparation of large and complex regional energy projects (including
                           technical, economic and financial feasibility studies, environmental assessments, legal
                           documentation and financial transaction advisory services) throughout the Southern Africa Power
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pool region. This is a technical assistance project and no funding will be directly allocated to finance
                           any infrastructure or physical activities that could cause adverse environmental or social impacts and
                           effects. The Project will finance detailed studies for new generation and transmission projects that
                           might have future environmental or social impacts, if and when the related investments materialize.
                           The projects to be prepared with support under this Project have not yet been selected.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Project will be implemented by the Project Acceleration Team to be established under the SAPP
                           Coordination Center. The SAPP is a highly credible entity. It is supported by a number of donors
                           including the EU, USAID, SIDA and Norway and relies on a well-established institutional
                           framework. Its self-governance structure is robust and clear on the functions of its various
                           committees, sub committees and working groups. Africa’s mains regional institutions and notably the
                           African Union Commission attributes to the SAPP a lead role in advancing regional energy projects
                           that are identified as top priorities to expand electricity supply and access in the Southern Africa
                           Region. The SAPP has been at the forefront in promoting such projects with the Coordination Center
                           being recognized as key enabler, especially since it was appointed project coordinator for the Central
                           Transmission Corridor and the ZIZABONA projects, two of the key transmission projects in the
                           region. The Coordination Centre has significant experience in administering donor funds and
                           complying with donor’s requirements regarding environmental and social due diligence, safeguards
                           and oversight. Nonetheless, the Coordination Center has limited capacity in a number of areas
                           relating to project preparation, for which it relies mostly on external consultants. In order to ensure
                           that the SAPP and the Coordination Center can deliver up to expectations, the current team needs to
                           be substantially enlarged and its competencies strengthened to adequately cover all the functions
                           required for preparation of large and complex energy projects. The establishment of a dedicated
                           Project Acceleration Team is intended to fulfill this objective. The Team will include a Coordinator
                           and a number of experts providing the key profiles needed for project preparation, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           technical, financial, legal, regulatory, transaction advisory, environmental and social management,
                           financial management and procurement. Team members will be a mixture of senior and mid-career
                           highly credible specialists with strong track record of project development using public and private
                           funding.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Despite the project being a technical assistance
                           BP 4.01                                               (TA) project aimed at facilitating project
                                                                                 preparation and capacity building, it is proposed
                                                                                 that the project is classified as safeguards
                                                                                 category “A” project. While the TA project will
                                                                                 not finance any infrastructure or activities which
                                                                                 may have direct environment or social
                                                                                 footprints on the ground, it will finance detailed
                                                                                                                                 studies for potential new generation and
                                                                                                                                 transmission projects that might have significant
                                                                                                                                 potential environmental or social impacts, if and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 when these investments materialize. Part of the
                                                                                                                                 project objective and activities will be to
                                                                                                                                 introduce environmental and social assessment
                                                                                                                                 and management systems, which comply with
                                                                                                                                 good practice and would result in a range of
                                                                                                                                 safeguards instruments. The first of such
                                                                                                                                 instruments anticipated during project
                                                                                                                                 implementation would be an overall
                                                                                                                                 Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                                                                 Framework (ESMF), providing strategic
                                                                                                                                 guidance to the SAPP on the development and
                                                                                                                                 application of environmental and social criteria
                                                                                                                                 in project screening, prioritization, and
                                                                                                                                 development. Further instruments to be
                                                                                                                                 prepared under the Project will be ESIAs, RPFs
                                                                                                                                 and other required studies (e.g. cumulative
                                                                                                                                 impact assessments) complementing the techno-
                                                                                                                                 economic development of specific projects.

                                                                                                                                 The ESMF will also provide a detailed
                                                                                                                                 safeguards screening that will identify which of
                                                                                                                                 the Bank’s safeguards policies would be
                                                                                                                                 triggered for future project development, and
                                                                                                                                 establish a road map for the production of the
                                                                                                                                 required instruments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No

                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No

                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.12
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Apr-2014
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared as part of the TA
                             project implementation, which will include a set of criteria, procedures and methodologies for
                             environment and social risks identification, screening and evaluation. It would also describe in
                             detail the procedures and instruments for environmental and social assessments, mitigation and
                             monitoring of environmental and social risks and impacts, related to each investment once the
                             details regarding location, footprint and design are known. The framework will define the overall
                             “Environment and Social Management System” for SAPP, which will be a regional foundation
                             and guidance for preparation of trans-boundary power trade projects. For the purpose of appraisal,
                             detailed terms of reference (TOR) for the ESMF have been prepared, as well as generic
                             requirements for other, more downstream anticipated safeguard instruments. As any other
                             safeguards instrument, the TOR has been submitted for public disclosure, review and comments
                             on the website of the SAPP and at the World Bank’s InfoShop.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader:      Name: Mustafa Zakir Hussain

                           Approved By:
                           Regional Safeguards Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                         Date: 19-Aug-2014
                           Coordinator:
                           Sector Manager:     Name: Lucio Monari (SM)                                 Date: 28-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
