                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC3364

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kenya                           Project ID:     P145234
                            Project Name:      Kenya Petroleum Technical Assistance Project (KEPTAP) (P145234)
                            Task Team          Alexander Johannes Huurde
                            Leader:
                            Estimated                                          Estimated       24-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     SEGM2                           Lending         Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Public administration- Energy and mining (40%), Oil and gas (40%), Other
                                               Mining and Extractive Industries (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Other environment and natural resources management (50%), Other
                                               accountability/anti-corruption (25%), Other Private Sector Developme nt (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     50.00                    Total Bank Financing:        50.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
                              Total                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of the GoK to manage its
                           extractive industries sector for sustainable development impacts.
                           C. Project Description
                           COMPONENT 1: Petroleum Sector Reforms and Capacity Building
                         Through the activities grouped under Component 1, at the policy level, the Project would support the
                         drafting of a comprehensive Petroleum Policy outlining a vision and policy for the petroleum sector.
                         Also, through this Component the Project would provide technical assistance to develop a Petroleum
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Master Plan that considers strategic options and decision hierarchies for policies and investments in
                         the Project Area on a sound economic basis. A National Communication Strategy (NCS) would also
                         be developed to empower a greater proportion of the Kenyan public to effectively access, understand
                         and participate in the ongoing dialogue on using the petroleum and mining deposits as a source of
                         national wealth.

                         At the regulatory level, the Project would support the implementation of a comprehensive, clear and
                         workable regulatory framework for the development of Kenya’s petroleum resources. At the same
                         time, the Project would support the implementation of institutional reforms including the
                         identification and division of roles, establishment of new institutions if needed and capacity building
                         for relevant institutions.

                         At the transaction level, the Project would also support capacity building for negotiation of
                         petroleum deals. Also, through this Project, GoK would hire and contract consultants for provision of
                         transaction advisory services. The Project would also support the acquisition, interpretation and
                         promotion of geodata in the Project Area and capacity building related to petroleum cadastre
                         database of the Project Area.

                         The Project would also provide technical assistance to manage the impacts from the petroleum sector
                         including the implementation of health & safety reforms, implementation of environmental and
                         social reforms and development of a framework for oil spill preparedness and response capacity.

                         COMPONENT 2: Revenue and Investment Management Reforms and Capacity Building
                         Through the activities grouped under Component 2, the Project would support the design and
                         implementation of fiscal framework reforms in order to improve extractive industries taxation in
                         Kenya. The Project would also address transparency and accountability across the extractive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         industries value chain through a variety of mechanisms including technical assistance to subscribe to
                         and become compliant with EITI.

                         The Project would also provide technical assistance for drafting and implementing the appropriate
                         legal and institutional mechanisms to allocate revenues from the extractive industries in a balanced
                         way. In addition, through this Component, the Project will provide technical assistance to the
                         Ministry of Finance and Central Bank for the design and implementation of the appropriate fiscal
                         mechanisms to address 1) the finite nature of most natural resource endowments (e.g. savings funds)
                         and 2) the volatility of resource revenues (e.g. dedicated buffer or price stabilization funds).

                         Also, the Project would finance capacity building for setting-up a robust system of public financial
                         and investment management in anticipation of extractives revenues and potential increase in public
                         investments.

                         COMPONENT 3: Project Management.

                         The Project proceeds would also be used for the management and coordination of the Project and for
                         building GoK’s procurement, financial management, safeguards management, monitoring and
                         evaluation capacity through the provision of technical advisory services, training, acquisition of
                         goods, and operating costs.
                           The activities under this proposed project, as described above, will be performed at the central
                           government level and any procurement of goods and services will be targeted to the onshore areas of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Kenya as well as a limited set of offshore locations (" exploration blocks") which are not subject to
                           any dispute.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This is a desk top study and not related to a physical project.

                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Institutional capacities for assessing and implementing the requirements and standards of the
                           Safeguards Policies are limited. Assistance from the Project will be extended to the Ministry of
                           Environment and Mineral Resources, NEMA and other relevant institutions to design and implement
                           sector specific regulations, standards, frameworks and baselines for petroleum operations. The
                           Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment and safeguards support will inform the Government
                           on environmental and social management of the sector, including environmental and social impacts –
                           including understanding of the gender dimensions of the sector, involuntary resettlement, and health
                           and safety. Strengthening of resettlement policies, guidelines and practice standards will complement
                           the policies aimed at maximizing the positive aspects of large scale petroleum industry development,
                           such as access to infrastructure and power, job creation, increased employment opportunities and
                           business development. The project will support the development of an Environmental and Social
                           Management Information System, the purchase of environmental monitoring equipment for sampling
                           and testing of water, air and soil to support inspections and monitoring of operations. Advisory
                           Services and Training for NEMA staff to strengthen their capability of providing effective and
                           efficient oversight of petroleum sector in accordance with sector-specific environmental regulation
                           and in line with international best practice will be provided. The project will develop procedures,
                           standards and processes related to Hazardous Waste Management and Gas Flaring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Nyambura Githagui (AFTCS)
                           Sanjay Srivastava (AFTN3)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 has
                           BP 4.01                                                been triggered. The TA Project will improve the
                                                                                  client’s environmental management capacity on
                                                                                  key environment and social issues relating to
                                                                                  petroleum operations. Therefore a Strategic
                                                                                  Environmental and Social Assessment will be
                                                                                  undertaken. The SEA to be prepared as part of
                                                                                  the project TA will include an assessment
                                                                                  environmental and social impacts, involuntary
                                                                                  resettlement, and health and safety aspects in
                                                                                  Petroleum operations. Terms of Reference for
                                                                                  Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
                                                                                                                                 (SESA) will be consulted upon and disclosed
                                                                                                                                 before appraisal.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                       No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                                No

                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                           No

                                 Physical Cultural Resources OP/                                   No
                                 BP 4.11
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                                     No                            The SESA will undertake social analysis to
                                                                                                                                 identify areas with potential presence of
                                                                                                                                 indigenous or vulnerable population including
                                                                                                                                 risks resulting from future petroleum operations.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP                                    No                            The TA project does not envisage any land
                                 4.12                                                                                            taking or preparation of future investments that
                                                                                                                                 may involve involuntary land acquisition. The
                                                                                                                                 SESA will, however include analysis of socio-
                                                                                                                                 economic aspects of typical petroleum
                                                                                                                                 operations, including areas for strengthening of
                                                                                                                                 resettlement policies, guidelines and practice
                                                                                                                                 standards in Kenya, which can complement the
                                                                                                                                 local resettlement policies
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No

                                 Projects on International        No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2014
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      -A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be undertaken during the project
                                      implementation. A terms of reference and scope of SESA will be prepared as part of preparation.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Alexander Johannes Huurde

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 04-May-2014
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (SM)                                                                                     Date: 05-May-2014




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
