                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA2884
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Congo, Democratic Republic                 P131027
                                                                            Project ID:
                                               of
                            Project Name:      Inga 3 and Mid-Size Hydropower Development TA (P131027)
                            Task Team       Jean-Christophe Carret
                            Leader:
                            Estimated       26-Nov-2013                           Estimated   11-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: AFTG2                                  Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Hydropower (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (70%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     106.50           Total Bank Financing:                  73.10
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  73.10
                              African Development Bank                                                                   33.40
                              SOUTH AFRICA Development Bank of Southern Africa
                                                                                                                          0.00
                              (DBSA)
                              Total                                                                                     106.50
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the sustainable development
                         of Inga 3 Basse Chute (BC) and selected mid-size hydropower projects.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The TA project consists of two components: (a) Inga 3 BC development support, and (b) mid-size
                         hydropower development support.

                         Component A – Inga 3 BC development support (total cost US$73.5m; of which IDA US$43.2m and
                         AFDB US$30.4m)

                         This component will build on the feasibility study for the development of the Inga site and associated
                         interconnections financed in 2010-13 by the African Development Bank (AfDB). It will finance
                         complementary studies, transaction advice and procurement support, and institutional support and
                         sector strengthening. The scope of activities that will be financed by the TA will be influenced by the
                         fine tuning of the allocation of activities and responsibilities between the public and private sector
                         regarding the design and construction management of the common infrastructures.
                         Component A will consists of three sub-components.
                         Sub-component A1 will finance the preparation of complementary studies identified in the feasibility
                         study. This includes: technical studies to complete the reference project design, social and
                         environmental studies and panels, and economic studies, including power supply-demand analysis.
                         Sub-component A2 includes technical, legal and financial assistance for the structuring of the Inga 3
                         BC development, including support on the development of legislation, transaction support for the
                         selection of the concessionaire for the power house and the transmission lines, advice on power sales,
                         and support for the bidding process of the common infrastructures.
                         Sub-component A3 will finance the establishment and operationalization of ADEPI. This includes
                         preparatory activities to structure ADEPI, such as studies on organization and staffing I, as well as
                         assistance for staff recruitment. This subcomponent will also finance the cost of recruitment
                         processes, staff, office equipment, operational costs, the organization of workshops of ADEPI, and
                         the development and the implementation of a consultation and communication strategy for the Inga 3
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BC development.
                         COMPONENT B – Mid-size hydropower development support (total cost US$23.3m; of which IDA
                         US$23.3m)
                         The component aims to develop midsize hydropower projects (with capacity between 10-100 MW)
                         by selecting potential projects, performing prefeasibility studies, accompanying bidding processes,
                         and evaluating the possibilities for carbon finance. The component will result in detailed feasibility
                         studies and the development of bidding documents, and support to the Government of the DRC to
                         select private developers and award concessions for three mid-size hydropower projects.
                         Component B will consist of three sub-components
                         Sub-component B1 will finance analysis of the institutional, regulatory and legal framework for the
                         development of mid-size hydro projects and the preparation of the additional legal texts ad
                         regulations to accompany the electricity law to regulate participation of the private sector in the
                         development of mid-size hydropower project.
                         Sub-component B2 will: (i) assess the eligibility for carbon finance for Inga 3 BC development and
                         mid-size hydropower projects; and (ii) develop of a CDM Program of Activities (PoA). Advice will
                         be provided to the GoDRC on how carbon finance operations work in general and an assessment of
                         prospects, options and requisites for carbon finance, and the implications on hydropower project
                         design.
                         Sub-component B3 will support the operation of the CGI3. It includes the consultants’ costs, office
                         equipment, operational fee, counselors, organization of workshops and communication.

                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The current project is a technical assistance project and does not include any construction nor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operational activities. The project will support studies and technical assistance the preparation of the
                         Inga 3 BC development and to the design of mid-size and decentralized hydropower projects.

                         The Inga 3 BC development is located on the Congo River, near the port of Matadi, in the Bas-
                         Congo province and will have a power generation capacity in the order of 4,800 MW. Project
                         infrastructures will include a water intake on the Congo River, upstream of the water intake for Inga
                         1 and Inga 2 existing power stations, an 12 km long canal diverting water in the Bundi valley, a 100
                         m high dam in the Bundi valley ,and a hydropower station equipped with 11 units releasing water in
                         the Congo river downstream of Inga 1 and 2 power stations.

                         Inga-3 BC is the next phase of a series of hydropower development at the Inga site. The Inga 3 BC
                         project will be designed in a way to allow future development phases but will constitute a fully
                         viable project on its own. Environmental assessments planned include Environmental and Social
                         Impact Assessment (ESIAs) for the Inga 3 BC development (including a cumulative impact
                         assessment of Inga-3 BC and Inga-3 HC developments) and for the transmission lines in the DRC.
                         The assessments will include substantial environmental and social baseline information on the Inga 3
                         BC development site.

                         The areas of impacts and areas of influence for the Inga 3BC development are as follows:
                         -       Area of impact: the Bundi river and reservoir, the dam site and the downstream part of the
                         Congo river down to the sea.
                         -       Area of Influence: the area upstream and downstream of Inga likely to be affected by Inga-3
                         BC from a socio-economic, physical, or biological point of view.

                         Although this is clearly outside of the geographical and temporal boundary of the proposed project, it
Public Disclosure Copy




                         is worth mentioning that the development Inga 3 HC is expected to have a larger footprint as the
                         Bundi reservoir elevation is increased and a dam will be constructed across the Congo River. The
                         reservoir that will be created over time by the Inga site subsequent phases will eventually cover about
                         40 km2, and raise water levels as far as 180 km upstream.

                         The second component of the project will include preparing pre-feasibility studies for 30 potential
                         sites for mid-size plants (10-100 MW) and feasibility studies, environmental and social assessments,
                         as well as technical specifications and bidding documents for the three selected sites to be developed
                         under Public Private Partnerships. It will support to GoDRC for the selection of three private
                         developers for the three selected hydropower sites, including the preparation of the bidding process,
                         the signature of the exclusive cooperation agreements, and the supervision of the developers’ activity
                         all the way to the signing of the concession agreements.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Hocine Chalal (AFTN1)
                         Nathalie S. Munzberg (LEGEN)
                         Antoine V. Lema (AFTCS)
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (AFTN1)




                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                         6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes            The TA will finance the ESIA for Inga 3 BC
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.01                                      development hydropower complex and the ESIA
                                                                      for Inga 3 BC transmission line from Inga to the
                                                                      border with Zambia. These studies will update
                                                                      and complete the initial ESIA prepared by
                                                                      AECOM-RSWI/EDF, which was commissioned
                                                                      by the GoDRC with African Development Bank
                                                                      (AfDB) financing. The ESIA will review all
                                                                      foreseeable potential adverse impacts and include
                                                                      an ESMP. The ESIA will also include a
                                                                      cumulative impact assessment of Inga-3 BC and
                                                                      Inga-3 HC developments. ToRs have been
                                                                      disclosed in-country and in the Bank Infoshop.

                                                                      An environmental and social impact assessment
                                                                      (ESIA) of transmission lines within DRC will be
                                                                      carried out. These transmission lines will follow
                                                                      essentially the same corridor as the existing ones
                                                                      leading to the Zambian border and the
                                                                      corresponding ToRs for this ESIA have been
                                                                      disclosed in-country and in the Bank Infoshop.

                                                                      Moreover an Environmental and Social Impact
                                                                      Assessment (ESIA) will also need to be prepared
                                                                      for the transmission lines extending beyond the
                                                                      territory of DRC (outside the scope of the TA
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      project). However it is expected that the ToRs of
                                                                      this ESIA will be shared with the World Bank in
                                                                      a timely fashion, in order to ensure consistency
                                                                      with its policies, procedures, and standards.

                                                                      ESIAs for the mid-size hydropower projects will
                                                                      be prepared in accordance with operational policy
                                                                      OP4.01 once the sites of these projects is known.
                                                                      The ToRs for these ESIAs have been disclosed
                                                                      in-country and in the Bank Infoshop.

                                                                      Finally, an environmental and social expert panel
                                                                      will be set up to advise DRC on the
                                                                      environmental and social aspects of this project in
                                                                      accordance with OP/PB 4.01 for projects which
                                                                      are classified “A”. ToRs of the Panel of Expert
                                                                      have been disclosed in-country and in the Bank
                                                                      Infoshop.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes            The initial ESIA carried out during the Inga
                                                                      feasibility study mentions that four IUCN Red


                                                              Page 4 of 14
                                 List mammal species have been identified in the
                                 Inga area: Chimpanzee (Endangered);
                                 Hippopotamus (Vulnerable); Bay Duiker (Least
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Concern); Sitatunga (Least Concern). Regarding
                                 the presence of chimpanzees, local people report
                                 the continued presence of chimpanzees in
                                 forested areas beyond the left bank of the river at
                                 a level adjacent to Inga, and in the hilly areas
                                 beyond the right bank just upstream of Inga
                                 extending to Luozi. Considering the small
                                 footprint of the Inga-3 BC development which
                                 falls within the current SNEL concession area it
                                 is not expected that there will be an impact on the
                                 above mentioned species. Subsequent possible
                                 developments might (HC and beyond) have
                                 significant impacts but as mentioned above this is
                                 beyond the scope and impact boundaries of the
                                 Inga-3 BC.

                                 However, more details will be provided by the
                                 proposed Inga ESIA regarding the presence of
                                 these species, in particular chimpanzees, the
                                 potential impact on them of the development of
                                 Inga 3 BC, measures to mitigate this impact, and
                                 if possible the measures to improve the protection
                                 of these species.

                                 Aquatic biodiversity: The Inga zone of the Congo
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 River is rich in diversity of fish species. One
                                 assessment states that 146 fish species have been
                                 identified in the Inga area, of which only the
                                 African Butter Catfish (Schilbemystus) is
                                 included in the Red List (Least concern in Central
                                 Africa). However, the assessment also states that
                                 four fish species have been identified as endemic
                                 to this part of Bas-Congo. In particular, the ESIA
                                 for Inga 3 BC development hydropower complex
                                 will reflect the Red List concern regarding the
                                 impact of Inga development on these species.

                                 The initial ESIA also notes (i) the presence of
                                 endemic species of micralestes and
                                 micropanchax, which could be threatened by the
                                 development of the full Inga, and (ii) that it is
                                 “certain” that a number of species, particularly
                                 those adapted to the deepest parts of the river (up
                                 to 100m deep) remain to be discovered. In



                         Page 5 of 14
                                                                         presenting the report, the consultant also noted
                                                                         the dearth of information on the possible presence
                                                                         and behavior of migratory fish species, which
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         would be particularly impacted especially during
                                                                         the subsequent Inga-3 HC development.

                                                                         Given the importance of the aquatic diversity in
                                                                         the Inga area, it would be appropriate to initiate
                                                                         as soon as possible long-term support for
                                                                         scientific research that will guide efforts to
                                                                         mitigate these impacts in both the medium-term
                                                                         (i.e. for Inga-3 BC) and the long–term (i.e. Inga 3
                                                                         HC and subsequent hydropower developments at
                                                                         Inga) in collaboration with international research
                                                                         centers who are or have been involved in
                                                                         researching the aquatic biodiversity of Bas-
                                                                         Congo. The ESIA of the Inga-3 BC hydropower
                                                                         complex, whose ToRs have been prepared, take
                                                                         into account these aspects of biological diversity.
                                                                         The project includes financing for a
                                                                         supplementary biodiversity study, should it be
                                                                         required.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                Yes             There is 2.6 km2 of forest in the project area
                                                                         concerned by the Inga-3 BC hydropower
                                                                         development Moreover, the transmission lines
                                                                         could have potential impacts on the forest even if
                                                                         they will use the same corridor as existing lines.
                                                                         The ToR for the ESIA for the construction of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         Inga 3 BC hydropower complex and the ToR for
                                                                         the ESIA of the transmission lines routes from
                                                                         Inga to the Zambian border, include provisions to
                                                                         address forestry concerns.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              This policy is not triggered under the project.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Many studies carried out in DRC indicate that
                         BP 4.11                                         the country is rich in cultural resources.
                                                                         Moreover, the transmission line will cross at least
                                                                         two countries before arriving in South Africa. In
                                                                         order to protect potential cultural resources which
                                                                         could be affected by the project, ToRs for ESIA
                                                                         for Inga 3 BC hydropower complex and the
                                                                         ESIA for the transmission line from Inga to the
                                                                         border with Zambia include provisions for the
                                                                         preparation of a cultural resources management
                                                                         framework (CRMF). The TORs for an ESIA
                                                                         submitted for the transmission line outside DRC
                                                                         will also need to reflect these considerations.


                                                                 Page 6 of 14
                                                                        Potential cultural heritage issues related, for
                                                                        instance, to graves, fetishes, sacred trees, altars of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        traditional religion, and other cultural assets that
                                                                        might be affected, particularly by the
                                                                        transmission lines, will be reviewed as part of the
                                                                        CRMF. ToRs regarding these aspects have been
                                                                        prepared and disclosed in-country and in the
                                                                        Bank Infoshop.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    Yes             There are no indigenous people settlements at
                                                                        the Inga 3 BC site project area or its immediate
                                                                        area of influence. The transmission lines,
                                                                        however, may cross areas inhabited by
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples. But, the alignment of the
                                                                        transmission lines is yet to be preciselyknown, as
                                                                        it is subject to the feasibility study. An
                                                                        Indigenous People Planning Framework (IPPF)
                                                                        will be prepared and disclosed for the section of
                                                                        the transmission lines within the DRC borders.
                                                                        ToRs have been prepared and disclosed in-
                                                                        country and at Bank’s Infoshop.

                                                                        Beyond the DRC border and along the
                                                                        transmission line corridor the presence of
                                                                        Indigenous Peoples will have to be confirmed. If
                                                                        this is the case an Indigenous People Planning
                                                                        Framework (IPPF) will have to be prepared once
                                                                        the details of which parties will be financing and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        implementing these associated facilities are
                                                                        known. It is expected that the ToRs of this IPPF
                                                                        will be shared with the World Bank in a timely
                                                                        fashion, in order to ensure consistency with its
                                                                        policies, procedures, and standards.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes             The TA project will finance a social impact
                         4.12                                           assessment and a resettlement action plan
                                                                        focusing on the Inga 3 BC hydropower complex
                                                                        and on the transmission lines in DRC. The ToR
                                                                        for the RAP of Inga 3 BC development will serve
                                                                        to update and complete the initial RAPprepared
                                                                        by AECOM-RSWI/EDF, which was
                                                                        commissioned by the GoDRC with African
                                                                        Development Bank (AfDB) financing. The TORs
                                                                        for a RAP for the Inga 3 BC hydropower complex
                                                                        and for a RAP for transmission lines up to the
                                                                        Zambian border have been prepared and
                                                                        disclosed in-country and at the Bank’s Infoshop.




                                                                Page 7 of 14
                                                                   Beyond the DRC border and along the
                                                                   transmission line corridor the likelihood of
                                                                   involuntary resettlement will have to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   confirmed. If this is the case a Resettlement
                                                                   Action Plan (RAP) will have to be prepared. At
                                                                   this stage the details concerning the parties who
                                                                   will finance and implement these associated
                                                                   facilities are not known. It is expected that the
                                                                   ToRs of this RAP will be shared with the World
                                                                   Bank in a timely fashion, in order to ensure
                                                                   consistency with its policies, procedures, and
                                                                   standards.

                                                                   For component B (feasibility studies for mid-size
                                                                   hydropower development) potential involuntary
                                                                   resettlements on the sites of the mid-size
                                                                   hydropower plants will be assessed and RAPs
                                                                   will be also prepared for which the corresponding
                                                                   ToRs have been prepared and disclosed in-
                                                                   country and at the Bank’s Infoshop.

                                                                   ToRs for a community development plan for
                                                                   communities at the Inga site have been disclosed
                                                                   in-country and at the InfoShop.

                                                                   At present, there are four villages and an
                                                                   encampment (Camp Kinshasa) located in the
                                                                   SNEL concession area at Inga. To facilitate the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   construction of the Inga-3 BC hydropower
                                                                   complex and, eventually, Inga-3 HC
                                                                   development, these villages and the camp will be
                                                                   moved and relocated outside the concession. The
                                                                   community development plan and RAP will also
                                                                   address historically pending environmental and
                                                                   social issues related to Inga 1 and 2, which were
                                                                   built in the 1970s without Bank financing. The
                                                                   ToRs for the Camp Kinshasa/villages RAP have
                                                                   also been disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                   InfoShop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   Yes            The Inga-3 BC development will include a large
                                                                   dam in the Bundi valley (100 m high) and a canal.
                                                                   The TA project will support the consolidation of
                                                                   the geotechnical knowledge of the area and the
                                                                   preparation of a preliminary geotechnical baseline
                                                                   report.

                                                                   Sediment management is known to be a critical



                                                           Page 8 of 14
                                                                                 issue on Inga-1 and Inga-2. An appropriate
                                                                                 sediment management strategy will have to be
                                                                                 designed for the Inga-3 BC development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 A dam safety panel of experts for Inga-1 and
                                                                                 Inga-2 is already in place since March 2011. It
                                                                                 comprises five specialists (geotechnical, concrete,
                                                                                 sediment, dam, electro-mechanics) who conduct
                                                                                 at least bi-yearly visits to the site and produce
                                                                                 associated reports.

                                                                                 The Dam Safety panel for the proposed project
                                                                                 will have the same composition. ToR the full
                                                                                 duration of the mission of the Panel have been
                                                                                 disclosed in-country and in the Bank Infoshop.
                            Projects on International            Yes               OP 7.50 applies to projects that carry out
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 detailed design and engineering studies for
                                                                                 hydroelectric projects involving the use of
                                                                                 international waterways. Consequently the
                                                                                 Minister of Hydraulic Resources and Electricity
                                                                                 has notified the Congo River basin Organization
                                                                                 (CICOS) on October 12, 2013, CICOS in turn has
                                                                                 sent notification to the twelve riparian countries
                                                                                 of the Congo basin on November 4, 2013.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                    The project is not located in a disputed area, nor
                            7.60                                                 is the project area likely to become one in the
                                                                                 foreseeable future.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The current project is a technical assistance project and does not include any construction nor
                              operational activities. The project will support studies and technical assistance the preparation of
                              the Inga-3 BC development and to the design of mid-size hydropower projects.

                              Expected negative impacts associated with the future Inga-3 BC development during construction
                              and exploitation phases include, but are not limited to: land acquisition, involuntary resettlement;
                              impacts on natural resources; biodiversity; fauna; landscape; water quality; transport
                              infrastructure; transmission of HVI/AIDS; impacts on cultural resources as well as potentially
                              negative social development impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The indirect impacts of the future implementation of the Inga-3 BC development include: the
                              pending impacts of Inga-1 and Inga-2 (e.g., sedimentation of reservoir and downstream erosion);
                              hydrological changes downstream; flooding of natural habitats; downstream erosion of


                                                                         Page 9 of 14
                           sedimentary of depositional environment; riverine and coastal erosion; erosion of river bank
                           vegetable gardens and permanent relocation of project affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for the Inga-3 BC development will include a
                           cumulative impact assessment of Inga-3 BC and Inga-3 HC developments. The spatial and
                           temporal dimensions of the cumulative impact assessment are based on what is known about the
                           on-going and proposed development projects within the project area in the reasonably foreseeable
                           future. The development of Inga-3 BC and Inga-3 HC will take well over a decade. The size,
                           scope, and, nature of future hydropower developments beyond the Inga-3 HC development are not
                           yet reasonably defined and available information is insufficient to consider them meaningfully in a
                           cumulative impact assessment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Several alternatives were considered for the project design. This includes a series of studies over
                           the past decade, looked into alternatives to develop the hydropower potential at the Inga site –
                           including Grand Inga and Inga 3 Tunnel. The Grand Inga scheme was first studied at the
                           prefeasibility level in 1974. Although the study looked at a staged development approach, the
                           Grand Inga scheme would require the construction of a large dam across the Congo. The costs of
                           the scheme were prohibitive.

                           Inga 3 Tunnel would capture water from the Congo waters in the vicinity of Inga 1 and Inga 2
                           intake and carry it through large tunnels to a power station. There has been no consensus on the
                           viability of the Inga 3 Tunnel option given the high geological risk of constructing extensive
                           underground works in an area where no site investigation has been undertaken.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           At national level, the DRC has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
                           environmental management. In addition, DRC has signed a number of international treaties and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           conventions. However, implementation capacity is weak. Environmental policies and their
                           compliance are governed by the Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Tourism (Ministère
                           de l’Environnement, de la Conservation de la Nature et du Tourisme - MECNT) – . The MECNT
                           has three departments in charge of environmental monitoring and management: i) Le Groupe
                           d’Etudes Environnementales du Congo (DRC Environmental Studies group GEEC); ii) le Centre
                           National d’Information sur l’Environnement (Environmental Information National Center -
                           CNIE); and iii) La Cellule Réglementation et Contentieux Environnementaux (Environemental
                           Regulation and Disputes’ Cell - CRCE). The GEEC is responsible for safeguards compliance of all
                           projects in the country. The unit is understaffed and has limited capacity. Despite several donor-
                           funded capacity building initiatives, the unit still largely relies on donor funds to carry out its field
                           supervision duties.

                           The CGI3 will manage component A until ADEPI establishment and component B throughout the
                           project, and therefore recruit environmental and social experts based on TOR and qualification
                           acceptable to IDA. ADEPI will manage component A, and will recruit environmental and social
                           experts able to deal with all relevant environmental and social questions, based on TOR,
                           experience and qualification acceptable to IDA.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                       Page 10 of 14
                           Stakeholders involved in the future Inga-3 BC development and thus in the TA project include
                           local populations, power offtakers, and indirectly customers of the national utility. Consultation
                           with local stakeholders in the context of a large communication effort will be key during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           proposed project implementation. The GoDRC publicly disclosed the 12 ToR for E&S studies on
                           June 28, 2013. Later, the TORs were consulted upon with local stakeholders including civil
                           society and project affected in Kinshasa on July 3, 2013 and in Matadi on September 2, 2013. Ten
                           of the TORs address E&S issues related to the development of Inga 3-BC. The two additional
                           TORs (community development plan for project affected persons [PAPs], and resettlement action
                           plan [RAP] for Camp Kinshasa/villages), address historically pending environmental and social
                           issues related to Inga 1&2, built in the 1970s, without Bank funding. After reception of all
                           comments, the TORs will be revised and re-disclosed.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          28-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       28-Jun-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          28-Jun-2013
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                        28-Jun-2013
                           Comments: www.cate.cd
                           Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          28-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       28-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                        28-Jun-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: www.cate.cd
                           Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          28-Jun-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       28-Jun-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                        28-Jun-2013
                           Comments: www.cate.cd
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         ToRs for the following safeguards instruments have been prepared and disclosed on June 28, 2013:
                         These assessments will be directly related to the activities financed under IDA and related co-
                         financing
                         1.      ESIA for Inga-3 BC development hydropower complex;
                         2.      ESIA for Inga-3 BC transmission line from Inga to the border with Zambia;
                         3.      ESIA for mid-size hydropower projects;
                         4.      Environmental and social experts panel;
                         5.      Dam safety expert panel;


                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                         6.     RAP for the Inga 3 BC hydropower complex;
                         7.     RAP for the transmission line from Inga to the border with Zambia;
                         8.     RPF for the mid-size hydropower projects;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         9.     IPPF for the transmission line in the DRC;
                         10.    Assessment Framework for Physical and Cultural Resources.
                         11.    Community development plan for project affected persons during the construction of Inga
                         1&2; and
                         12.    RAP for Camp Kinshasa/villages, built during the construction of Inga 1&2.

                         As for the associated facilities, namely the infrastructures to be constructed outside the DRC border,
                         the ToRs for the following specific instruments will need to be prepared during project
                         implementation once the parties responsible for financing and implementation of the corresponding
                         activities are known.
                         13.      ESIAs for transmission lines and substations in the relevant countries
                         14.      RAPs for transmission lines and substations in the relevant countries
                         15.      IPPF for transmission lines and substations in the relevant countries

                         These ToRs will need to be consistent with the corresponding World Bank Safeguards policies. It is
                         expected that these ToRs will be shared with the World Bank in a timely fashion, in order to ensure
                         consistency with its policies, procedures and standards.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         This project being a technical assistance operation, no physical works are considered. Consequently
                         only ToRs of E&S studies mentioned above were disclosed before appraisal.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [     ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?


                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?


                                                                    Page 13 of 14
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Jean-Christophe Carret
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)   Date: 09-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Meike van Ginneken (SM)       Date: 09-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                Page 14 of 14
