                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA5396
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Ethiopia                            Project ID:    P131118
                            Project Name:      Road Sector Support Project (P131118)
                            Task Team          Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Dec-2013                         Estimated   27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     AFTTR                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (75%), General transportation sector
                                              (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Trade facilitation and market access
                                              (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     385.00           Total Bank Financing:                   320.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           65.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 320.00
                              Total                                                                                       385.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Roads Sector Support Project is to
                           reduce travel time and cost along selected inter-regional corridors and support the sustainability of
                           the core road network.



                                                                        Page 1 of 14
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project aims at addressing critical sectoral issues by building on the following strategic
                         directions: (a) Supporting the objective of enhancing domestic trade, facilitating exports of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agricultural products, and strengthening social and economic cohesion among selected regional
                         states ; (b) Ensuring sustainability of the road network and instilling efficiency in road investment
                         by enhancing the use of innovative approaches, including asset management systems and OPRC
                         arrangements; and (c) Supporting the national Road Safety campaign through provision of Technical
                         Assistance and equipment, as well as addressing critical institutional issues affecting the performance
                         of the road sectors, including contract management capacity, work site safety and environment.

                         Based on the consultations conducted during the identification mission the proposed project will
                         encapsulate the following components:

                         Component 1: Upgrading of Critical Link Road (US$350 million), including: the upgrading of the
                         Nekempte – Bure road (258 km) to paved road standard through OPRC arrangement. This includes
                         monitoring, supervision and support to procurement services.

                         Component 2: Support to Enhancing Road Asset Management Practice (US$25 million). This will
                         provide for the maintenance of networks of selected roads with a total length of about 200 km, the
                         preparation of a road asset management strategy, bidding document preparation for road asset
                         management and Technical Assistance to strengthen road asset management capacity. GoE will fund
                         a further 400 km of road under a parallel financing.

                         SSub-component 2 (a) a road asset management contract for about 200 km of paved and gravel
                         roads, to be financed by the Bank, including monitoring and supervision services. The roads to be
                         maintained will be identified at the start of the project, in consultation with the Bank, upon
                         completion of prioritization of the roads, a social assessment and the preparation of an environmental
                         management plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 2 (b) strengthening road asset management capacity, and support for the adoption of
                         low cost road pavements.

                         Component 3: Support to Road Safety and Institutional Development (US$10 million): This
                         component caters for:

                         Sub-component 3 (a):- Support for the development of a safe and green road strategy and the
                         preparation of a national road safety audit manual.

                         Sub-component 3 (b): Strengthening ERA’s institutional capacity for OPRC design and management,
                         including: (i) preparation of OPRC contracts and procurement of OPRC contracts; (ii) preparation of
                         road asset management contracts, including assessment of roads maintenance priority and
                         preparation of OPRC bidding documents; (iii) preparation of an OPRC design and administration
                         manual; (iv) provision of training to, and enhancing the awareness of, domestic contractors and the
                         banking and insurance industry on OPRC related issues and OPRC risk management, and (v)
                         conducting a construction industry study.
                         Sub-component 3 (c): Strengthening ERA’s technical capacity on contract management, financial
                         management, construction site environmental and safety monitoring and management, transparency
                         practices and carrying out a gender and transport study and preparation of a gender action plan.


                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Activities will build on initiatives started under the ongoing road projects supported by the Bank..

                         Sub-component 3 (d): Support to preparation of follow-on operations through financing studies, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the preparation of design and bidding documents for potential roads for upgrading and rehabilitation,
                         as well as road asset management contracts.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The specific roads to be rehabilitated are: Nekempte-Bure, 258 km

                         Nekempte-Bure road is a link road connecting two regional sates. Nekempte town is located in
                         Oromia National Regional State (ONRS), on the Addis Ababa-Nekempte-Asosa Trunk Road, part of
                         which (the Gedo-Nekempte section) is currently under upgrading; while Bure is located in Amhara
                         National Regional State (ANRS) on the Debre Markos-Bahir Dar Trunk Road. The project road
                         starts at Nekempte town, 335 km west of Addis and terminates at Bure town after approximately 258
                         kms heading north/north-east direction and crossing the Blue Nile River after approximately 190 kms
                         from Nekempte. The end of the project is at the outskirt of Bure town, at the junction with Addis -
                         Debre Marcos-Bahir Dar trunk road. The Project Road is classified as Link road with gavel surface
                         and carriageway width of 4 to 7 meters. The current condition of the road can be categorized as fair
                         to good with predominantly good riding quality and drainage facilities functioned well. The Abay
                         bridge, which is located around 190 km from Nekempte, is in good condition and may not require
                         any further improvement.

                         The road passes predominately through a rolling terrain with a quarter of the road passes in
                         mountainous and flat sections. There are about 19 seasonal streams and rivers that crosses the road
                         along the road ultimately joining the Abay River.

                         There is one-realignment along the project road at Gida Ayana, about 103 km from Nekempte which
                         involves a stretch of about 6 kms linking Gendo town at km 103 to the Gida-Ayana town. In addition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the road passes through 8 small settlements and three towns (Anger Gutan, Gendo and Gida Ayana)
                         between Nekempte and Bure town. Properties within the 30m Right of Way (ROW) zone will be
                         acquired and population re-settled, particularly in the town section and settlement areas. In addition,
                         the project impact will be in locations where land is required for ancillary works, (ie quarry sites,
                         haul roads, borrow pits, camps and detour roads). The social survey indicates that upgrading of the
                         road will affect a total of 1655 household. In addition, the size of farmland that will be affected by
                         the project is estimated to be 9.8 hectares.

                         The project, when completed, is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts in the
                         long term, as it will facilitate economic and social development thereby promoting improvement in
                         livelihood of the population in the project influence area; it will also improve drainage and seasonal
                         river crossings, thus reducing runoff from the road. Although project is intended for design and build
                         road project, as the road mainly follows the existing route and the alignment is largely defined, a
                         separate Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Social Assessment (SA) studies and Resettlement
                         Policy Framework (RPF) were done and shared to the Bank, cleared, and disclosed in country and in
                         the Bank InfoShop on October 29, 2013. At both stages of the ESIA, RPF and SIA development,
                         public consultations took place in the project area and are documented in the reports.

                         The road project involves widening and raising the level of the road, within the existing right-of-way.
                         No significant adverse environmental and social impacts were identified during the ESIA that would


                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         hinder the proposed upgrading of the road to bitumen standard.

                         Asset management of 200 km of road network
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The asset management contracts will involve mainly maintenance works, including overlay,
                         resealing and routine maintenance works to be conducted on the existing road formation, and no
                         safeguard issues will be encountered. There will be no earthworks that requires borrow material or a
                         need to spoil material in the project vicinity. The contractors will use existing quarry sites and natural
                         gravel pits. For the routine management of existing quarry sites, an Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared and included in the works contract. However, the project
                         should verify that there is a broad support for the interventions by the population living along the
                         road influence area and whether the population living in the project area is vulnerable. As the
                         proposed project supports the introduction of asset management, i.e maintenance of existing roads as
                         a pilot on a network of roads that have not yet been identified, a social impact assessment has to be
                         carried out during implementation, once the proposed roads for the asset management contracts have
                         been selected to confirm whether the majority of the people living along the road corridor are
                         vulnerable people. If the assessment confirms that the majority of the people are vulnerable, OP/BP
                         4.10 will be triggered and an action plan will to be prepared. The maintenance will be carried out on
                         a network that fulfills the Bank safeguard policy and principles.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)

                         6. Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes              This policy is triggered due to the potential
                         BP 4.01                                               environmental and social impacts of the planned
                                                                               construction of Nekemte–Bure road.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               Environmental and Social Impact Assessments,
                                                                               and RPF have been prepared, cleared and
                                                                               disclosed for the road section. Environmental
                                                                               Management Plans in the ESIAs will be
                                                                               instrumental to avoid and/or mitigate negative
                                                                               environmental and social impacts.With regard to
                                                                               asset management activities, the impact is very
                                                                               minimal. However, once works and sites have
                                                                               been identified, Environment and Social
                                                                               Management Plan will be prepared, consulted
                                                                               upon, and disclosed, drawing on the guidance and
                                                                               measures in the ESIA.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           Yes              There are some natural habitats in or close to the
                                                                               project area. While no adverse impact is
                                                                               anticipated due to the project intervention, any
                                                                               potential impacts of the proposed operation on
                                                                               natural habitats are addressed in the
                                                                               environmental instrument (ESIA), which
                                                                               describes mitigation measures to be included in



                                                                       Page 4 of 14
                                                                         the contractor bid document and to be
                                                                         implemented during construction and operation
                                                                         phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No              Although there are some registered or known
                                                                         forests in the project area, no adverse impact is
                                                                         anticipated on them due to the project
                                                                         intervention, nor does the project involve forestry
                                                                         activities. Any potential impacts of the proposed
                                                                         operation on flora and fauna are addressed in the
                                                                         environmental instrument (ESIA), which
                                                                         describes mitigation measures to be included in
                                                                         the contractor bid document and to be
                                                                         implemented during construction and operation
                                                                         phase. Plantation and commercial trees affected
                                                                         by the project will be compensated for by cash
                                                                         and/or seedlings.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No              The Nekemte-Bure road project does not
                                                                         involve activities that require pesticide use.
                                                                         Neither direct purchase of pesticides nor
                                                                         financing activities that use pesticides will be
                                                                         supported by the project. Therefore this policy is
                                                                         not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes             Some road works and ancillary activities may be
                         BP 4.11                                         located in the area of influence of some sites. The
                                                                         project ESIAs includes procedure for
                                                                         identification and management of chance finds. If
                                                                         existence of physical/cultural resources is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         confirmed, the ESIA will be updated with the
                                                                         Physical/Cultural management plan. In any case,
                                                                         “Chance Find” procedures will be included in the
                                                                         contract documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No              A Social Assessment has been carried out to
                                                                         identify whether the vulnerable exist along the
                                                                         project corridors and mitigation measures will be
                                                                         included in the project design. However, the
                                                                         population living along the Bure - Nekemte is
                                                                         Oromo and Amhara therfore, OP.4.10 is not
                                                                         triggered. With regard to asset management
                                                                         operation, social assessment will be carried out
                                                                         when the road to be maintained are identified.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes             Since the project interventions will involve
                         4.12                                            acquisition of land and economic displacement;
                                                                         and the exact location is not certain, but it is
                                                                         estimated that about 1,600 persons may be
                                                                         impacted; more than 250 houses are expected to
                                                                         be demolished; and the size of farmland that will



                                                                 Page 5 of 14
                                                                                be affected due to the widening of the ROW is
                                                                                about 9.8 hectares. Therefore, a Resettlement
                                                                                Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                disclosed to ensure that appropriate measures are
                                                                                in place to address any issues which might arise
                                                                                from potential land acquisition, economic
                                                                                displacement and or restriction of access to
                                                                                communal natural resources under the Project. A
                                                                                detailed Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                                                                                prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed before
                                                                                the commencement of civil works. For the asset
                                                                                management operation, there will be no
                                                                                involuntary resettlement as maintenance of
                                                                                exiting road does not involve displacement of
                                                                                people.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No                The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                policy.
                            Projects on International        No                   Project does not affect any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                waterways, thus the policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The project is not taking place in a disputed
                            7.60                                                area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The Nekempte-Bure road is a gravel road used by commercial vehicles, including heavy trucks.
                              The new road will largely follow the existing alignment, except in the short realignment section of
                              about 9 km. The road involves widening within the existing right-of-way. The project triggers OP/
                              BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and
                              Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The Physical and Cultural Resources was triggered,
                              given the possibility that there may be cultural assets and/or sites in the project area. A social
                              screening was conducted along the Bure-Nekempte road to determine whether communities living
                              along the proposed road/corridor meet the characteristics as defined under the Bank’s OP4.10, the
                              Indigenous People policy. However, the screening shows that the population in the project area of
                              influence did not meet the sociocultural and bio-physical characteristics required in the policy,
                              therefore, the project will not trigger OP4.10.

                             ERA has prepared Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and
                             Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), for the Nekempt-Bure road. The safeguard instruments
                             were prepared to reflect on risks related to (i) adverse impacts of quarry sites and borrow pits; (ii)
                             adverse impacts of spoil materials; (iii) site safety issues; and (iv) capacity of ERA, contractors
                             and supervisors in implementing mitigation measures, observed in other road upgrading projects.
                             The ESIA, SIA and RPF were disclosed locally and at the Infoshop on October 29, 2013. The
                             ESIA was disclosed in country on October 28, 2013 by posting the ESIA in the ERA official


                                                                        Page 6 of 14
                         website. ERA will continue disclosing the ESIA by translating the executive summary of the ESIA
                         to a local language and organizing a workshop to discuss the ESIA findings. The ESIA includes an
                         ESMP for managing the road's environmental and social impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will also finance the development of the road asset management program. This
                         program will involve mainly maintenance works, including overlay, resealing and routine
                         maintenance works to be conducted on the existing road formation. Once the program sites and
                         works have been finalized, ESMPs will prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed, drawing on the
                         guidance and measures in the ESIA for the Nekempt-Bure Road. Should the program take place in
                         areas where Indigenous Peoples are present, the Social Assessment for the project will be updated
                         and measures for Indigenous Peoples will be included in the ESMPs, per the requirements of OP
                         4.10.

                         Gender Issues. The program will benefit women and men, children and the elderly by improving
                         access to markets and social services. Particular attention will be given to market towns and road
                         side markets by providing safe and improved access to the market places, which will benefit
                         women, which represent the majority engaged in informal trade. The project will conduct gender
                         sensitivity analysis to improve the gender focus of the project, particularly taking into
                         consideration women’s role in transport sector.

                         HIV/AIDS Prevention. To address HIV/AIDS risks during construction period the civil work
                         contracts will have provision for awareness campaigns for the workers, the community and
                         drivers. The contracting entity will prepare HIV/AIDs mitigation plan to be cleared by the World
                         Bank.

                         Local job creation: The upgrading and road asset management contracts will create jobs for the
                         local people. This includes unskilled labor required for the construction works and contractors’
                         camp operation, as well as skilled labors, such as drivers and equipment operators. Contractors
                         will engage local labor for road side environmental protection activities and labor intensive works
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such as culvert clearing. During the maintenance period routine activities, including bush clearing
                         and cleaning drainage structures would be carried by labor, hence creating local employment.
                         Under the OPRC arrangement the contractors’ may benefit from the availability of local
                         contractors that could sub-contract the maintenance works.

                         Under the OPRC arrangement ERA will be responsible for ensuring the understanding of
                         additional impact assessment by the contractor to addres s environmental and social issues
                         resulting from the contractors’ design. The contractor willprepare additional ESMPs and
                         implement all mitigation measures as per the contract. The contractors are also responsible for the
                         construction site safety in applying internationally accepted industry safety norms and good
                         practices. ERA through the supervision and monitoring consultant ensures the undertaking of
                         additional impact assessment and implementation of ESMPs. ERA will assign staff for monitoring
                         safeguard issue. Further, the Bank supervision missions will review the environment and social
                         impact mitigation reports to be prepared by the consultant as part of the monthly progress reports.

                         ERA has established an environmental and social management team (ESMT), which is currently
                         staffed with six professionals. The major duties and responsibilities of the EMST includes setting
                         and implementing ERA’s environmental guidelines in line with the national level requirements,
                         and providing advisory, coordination and supervision roles pertinent to road environmental
                         impacts and assessments.

                                                                   Page 7 of 14
                         The performance of ERA, within current IDA financed projects; in monitoring and supervising the
                         implementation of environmental, social and safety issues has been less than satisfactory. In earlier
Public Disclosure Copy




                         projects, there were gaps in environmental and social safeguard management due to delays and
                         shortcomings in the adequacy and quality of compliance with environmental and social clauses in
                         the civil work contracts; weaknesses in the contractors' organizations; and shortcomings in
                         supervision and monitoring. The proposed new project includes Technical Assistance, aimed at
                         strengthening ERA's capacity to administer contracts, including strengthening of the systems and
                         processes used by ERA to manage safeguards compliance requirements.

                         The findings of the ESIA will be transcribed into the Works contract documents, and where
                         necessary into the Terms of Reference (TOR) of the Supervision and Monitoring Engineers. The
                         contractors will be required to prepare detailed Environmental and Safety Management Plans that
                         address and mitigate the environmental and social impacts described in the ESIA. ERA will ensure
                         that a budget is provided to cover the costs associated with Right-Of-Way (ROW) and ensure that
                         resettlement and compensation issues are resolved ahead of construction activities.

                         Nekempte-Bure:

                         The possible negative impacts identified, are attributed to ground disturbance, operation of
                         equipment, and labor force housing, quarry and borrow site operation and various ancillary
                         activities during the project implementation.
                         The Project Road passes through mostly cultivated areas with about 33% flat, 48% rolling or
                         undulating, 6% mountainous and 13% escarpment topography. The climate of the Project Area is
                         mostly temperate and receives relatively sufficient amount of rainfall.

                         The route corridor passes through vegetation and is a mix of very dense indigenous as well as
                         exotic tree species, much of which has been planted by local residents. The exotic tree species are
                         Eucalyptus camaldulensis, Cuppresslustanica, Graviliarobusta, Pinusradiata. There are coffee trees
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (Coffee Arabica) under the indigenous tree species. Eucalyptus is the dominant species on the
                         roadside. The implementation of the project road will cause significant vegetation removal and
                         may incur high compensation payment for commercial trees lost, particularly for the first section
                         from station 0+000km-6+900km. From km 29 to km 51 there are no dense variations along the
                         road but the section is characterized by intensive farm land. There is no registered national park
                         along the envisaged road route, but protected forest and forest patch areas fall along the road
                         corridor and in the proximity of the road project. The forest areas will not be affected by the
                         project.

                         The main potential environmental and social safeguards include the following:

                         Loss of land: due to widening of the carriageway and alignment improvements, there will be some
                         loss of land. Most of the affected land is under crop production and livestock grazing. Proposed
                         mitigation measures include restoration of areas affected due to temporary activities, and payment
                         of compensation for loss of farmlands, grazing areas and properties.

                         Soil erosion, compaction and contamination: Implementation of the road project is likely to cause
                         increased soil erosion during the construction phase. In addition to increased potential for soil
                         erosion, soils may be contaminated by hazardous substances like oils, fuel and detergents resulting
                         from accidental spillage, leakage of equipment and vehicles, or improper disposal of used oils.

                                                                   Page 8 of 14
                         These impacts can be minimized by implementing the road works during the dry season,
                         construction of effective drainage structures (paved side-drains, diversion drains, check dams,
                         sufficient turnouts), reducing the time surface remains bare following completion of works,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         planting of appropriate plant species on erosion-prone slopes, and preventing soil pollution by
                         hazardous substances through careful handling and appropriate disposal of used oils through
                         approved waste agencies.

                         Impacts on landscape quality and slope stability: Along the sections located in hilly terrain at Ch
                         21 - 26 km and Ch 28 – 32 km, the road upgrading activities will involve cutting of adjacent
                         slopes. Suitable spoil l ocations must be found and approved as part of the Environmental
                         Management Plan (EMP) and disposal of excavation materials on downslope must be prohibited.
                         Other activities that may result in disfigurement of the landscape include operation of quarries and
                         borrow pits, and establishment of contractors’ site facilities such as campsites, workshops and
                         construction materials processing sites. Some geological hazard can be expected along a few
                         stretches such as along Ch 22 – 26 km and Ch 28 – 32 km, where loose geological formations,
                         mainly pumice, are observed. Recommended mitigation measures include planting of appropriate
                         grass, shrub or tree species on cut slopes and embankment/fill slopes, avoiding indiscriminate
                         disposal of surplus or unsuitable excavation materials by depositing it only at approved disposal
                         sites, and use of existing material sources and materials processing sites that have been used by
                         former road projects and natural clearings/open lands for contractor’s site facilities. Additional
                         measures include restoration of borrow sites and areas of contractors’ site facilities through back-
                         filling, landscaping and re-establishing vegetation cover, designing and constructing appropriate
                         slope stabilizing structures like retaining walls or gabions at the vulnerable sections, and
                         controlling surface water infiltration to reduce seepage forces by providing adequate side drains,
                         check dams and interceptor drains.

                         Impacts on water resources: The proposed road and drainage works may cause some adverse
                         impacts including increased sedimentation and water pollution of the streams and other
                         watercourses intercepted by the project road or in i ts vicinity. In addition, water quality of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         streams, groundwater or other water sources could be impacted due to contamination through
                         spillage of pollutants like fuel and oil, or due to improper disposal of used oil, as well as due to
                         uncontrolled discharge of sewage and other fluid wastes at campsites. Recommended mitigation
                         measures include execution of the potentially impacting road and drainage works during the dry
                         season, use of sediment traps, avoiding disposal of surplus excavated materials on river banks or in
                         river courses, proper handling of oils, fuel, used oil, detergents etc. to avoid water pollution,
                         avoidance of leakages from vehicles and construction equipment by regular and effective
                         maintenance, and provision of satisfactory solid and liquid wastes disposal facilities at
                         construction camps.

                         Impacts on water supply systems and competition for water: The project road intercepts about six
                         irrigation canals and several water supply pipelines. In addition, the project may affect a protected
                         spring water source and a pipeline conveying the water to a distribution point at about km 56.70,
                         and unprotected spring water source at about km 29.00. Proposed mitigation measures include
                         designing and implementing the project by shifting the centreline to RHS to protect the spring
                         water source found at km 56.70 LHS, replacing the affected water pipelines and distribution points
                         by new ones, and avoidance of withdrawal of water for the road works or campsite requirements
                         from sources used by the local community unless its sufficiency is approved by the local
                         authorities.



                                                                   Page 9 of 14
                         Air and noise pollution: During construction phase, air and noise pollution are likely to be
                         significant resulting from increased traffic flows, diversion of traffic to gravel surfaced detour
                         roads, operation of heavy duty machinery, and operation of quarries, borrow sites and materials
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processing plants. The recommended mitigation measures include restriction of traffic speeds and
                         spraying of water regularly on dusty roads, use of modern and well-maintained equipment, regular
                         maintenance of machinery, plants and vehicles, siting of aggregate production plants and bitumen
                         mixing plants at a minimum distance of 3km from sensitive receptors, application of a well-
                         designed traffic management plans, and carrying out noisy construction activities during normal
                         working hours.

                         Impacts on flora: Implementation of the proposed road project is likely to cause loss of some
                         remnant indigenous trees as well as plantation trees found on the roadsides. The stretches or spots
                         which have potentially affected trees include km 0.30 – 1.00, km 15.50 – 15.70, km 25.20 – 26.50,
                         km 28.60 – 28.80, km 29.50 – 30.00, km 33.40 – 33.60, km 34.20 – 34.30, km 43.00 – 44.00, km
                         47 – 51.20, km 54.60 – 57.20, and 58.10 – 58.70. Major potentially affected tree species include
                         Acacia (Girar), Hagenia (Kosso), Juniper (Yehabesha Tid), Albizia (Sassa), Erythrina (Korch),
                         Eucalyptus (Bahir Zaf), and Cuppressus (Yeferenj Tid). Recommended mitigation measures
                         include clearing to pre-defined limits only, adopting reduced ROW and widening/improving the
                         road to one side only, restricting earthworks to the area absolutely necessary for the road works,
                         and applying ‘half-width’ construction method for sections to avoid constructing a side-track
                         through important indigenous vegetation. Uncontrolled side-tipping of spoil on down-side of
                         slopes must be avoided. Suitable and approved spoil areas must only be used.

                         Impacts on fauna: Implementation of the proposed road project will cause minor impacts on
                         wildlife except on birdlife. During construction, the bird species residing in the habitats adjacent to
                         the project road are likely to be di sturbed by noise generated from the operation of heavy
                         equipment, noisy plants and construction vehicles. These disturbances may affect nesting and the
                         breeding success of the bird species. Potential impacts on wildlife will be minimized or
                         compensated for by adopting the mitigation measures recommended for the impacts on flora.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Impacts on road and traffic safety: During construction, there will be increased construction
                         vehicles which may increase accident risks to the roadside communities, road users and domestic
                         animals. In particular , the dump trucks transporting construction materials could create more
                         safety risks for road users and villagers. Since the road project is located in a densely populated
                         area, risks due to traffic accidents could be an important issue unless necessary mitigation
                         measures are implemented. Proposed mitigation measures include provision of necessary
                         information such as speedlimits, direction, hazard locations, sensitive sites by putting appropriate
                         signals, assigning traffic regulators to control traffic flows at critical sections or periods where/
                         when traffic safety is a serious issue, awareness training of operators of equipment and
                         construction vehicles in traffic safety measures, and establishment of speed limits and controls for
                         construction vehicles and discipline for the drivers.

                         Socio-economic impacts: The key adverse social impacts include loss of farmlands and crops,
                         demolition of housing units used either for residential or business purposes, impacts on public
                         utilities (water supply, electric and telephone poles), impacts on social services (churches, health
                         units), spread of HIV/AIDS and other STDs, and pressure on local services and facilities, and
                         impacts on settlements. The specified negative impacts could be mitigated by effecting
                         compensation for affected housing units, social services, farmlands and crop losses based on the
                         existing legal frameworks and regulations provided for these sorts of interventions. In addition, the

                                                                    Page 10 of 14
                           promotion of training and awareness creation on HIV/AIDS and other STDs would help to tackle
                           the threat of the specified problems. Further, in order to avoid pressure on the local services like
                           health and water supply, it is a requirement that the contract documents include provision to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           supply the specified social services within the camps established for project workers.

                           Positive impacts will include improvements in horizontal and vertical curves, widening of the road
                           width, provision of shoulders, provision of parking lanes and pedestrian walkways in towns and
                           villages, new drainage structures and replacement of substandard structures, proper side ditches
                           and erosion protection structures, and asphalt pavements. These improvements are anticipated to
                           bring several benefits in terms of environmental protection and road and traffic safety issues
                           during the operation phase. These include avoidance of dust pollution and erosion problem
                           prevailing on the existing gravel road, minimization of erosion from roadside ditches and
                           diversion drains, and reduction of sedimentation of rivers and streams and impacts on water
                           quality. In addition, it is likely to improve sight distance/visibility for drivers and pedestrians,
                           which in turn will reduce accident risks for both motorized and non-motorized traffic, and
                           facilitate traffic flows. Moreover, it will bring better safety for pedestrians and non-motorized
                           vehicles in relation to provision of pedestrian walkways and parking lanes in town and village
                           sections. The expansion of road and transport services in the project area will promote accelerated
                           and sustainable agricultural development in the project area, improving market opportunities for
                           the sale of agricultural products and consumer goods.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           There is no significant indirect impact. Since significant parts of the project corridor are populated
                           and intensively used for agricultural activities, there is little undisturbed habitats that could support
                           wildlife resources. As a result only wildlife adapted to disturbed habitats are found in the area. The
                           wild animals reported to be found in some parts of the road corridor include Hyena, pig, Monkey,
                           Ape, and Fox, Lion & Tiger as well as Antelope.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           No project alternatives are required for this operation as no significant adverse impacts are
                           foreseen for the proposed project. The Government has considered the option of re-aligning about
                           17.5 km section of the road from Gendo (on the existing road) through Gida-Ayana town and back
                           to the exiting road. The main purpose of the realignment is to connect the Gida-Ayana twon,
                           which is currently some 6 km off the existing road, to the main road. As the proposed re-alignment
                           passes through a town section and further on a farmland it will cause acquisition of land and
                           removal of some trees. However, the impact is marginal and will not cause significant adverse
                           environmental impact. The environment and social assessment have already identified the
                           potential damages and mitigation measures are in place.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           ERA in the regions will be responsible to supervise the implementation of the RAP, EMP and
                           applications of ESMF and RPF. ERA will develop contract documentation (bidding document’s)
                           that will include preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) that are
                           responsive to the findings of the ESIA’s and RAPs, and will ensure that all prohibitions and
                           mitigation measures that are identified in the ESIAs are complied with.

                           The ESMP will include all the mitigation and monitoring measures to be applied during the


                                                                       Page 11 of 14
                           construction activities, together with the timeframe required for implementation. They will set-out
                           the main environmental and social impacts, key corresponding mitigations, offset or compensation
                           measures, recommended time framework for implementation of the mitigation measures,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           organizations/ parties responsible for implementation of the mitigation plan, organizations/ parties
                           responsible for monitoring of the proper implementation of the mitigation plan, and where
                           necessary, cost estimate of the mitigation plan.

                           Environmental and social monitoring will be required both during implementation and operation
                           phases of the project to ensure the proper implementation of the EMPs and RAPs. Environmental
                           monitoring helps to detect the scale and extent of impacts caused by the project over time and to
                           assess whether mitigation actions have been properly and timely implemented and are working as
                           expected. Monitoring of environmental parameters will identify potential problems from the road
                           development activities and will allow for prompt implementation of effective corrective measures.
                           Details of the recommended environmental monitoring program (issues, indicators and
                           parameters) are provided in the ESIAs

                           To ensure implementation, it will be essential that the proposed mitigation measures be considered
                           during the detailed engineering design and included in the specifications of the tender
                           documentation. In addition, adequate budget shall be allocated by ERA to implement the RAPs
                           ahead of the construction phase. The Contractor will be required to manage the project in
                           accordance with the ESMP, the Supervising Engineer (which will include environmental and
                           social experts) will be required to ensure that the ESMP it is properly implemented, and inform
                           ERA where there are gaps and recommend actions need to be taken to ensure the Contractor
                           complies with his contractual obligations in this respect.
                           Further, ERA will undertake a well-planned audit program to follow up the proper implementation
                           of the EMP and RAP recommendations and their effectiveness, as well as identify any unforeseen
                           issues.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders for the projects are the impacted communities, ERA through its Right of
                           Way Agencies (RoW) and the Woreda Administrations. All the communities, including the
                           implementing agency and the Woreda administrations ( local administration) in all the woredas
                           that the road traverse have been actively consulted during the preparation of the ESIA and the
                           RPF. The information regarding the project was widely shared with the larger community along
                           the roads prior to seeking input and concerns. Consultations were undertaken to facilitate
                           stakeholder involvement and raise awareness during preparation of the project ESIAs and RPF.
                           Public consultations will continue throughout project implementation to ensure that the
                           information required for decision making is available to all interested parties.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         29-Oct-2013
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Oct-2013
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         29-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Oct-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Oct-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         29-Oct-2013
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 08-Dec-2013
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                      Date: 18-Dec-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 14 of 14
