                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSR8214
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-May-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Morocco                                      Project ID:           P098459
                            Project Name:       Morocco Oum Er Rbia Sanitation (P098459)
                            Task Team           Richard Abdulnour
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           09-Apr-2010                                  Estimated   15-Jun-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      MNSWA                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Sanitation (94%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection
                                                (6%)
                            Theme:              Urban services and housing for the poor (98%), Pollution management and
                                                environmental health (2%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        75.10           Total Bank Financing:                                        43.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              32.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 43.00
                              Total                                                                                                 75.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The immediate and most direct objective of this project is to improve the access to sanitation and
                           pollution reduction services for the dwellers of seven small                                  towns in


                                                                                  Page 1 of 8
                         the Oum Er Rbia river basin. This will be achieved through the construc
                         tion of new wastewater collection networks and treatment plants.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The larger objective of the project is to pilot a number of innovative approaches to make the
                         implementation of the larger National Sanitation Program more effe
                         ctive. Specifically , the project will help introduce and pilot a) appropriate
                         (                                   low cost) technologies for wastewater collection and treatment for
                         these seven t                                    owns b) the reuse of treated wastewater in productive
                         uses (agriculture or indus                                   try) and c) the reduction of greenhouse
                         gases (methane) and odors from existing                                       plants ➢❨ while
                         redirecting these gases for household uses - and the generationo                                   f
                         carbon credits.

                          Benefits derived from water sanitation and pollution control service typically include improved
                         living standards (convenience and clean living environment), pub                                     lic
                         health benefits (reducing epidemic possibility and bad odor from open
                         sewage                                  , reducing possibility of polluting surface and ground waters,
                         and increasing sa                                 fety of agricultural products by reducing direct
                         drainage of wastewater into agr                                   icultural production), improved
                         public goods and environment (less pollution of                                     water resources, and
                         potential reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases).
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The immediate and most direct objective of this project is to improve the access to sanitation and
                         pollution reduction services for the dwellers of seven small                                  towns in
                         the Oum Er Rbia river basin. This will be achieved through the construc
                         tion of new wastewater collection networks and treatment plants.

                          The larger objective of the project is to pilot a number of innovative approaches to make the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the larger National Sanitation Program more effe
                         ctive. Specifically , the project will help introduce and pilot a) appropriate
                         (                                   low cost) technologies for wastewater collection and treatment for
                         these seven t                                    owns b) the reuse of treated wastewater in productive
                         uses (agriculture or indus                                   try) and c) the reduction of greenhouse
                         gases (methane) and odors from existing                                       plants ➢❨ while
                         redirecting these gases for household uses - and the generationo                                   f
                         carbon credits.

                          Benefits derived from water sanitation and pollution control service typically include improved
                         living standards (convenience and clean living environment), pub                                     lic
                         health benefits (reducing epidemic possibility and bad odor from open
                         sewage                                  , reducing possibility of polluting surface and ground waters,
                         and increasing sa                                 fety of agricultural products by reducing direct
                         drainage of wastewater into agr                                   icultural production), improved
                         public goods and environment (less pollution of                                     water resources, and
                         potential reduction in emissions of greenhouse gases).
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project consists of two components.


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         Part I: Wastewater Collection and Treatment. This component consists of the rehabilitation and
                         expansion of existing sewerage systems, including collection networks and treatment plants,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provision of equipment for the maintenance and operation of said systems, and provision of odor-
                         control technologies for selected small and medium towns in the Project Provinces. To date, this
                         component’s activities takes place in twelve towns (Aghbala, Azilal, Bejaad, Boulanouare, Chemaia,
                         El Brouj, El Ksiba, Hattane, Ouaouizeght, Oued Zem, Youssoufia, and Zaouiet Cheikh) covering
                         four provinces in the Oum Er Rbia river basin (Azilal, Benimellal, Safi, and Settat). Works have
                         partially or fully started in four towns (El Brouj, El Ksiba, Ouaouizerth and Youssoufia), and are
                         expected to partially start soon in five additional towns (Aghbala, Azilal, Boulanouare, Chemaia and
                         Hattane). It is expected that the wastewater collected from about 220,000 inhabitants will be treated
                         in twelve wastewater treatment plants, seven of which are built under the Project, with an average
                         capacity of 19,000 population equivalent.

                         Part II: Implementation Support. This component consists of the provision of implementation support
                         to the Borrower, including support for: construction supervision; Project management, monitoring
                         and reporting; monitoring of environmental management plans, awareness raising campaigns; and
                         promotion of wastewater reuse projects.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to provide sewerage and wastewater management services to selected small
                         and medium towns. At this time, these towns are Azilal, Aghbala, Bejaad, Oued Zem, Zaouiet
                         Cheikh, Boulanouar, Chemaia, El Brouj, El Ksiba, Hattane, Ouaouizeght, and Youssoufia. All towns
                         benefitting from the Project are located within the perimeter of action of the Oum Er Rbia River
                         Basin Agency.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Najat Maalla M'Jid (MNCMA)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Andrea Liverani (MNSSU)
                         Taoufiq Bennouna (MNSEE)
                         Khalid Anouar (MNSWA)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             Project is Category B (Partial Assessment) for
                          BP 4.01                                            Environmental Assessment policy purposes. This
                                                                             Project is reclassified from A to B Category
                                                                             based on the fact that (i) the experience and
                                                                             results of ONEE in the operation and
                                                                             performance of existing treatment plants were
                                                                             satisfactory and that the potential environmental
                                                                             impacts associated with the project were limited
                                                                             and mostly reversible with minimal cumulative
                                                                             impact risks, and (ii) the wastewater treatment
                                                                             plants under the proposed project are generally
                                                                             smaller (19,000 population equivalent on
                                                                             average) than the treatment plants already in



                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                                                                                operation by ONEE and will be geographically
                                                                                dispersed in the Oum Er Rbia basin.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09             No

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/     Yes             The Physical Cultural Resources policy is
                            BP 4.11                                             triggered because a small portion of sewerage
                                                                                rehabilitation works in the city of Bejaad might
                                                                                include a small part of the Medina, which is
                                                                                classified and registered as national heritage.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No

                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      Yes             The Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered
                            4.12                                                as there is limited land acquisition for wastewater
                                                                                treatment plants, pumping stations and other
                                                                                small structures.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No

                            Projects on International        No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project’s main environmental risks remain moderate, low and manageable. The main risks
                              are related to: (i) the concentration of pollution due to the expansion of sewage collection
                              networks, (ii) potential pollution through the inadequate management of sludge produced in
                              sewerage treatment plants, and (iii) visual and olfactory nuisance related to the installation of
                              sewage treatment plants. Pollution from effluents and sludge are managed under the project
                              through the construction and sustainable operation of adequate treatment plants and the
                              implementation of adequate sludge management practices. Other risks considered to be low and
                              manageable include construction nuisances.

                             ONEE is intensively implementing a well-designed communication and awareness raising plan,
                             specifically in locations where works have already started or will start soon, including a detailed
                             screening of neighboring inhabitants and farmers to identify potential options for benefit -sharing
                             in areas targeted for WWTP construction, as well as establishment of local grievance redress
                             mechanisms to systematically receive complaints or queries and to ensure that these are managed
                             in an effective and timely manner. It is expected that such client-beneficiary engagement will be
                             critical towards building community support; learning of community needs; but also providing an

                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                          avenue for early-on resolution of potential community grievances.

                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                            Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) have been carried out by ONEE for all twelve towns
                           and deemed acceptable according to the national legislation. These EIAs identified reversible
                           environmental impacts which are currently mitigated by ONEE, with the support of its technical
                           assistance, through the implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan
                           (ESMP).

                          The addition of works in the town of Bejaad might include a small part of the Medina which is
                          classified and registered as national heritage. Impacts are deemed limited and manageable through
                          the application of the environmental and social guidelines for civil works in the city of Bejaad.,
                          which also contain the Bank’s chance find procedures.

                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            Not relevant.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Project is a pilot for the use of country systems for managing safeguards under the
                           Environmental Assessment policy (OP 4.01) and under the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP
                           4.12). A Safeguards Diagnostic Review (SDR) was carried out in 2010, to review national systems
                           for environmental management and land acquisition, to ascertain their equivalence to OP 4.01 and
                           OP 4.12 respectively, and their acceptability, and to identify any necessary gap filling measures.

                          Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) have been carried out by ONEE for all the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          interventions in the twelve towns and deemed acceptable according to the national legislation.
                          These EIAs identified reversible environmental impacts which are currently mitigated by ONEE,
                          with the support of its technical assistance, through the implementation of the Environmental and
                          Social Management Plan (ESMP).

                          Land acquisitions for wastewater treatment plants, pumping stations and other small structures are
                          carried out by the Communes by following Law 7-81. The review of national systems for land
                          acquisition showed that the main gaps between Moroccan law and OP 4.12 concerned monitoring
                          of resettlement implementation. Neither of these required changes in Moroccan law, and could be
                          addressed through five project specific measures to be implemented by ONEE, namely (i)
                          technical assistance to the Communes, (ii) collection of detailed land data and documentation from
                          the Communes, (iii) monitoring and documenting that land acquisitions have been properly and
                          fully carried out by Communes prior to the initiation of works, (iv) disclosure of relevant
                          procedures and awareness raising, and (v) undertaking an independent review one year after the
                          first initiation of works to ensure that any and all grievances are being addressed, as Law 7-81
                          does not require ex-post analysis of whether resettlement has been successful. It should be noted
                          that this project was part of the regional resettlement review concluded in 2014, which confirmed
                          the close convergence between Moroccan legislation and OP 4.12. Nonetheless, a key issue noted
                          for Morocco is the delay in access to compensation, arising from administrative complexities
                          under Law 7-81, especially land ownership documentation, combined with the challenges of


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           owners living overseas. In practice, the Project has not required involuntary land acquisition to
                           date, as all land that has been acquired under the project has been acquired through a voluntary
                           sale either from private land owners or collective ownership. Most remaining land acquisition
Public Disclosure Copy




                           should similarly be carried out by aiming for amicable agreement with private land owners (while
                           reverting to expropriation only as a last resort), with the rest being incorporated or occupied under
                           specific procedures that do not require acquisition. Supervision missions have confirmed that
                           technical assistance, public awareness and documentation of the land acquisition process
                           (measures (i) to (iv)) have been carried out according to the agreed procedures. At the same time,
                           supervision has also found that actual access of beneficiaries to their compensation, though
                           previously budgeted by the Communes, did not always take place prior to the initiation of works.
                           ONEE is currently undertaking an assessment to identify pending payments in the four locations
                           where works have been initiated. ONEE will intensify their assistance to local authorities to take
                           all necessary actions to ensure that payments are processed and brought into full compliance with
                           the agreed procedures. Furthermore, a full audit of the land acquisition process under the project
                           (measure (v)) has been agreed to be undertaken in coming months to identify any needed
                           improvements in the overall process, as well as to identify and address any instances requiring
                           remedial actions.

                           The environmental legislation concerning the cultural heritage is Law 22-80 (1-80-341) of 1980
                           amended and supplemented in June 2006 with Law 19-05 (1-06-10215) on the conservation of
                           historic monuments and sites, inscriptions, art and antiquities objects. Article 47 of the amended
                           law specifies the process to be followed in case of chance find. On the OP 4.11, ONEE will rely
                           on the environmental and social guidelines for civil works in the city of Bejaad, which include the
                           Bank’s chance find procedures. This guideline was submitted to the Bank and found to be
                           satisfactory.

                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A public consultation was held on the SDR on March 22, 2010, in Rabat. The meeting was
                           attended by a parliamentarian of the Region, officials from ONEP, various Ministries (Interior,
                           Agriculture, Secretariat of Water and Environment), municipalities in the Oum Er Rbia basin,
                           consulting firms and Bank staff. The minutes and the list of the participants in the consultation are
                           included in the SDR report

                           Per the current monitoring in place, all consultations for all relevant EIAs were held with all
                           stakeholders prior to their disclosure on both the ONEE's and Bank's websites. Furthermore,
                           ONEE is intensively implementing a detailed communication and awareness raising plan,
                           specifically in locations where works have already started or will start soon, with the corollary aim
                           of screening neighboring inhabitants and farmers to identify potential options for benefit -sharing
                           in areas targeted for WWTP construction. All consultation actions are extensively documented and
                           shared with the Bank.

                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          30-Mar-2010
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       06-Apr-2010



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Morocco                                                          06-Apr-2010
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Mar-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Apr-2010
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Morocco                                                          06-Apr-2010
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         On the OP 4.11, ONEE will rely on the environmental and social guidelines for civil works in the
                         city of Bejaad. This guideline was cleared by the Bank on May 14, 2014, and will be disclosed in-
                         country and on the Infoshop.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Sector Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Richard Abdulnour
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Nina Chee (RSA)                              Date: 19-May-2014
                            Coordinator:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (SM)                   Date: 19-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 8 of 8
