INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12995
U
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Argentina                   Project ID:  P132846
Project Name: Forests and Community (P132846)
Task Team       Peter Jipp
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Feb-2015                Estimated    07-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Gender (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Rural non-farm income generation
(20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other envir onment and natural
resources management (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      61.06             Total Bank Financing:    58.76
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      2.30
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        58.76
Local Communities                                                             0.00
Total                                                                        61.06
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve forest management; and increase access to markets
and basic services by small forest producers including indigenous and campesinos in selected
Page 1 of 12


﻿Northern Provinces of Argentina.
3. Project Description
The Project is expected to benefit approximately 150,000 beneficiaries distributed as follows: (a)
10,000 families (50,000 estimated beneficiaries; >75% indigenous; in approximately 250
communities) mainly Small-scale Forest Producers (SFP) participating in designing and
implementing integrated management plans and income generating sub-projects; (b) 100,000
beneficiaries participating in communication and training programs including families of SFP, public
o        administrators, and service providers at federal, provincial, and departmental levels.
Component 1: Sustainable Livelihoods (US$42.25 million, of which: GoA US$1.62 million and
IBRD US$40.63 million). This component would finance the preparation and implementation of
management plans for land and forests in approximately 250 Communities. Integrated Community
Plans (Planes Integrales Comunitarios) will be designed to raise incomes and increase resilience to
drought through demand-driven investments including both service delivery (among other,
improving forest management planning, increasing dry season water availability, strengthening
tenure, improving efficiency of wood energy systems) and locally-managed subprojects (among
other, increasing production, processing and marketing of timber and non-timber products and
installation/monitoring of improved cook stoves and charcoal kilns). Forest management plans
prepared under this component will be considered for certification and for financing under the
Project and/or under the national Forest Fund created by the Forest Law 26.331.
Component 2: Natural Forest Management and Civil Society (US$1.44 million, of which: GoA US
$0.20 million and IBRD US$1.24 million). This component would finance (a) a national forest and
climate awareness campaign to expand and maintain support for implementation of the Forest Law
and (b) the establishment or expansion of existing community radio stations in a total of 25 locations
to distribute information locally and in native languages. The campaign would highlight, among
other things, the importance of the conservation of natural forest for agriculture (and agro-exports)
due to their ecological functions (regulating hydrologic cycles, contributing to soil fertility and
biodiversity conservation), and emphasize the important role that forests play in supporting rural
livelihoods and maintaining the cultural values of the indigenous and criollo populations. The target
audience would include indigenous and criollo communities and the general public with particular
emphasis on national and sub-national decision makers and local leaders overseeing implementation
of the Forest Law and responsible for delivery of services in communities living in and around
natural forests in Northern Argentina.
Component 3: Skills Development and Technology Transfer (US$ 7.4 million IBRD). This
component would finance strengthening the technical and managerial skills of (a) indigenous and
criollo community members, (b) small private forest owners, and (c) technical service providers and
extension agents working in the project area. The training delivered under this component will cover
project related topics; such as, sustainable forest management, improved production, climate resilient
agricultural and livestock production, value addition and tenure security. Short training courses will
be delivered through both classroom and community level instruction. Classroom instruction will be
delivered to both community members and Rural Development Agencies (RDA) staff and others
involved in project related service delivery. Instruction of service providers will include sharing
experience among RDA and implementing agencies across provinces, improving communication
with local communities, accessing land tenure security services, and accessing funds for sustainable
forest management. Activities to be financed would include consultant and non-consultant services,
training, and equipment.
Page 2 of 12


﻿Component 4: Forest Information and Monitoring Systems (US$9.57 million, of which: GoA US
$1.63 million and IBRD US$7.93 million). This component would support the expansion of SAyDS
technical and institutional capacity to manage forest information and monitor changes in forest cover.
O
U         The component would finance (a) expanding coverage of the Forest Administration, Control and
Verification System (SACVEFOR) to 10 Provinces in Northern Argentina, (b) establishment of a
national Deforestation and Forest Degradation Early Warning System, and (c) the planning and
establishment of a National Grid of Permanent Sample Plots. The component would finance
consultant and non-consultant services, training, and equipment.
Component 5: Project Management and Impact Monitoring (US$2.01 million, of which: GoA US
$0.44 million and IBRD US$1.57 million). This component would finance; (a) the technical and
administrative coordination of the project, (b) hiring consultants to staff the National Project
Executing Unit (NEU) and (c) operational costs, training and equipment. This component also would
support the development of an impact evaluation to identify changes in outcomes directly attributable
to project activities. The impact evaluation is expected to help identify strengths and weaknesses in
the design and implementation of existing policies and regulations related to forest management and
forest tenure in Argentina and inform future decisions and regulatory revisions including during
project implementation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Consistent with the CPS, the project area will include regions characterized by both high levels of
rural poverty with high concentrations of SFP and indigenous peoples. Accordingly, the initial area
of intervention will include pre-selected departments in three provinces in the Chaco Eco-Region
(Chaco, Salta, and Santiago del Estero) but the area is expected to expand to include poor
communities of SFP in Misiones and Jujuy Provinces during implementation. Land tenure
strengthening activities under the project will initially be piloted in a more limited area, with possible
expansion considered during the mid-term review, taking into consideration implementation results
and lessons generated from a parallel PHRD financed Land Governance Dialogue
Argentina is characterized by a broad mix of ecological regions and rich biological diversity due to
its wide range of climatic conditions. Of the 178 terrestrial eco-regions in Latin America and the
Caribbean (identified in a World Bank/World-Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) study), 18 are to be
found in Argentina. Eight of these eco-regions have been classified as among the highest priorities
for conservation in the Neotropics. They range from the tropical rain forests of Misiones Province to
the cold and arid Patagonian steppes of southern Argentina.
The World Bank co-sponsored a publication titled "Argentina: State of the Environment 2005",
which concluded that "According to the sustainable development indicators published by the
Secretariat of the Environment and Sustainable Development "the major environmental trends are
still of great concern. These trends include increased deforestation and its consequent loss of
biodiversity; erosion and water contamination from intensive agriculture and grazing, among other
issues of environmental concern".
The Project's main activities would take place in the Gran Chaco Forest eco-Region (e.g. the
component aimed at supporting the sustainable livelihoods of forest dependent people and
communities represents 81% of the Project budget, and focuses its activities mainly in the dry forest
Chaco ecosystem. But it would further on also support pilot activities of participatory forest
Page 3 of 12


﻿landscape management in the humid and highly biodiverse forests of the Selva Misionera and Selva
Tucumano-Boliviana, once the intervention concept has proved to be effective).
Over 67% of Argentine natural forests are located in the Gran Chaco eco-region, also known as the
O
"Bosque Chaqueflo", "Parque Chaqueflo", or simply "Chaco". This area in northern Argentina spans
twelve provinces and produces around 90% of all natural forest products in Argentina (mainly
wooden poles, tannin, firewood and charcoal), or around 6.3 million tons per year.
Biodiversity of global and national importance in the Gran Chaco includes quebracho colorado
(Schinpsis quebracho-colorado and Schinopsis balansae), quebracho blanco (Aspidosperma
quebracho-blanco), mistol (Ziziphus mistol), tatfi carreta (Priodontes maximus), three species of
peccary (Catagonus wagneri, Pecari tajacu, Tayassu pecari), giant anteater (Mirmecophaga
tridactyla), boa (Eunectes notaeus), jaguar (Panthera onca), Darwin's rhea (Rhea americana),
crowned eagle (Harpyhaliaetus coronatus), and a tortoise (Chelonoidis chilensis), many of which are
threatened in different degrees.
With over 22 million ha. of forests, the Chaco contains vast amounts of above-ground carbon stocks,
estimated at over 1.08 teragrams (C eq.), with a total emissions potential of 3.9 teragrams (CO2e.).
On average, the Chaco forests contain about 49.4 tons per ha. of C eq., with an emissions potential of
181 tons of CO2e per ha.
The Gran Chaco is also arguably the most threatened eco-region in the country, primarily as a result
of the massive industrial-scale clearing for soybean cultivation experienced during the last decades.
The most recent official deforestation estimates show a loss of 317,000 ha. of forest per annum in
Santiago del Estero, Chaco and Formosa provinces alone for the year 2007. Forest loss also affects
the hydrologic cycle, destroys biodiversity, and can lead to accelerated soil erosion and loss of soil
fertility. Aside from the effects of the burgeoning soybean industry, the Gran Chaco is also highly
degraded as a result of decades of over-harvesting of timber, woodland grazing, and fires.
The high concentration of arsenic in the underground water is well known and documented in a large
portion of the Project area. However, this region lags behind the rest of the country in social services
and basic infrastructure. What is more, the illiteracy rate is three times higher than the national
average, and more than a third of its population lives with unsatisfied basic needs (NBI). Although
a         the population of the twelve Provinces that make up the Gran Chaco eco-region amounts to only 18%
of the national total, they consume more than 50% of the total fuel wood in the country. Eight out of
ten rural households in the most critical areas of the Gran Chaco eco-region still use wood or
charcoal to cook their food. So, to add insult to injury, deforestation in the Gran Chaco is often
accompanied by detrimental social impacts on the rural poor. Although having historical ties to the
land, these groups often lack formal land titles and, therefore, are highly vulnerable to displacement
by well-funded groups.
The other Project components (aimed at 1) maintaining societal support and to strengthen the
political will to continue investing public financial resources in natural forest management and
conservation; 2) strengthening technical and managerial skills of forest dependent community
members, small private forest owners, technical service providers and extension agents; and 3)
expanding the technical and institutional capacity of the SAyDS to manage forest information,
strengthening its mandate to monitor changes in forest cover, and to expand a system of forest
product transport licensing and better control illegal forest products harvesting, transport and
consumption nationwide, to combat illegal timber transport) will have a nation-wide reach.
Page 4 of 12


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Lilian Pedersen (GSURR)
Pablo Francisco Herrera (GENDR)
O
Ricardo Larrobla (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project is expected to generate mostly positive
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                environmental impacts, given that its objective is to
improve forest management, conservation, and resilience
to climate change based on participatory community
management models. No substantial negative
environmental impacts are expected from the project
investments and activities.
As part of the EA development, an Environmental
Management Framework based on a category B-type
project (EMF), was developed by the borrower during the
course of project preparation. This framework will ensure
the prior assessment of the environmental risks and
impacts of any investment to be made within this Project,
and particularly those aimed at financing sub-projects (the
so called "PICs"), as well as the availability of specific
guidelines to minimize their environmental impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The ecosystems covered by the project area include the
4.04                                 Chaco dry forests, the Atlantic rainforest, and the Yungas
cloud forests. The Project area also includes many sites
that are important and critical natural habitats (National
Parks, Provincial Reserves, Biosphere Reserves, as well
as different priority areas for biodiversity conservation,
identified by public and private institutions).
The project impacts with regard to critical natural habitats
are expected to be mostly positive or neutral, since it will
support improvements in the management of the forest
landscapes where those critical natural habitats are
immersed.
Guidelines were developed as an annex to the EMF to
identify, manage and monitor possible negative impacts
on critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          The project will focus on forest ecosystems and their
improved management. Those community sub-projects
(PICs) addressing the implementation of forest
management or harvesting by small scale holders will be
subject to the development of Forest Management Plans
acceptable to the Bank and coherent with the local
standards required to access the "National Forest Fund".
In addition to natural forests management, it is expected
that reforestation activities will also be supported. No
Page 5 of 12


﻿large-scale commercial plantations will be supported by
the project. Plantation activities will be community-based
for reforestation, of relatively limited size, and primarily
focused on native species. Certification will be promoted
and increased areas under improved management or
certification would be secured by completion. Through
the implementation of a preparatory activity (BIRF-7520-
AR), the borrower has identified and documented a set of
technical guidelines and eligible management practices
for the specific eco-regions where the Project is going to
be executed.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            The small scale agriculture investments planned in this
Project will use biological pest management methods and/
or non-synthetic chemical pesticides.
The Project might include small scale reforestation, as
well as other agroforestry activities, which could possibly
require the use of pesticides, herbicides, and fungicides in
some stages. The EMF addresses pest management issues
and the subsequent use of these substances within the
specific activities and sub-projects (PICs) since its
"Preliminary Environmental Assessment" stage. Should
any activity or sub-subproject require so, the EMF guides
the preparation of specific pest management studies and/
or plans to be implemented along with those specific
interventions.
The EMF has clearly established which chemicals are not
eligible for financing.
Physical Cultural        Yes          Although no physical cultural resources have been
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   identified in relation to the Project activities, some Project
areas may have physical cultural resources.
The EMF includes procedures and generic terms of
reference for the development of physical cultural
resources protection plans in case of chance findings in
the project area.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes           The project beneficiaries (partners) involve both
BP 4.10                                Indigenous Peoples and small producers (Criollos) in the
5 provinces in North Argentina that are included in the
project. To address OP 4.10 requirements, the Borrower
prepared an Integrated Community Framework (ICF) that
includes an IPPF that contains details of the consultations
carried out during preparation and the framework itself is
based on community consultations in order to ensure
broad support under a free, prior and informed consent
following national legislation. In all activities involving
beneficiaries who are indigenous peoples, the IPPF will
serve as a guideline to design and implement subprojects
that contain the requirements of an Indigenous Peoples
Page 6 of 12


﻿Plan (IPP). The same procedure will apply for activities
involving Criollos. The majority of communities in the
target area include a mix of indigenous and non-
indigenous inhabitants.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Project activities are not expected to cause displacement
OP/BP 4.12                           however activities related mainly with land regularization
and subprojects designed by communities may include
actions that limit the access to natural resources. It is not
expected the project to limit the access of any of the
protected areas within the project area. To address OP
4.12 requirements, the Borrower prepared an Integrated
Community Framework (ICF) that includes a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), built from past
rural projects in Argentina. The RPF establishes process
by which members of potentially affected communities
participate in the design of project components, selection
of options to achieve resettlement policy objectives, and
implementation and monitoring of relevant project
activities. In order to address possible restrictions to
resources, a Process Framework was also prepared as part
of the ICF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
O
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No large scale, significant or irreversible negative environmental impacts are expected to be
caused by the project investments and activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Considering the high concentration of arsenic present in a large portion of the Project area's
underground waters, the Project activities aimed at supplying water for human consumption might
have indirect or long term impacts on human health, so specific water quality assessments will be
required, which should be identified through a Preliminary Environmental Assessment Form
(Formulario Ambiental Preliminar) and conducted before the execution of such activities.
The addition of value to forest timber and non-timber forest products, as well as the improvement
of cooking stoves and kilns might lead indirectly to an increase in firewood, charcoal and wood
consumption from outside those considered in the Forest Management Plans to be developed by
the Project. This potential issue will be addressed during the screening of the sub-projects (PICs),
Page 7 of 12


﻿when considering their indirect impacts area and the mitigation measures related to each Forest
Management Plan.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Rainwater harvesting investments are included in the Project for those cases where the
underground water supply is not feasible or convenient.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As part of the EA development, a draft Environmental Management Framework based on a
category B-type project, was developed by the borrower during the course of project preparation.
The project will be implemented by the National Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable
Development (SAyDS), through its Undersecretary of Planning and Environmental Policy. This
will be done in close collaboration with national, provincial and local Rural Development
Agencies (RDA) that are already working in the territory with the local beneficiaries (FDPCs).
These RDAs may include public (national or provincial), non-governmental, academic institutions,
as also grass root organizations.
A gap analysis conducted by the Bank in 2011 to compare the Argentine frameworks for
environmental and social risks management and the Bank's safeguards policies found, in general
terms, a high level of coincidence between them, when it comes to their aim of promoting the
identification, assessment and mitigation of the possible impacts related to development projects.
In addition to that, under previous Bank projects, SAyDS has demonstrated openness to dialogue
and a willingness to enter into dialog and embrace innovation. However, experience has also
shown that SAyDS's implementation capacity is rudimentary, that its influence in the provinces is
limited, and that time is needed to build capacity and change attitudes among the stakeholders.
SAyDS's specific capacity for safeguards policies implementation is not an exception to this
general observation. Its experience on safeguards management is rather limited. While the
Undersecretary of Planning and Environmental Policy has previous experience in managing the
Bank's safeguards policies in a limited number of grants and investment lending projects, very few
of them (if any, at all) have had the level of complexity of this one (in terms of the nature of its
planned interventions in the field, its intended beneficiaries, its geographic extension, and its inter-
institutional coordination requirements). It is important to mention that, as Argentina's constitution
grants authority over natural resources to the individual provinces, the institutional arrangements
that the SAyDS will reach with the provincial governments would seem to be crucial in order to
ensure their buying into the environmental and social risk management processes and procedures
stipulated by the Bank's policies. To ensure implementation of the agreed social safeguard
measures an Integrated Community Framework (ICF) was prepared.
Budgetary provisions were made by SAyDS, in order to ensure the availability of resources to
recruit and train staff and partners dedicated to safeguards management, implementation and
monitoring.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Preliminary consultations with a sample of rural communities (peasants and indigenous peoples)
were carried out in most of the Project area during its preparation early stages.
Page 8 of 12


﻿Specific consultations on the Environmental and the Social Management Frameworks were
conducted during the last weeks of December, 2014 and during January, 2015. The consulted
stakeholders included representatives of the Indigenous Peoples Participation Council (Consejo de
Participaci6n Indigena, or "CPI") from the Provinces and peoples involved in the Project area, as
O
well as regional indigenous people's organizations. With regards to peasants and small farmers,
the public consultation included the "Red Agroforestal Chaco Argentina - REDAF", the "Foro
Nacional de Agricultura Familiar" and the "Movimiento Nacional Campesino Indigena", which
brings together most of the peasants' organizations at the primary and secondary level.
In addition to that, the EMF was distributed for consultation, via e-mail, among a group of well-
known local environmental NGOs that have previous work experience in the Project area.
The consultation extended over 8 weeks. The documents, in Spanish, were distributed via e-mail
on December 18th, and feedback was received through February 19th. The comments were
documented in the Chapter 9 of the EMF and Chapter 7 of the Integrated Community Framework
explicitly showing the treatment given to each comment, many of which were incorporated to the
final versions of the respective frameworks, which are to be disclosed on February 20th, 2015.
The final versions of the Environmental and the Social Management Frameworks, will be
uploaded to the borrower's web site (http://www.ambiente.gov.ar/?idarticulo=13359).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                            04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         10-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                               18-Dec-2014
Comments: Draft versions are available online. The fmnal versions of the Environmental and the
Social Management Frameworks, will be uploaded to the borrower's web site (http://
www.ambiente.gov.ar/?idarticulo=13359).
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                            04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         04-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                               18-Dec-2014
Comments: Draft versions are available online. The final versions of the Environmental and the
Social Management Frameworks, will be uploaded to the borrower's web site (http://
www.ambiente.gov.ar/?idarticulo=13359).
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                            04-Feb 2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         04-Feb-2015
Page 9 of 12


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                18-Dec-2014
Comments: Draft versions are available online. The final versions of the Environmental and the
Social Management Frameworks, will be uploaded to the borrower's web site (http://
www.ambiente.gov.ar/?idarticulo=13359).
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           04-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                18-Dec-2014
Comments: Draft versions are available online. The final versions of the Environmental and the
Social Management Frameworks, will be uploaded to the borrower's web site (http://
www.ambiente.gov.ar/?idarticulo=1 3359). Draft versions are available online. The
final versions of the Environmental and the Social Management Frameworks, will be
uploaded to the borrower's web site (http://www.ambiente.gov.ar/?
idarticulo= 13359).
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X]  No[     NA
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes[X] No[     NA
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
Page 10 of 12


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
.,          property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes  No  ]  NA [ X
O
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes      No        NA    X
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes[   No[X]     NA
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Jipp
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Francis V. Fragano (RSA)             Date: 09-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)             Date: 10-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


