INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC6767
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uganda                     Project ID:   P145309
Project Name:   Skills Development Project (P145309)
Task Team       Elizabeth Ninan Dulvy
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Feb-2015               Estimated     07-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Vocational training (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                    100.00
Total                                                          100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project objective is to improve the capacity of institutions to deliver quality and relevant skills
training programs in the agriculture and small and medium scale manufacturing/construction sectors.
C. Project Description
Component 1: Institutionalizing systemic reforms in skills development
As the Strategic Plan rightly points out systemic reform in the sector is critical to realigning the
delivery system without which investment in strengthening training institutions will eventually result


﻿in further reinforcing the existing supply driven system. Therefore, systemic reform activities
proposed under Component 1 are critical to the success of Component 2 and achievement of the
project development objective. Sub-components under component 1 include Establishing the Skills
Development Authority (SDA), and Establishing sector skills councils (SSCs).
o
Component 2: Improving Quality and Relevance of Skills Development
1.     Sub-component 2.1: Establishment of Centers of Excellence
2.     Under this sub-component, three Uganda Technical Colleges (UTC)- Lira UTC, Elgon
UTC, Bushenyi UTC and the Bukalasa Agricultural College will be upgraded to Centers of
Excellence (COE). The targets set for Component 2 of the USDP will be achieved through the
implementation of the following key activities: (i) Improving institutional governance; (ii) enhanced
equity; (iii) Design and adaptation of demand driven competency-based curriculum and assessment
system to international standards; (iv) Training for faculty and staff, and development of training and
learning materials; (v) Establish and upgrade physical infrastructure, including civil works and
establishment of modem workshops and classrooms with latest equipment and machinery and multi-
media facilities; and (vi) Support to improve management and monitoring mechanisms within the
CoEs.
Key and of more relevance to safeguards are the following:
3.     Design and adaptation of curriculum and assessment system to international standards. The
SDP under this sub-component will finance: (i) twinning arrangements between qualified
international consultants with the target institutions, through which competency-based curriculum for
craftsman, artisan and technician courses in construction, manufacturing and agriculture will be
developed in consultation with industries in Uganda and in accordance with international curricula
standards ; (ii) development of related occupational health and safety and environment management
curricula; (iii) adaptation of competency-based curriculum packages in specific trades/occupations to
the requirements of the country as defined by the Sector Skills Councils of the Reform Task Force/
Skills Development Authority; and (iii) the development of appropriate assessment systems which
are administered by a third qualifying party and not the CoE itself.
4.     Establish and upgrade physical infrastructure. The project will finance necessary civil works-
renovations and refurbishment of existing infrastructure and build new infrastructure, as necessary,
a       for workshops, classrooms, libraries, administrative blocks, common facilities for students, faculty
and staff; provision of water and sanitation in the institutions, augmented provision of electricity
supply with power back-up system, as necessary; improvement of campus environment, and low cost
boundary walls. All civil works will be disabled- friendly complying with national and international
standards. The project will also finance procurement of equipment and machinery in line with new/
revised curricula for diploma, craftsman and artisan training programs and their maintenance, and
tools, and training materials for students.
5.     Sub-component 2.2: Establishment of Networks
This sub-component will seek to establish a network around each CoE serving as a hub and linking a
limited number of Vocational Institutes (between 3 to 5 public and private vocational institutions)
with the CoE. Before the project mid-term, about two VIs will be linked to each CoE. After mid-
term, depending on the success of the network, two to three more VIs will be added to the network of
each CoE. Under the network model, both CoEs and network institutions will mutually benefit from
the USDP to provide competency-based training of good quality for different skill levels along a
given trade.


﻿6.     The project will support basic civil works, selected trade- relevant equipment, machinery and
tools, training-learning resources both for students and teachers, training consumables, and partial
costs incurred for operations in the public network institutions.
0
7.     Sub-component 2.3: Twining Arrangement for establishment of Centers of Excellence and
networks
8.     Technically qualified institutions will be selected through an international competitive
process to actas twinning partners responsible for providing all necessary support to help selected
Colleges grow into "Centers of Excellence". The partner institutions will also be responsible for
providing support to the network institutions in order to improve quality of training. The partner
institutions will prepare a time-bound detailed plan of action with clear deliverables. Once approved
by the MoES and the IDA, the MoES will ensure that the partners do not face procedural bottlenecks
in implementing the approved work plan.
Component-3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
This component would finance: (i) management of the project including establishment of a Project
Coordination Unit within the MoES to manage the project, as well as implementation units within the
respective CoEs; (ii) a social marketing campaign to improve the image of the BTVET sub-sector
with the aim of increasing demand for technical and vocational training as well as increasing equity
in access by attracting more females and students from other marginalized groups to technical and
vocational education and training; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation under the project including
baseline studies, mid and end-term tracer studies, employer satisfaction surveys, mid-term
management review, and annual performance audits.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 4 CoEs namely Lira UTC, Elgon UTC, Bushenyi UTC and the
Bukalasa Agricultural College and at 3-5 Network Vocational Institutions associated with each CoE.
Component 2 which involves establishment of CoEs with association to Network Vocational
Institutions shall entail civil works which among others include: renovations and refurbishment of
existing infrastructure and build new infrastructure, as necessary, for workshops, classrooms,
libraries, administrative blocks, common facilities for students, faculty and staff; provision of water
and sanitation in the institutions, augmented provision of electricity supply with power back-up
system, as necessary; improvement of campus environment, and low cost boundary walls. Key
Safeguards aspects relate to environmental, safety and social issues associated with construction
activities.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Both the Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) and the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry
and Fisheries (MAAIF) have previously implemented and are also currently implementing IDA
financed projects and are thus aware of its safeguards policies. However, both ministries lack
safeguards human capacity that may be required to implement the safeguard policies, for which will
require strengthening.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
Herbert Oule (GENDR)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment   Yes         The project will involve civil works which may
Q       OP/BP 4.01                               generate environmental, health and safety impacts.
Since the specific sites and locations are not yet
known, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework will be prepared to guide implementation
of the environmental and social aspects. The ESMF
shall be prepared in a consultative manner, and
disclosed both in-country and at info-shop before
project appraisal. Specific safeguard instruments
(ESIA, ESMPs) shall be prepared during project
implementation following guidance in the ESMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The project will not affect natural habitats nor
support any activities that affect any natural habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project will not involve or affect forests or
forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project will not involve the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         The civil works involved in the upgrading and
OP/BP 4.11                               development of the COEs may impact on known
and/or unknown PCRs and therefore a Chance Finds
Procedure will be developed as part of the ESMF. As
part of ESMF compilation, PCRs inventory will be
carried out in key/major known institutions and
appropriate management measures recommended
where necessary.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the four project
4.10                                     areas of Lira, Bushenyi, Mbale and Bukalasa.
.        Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project will involve upgrading of institutions
BP 4.12                                  specializing in small and medium scale
manufacturing/construction and agriculture, which
may require land take and involve some involuntary
resettlement and/or restrictions of access to resources
and livelihoods. A Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) will be prepared in a consultative manner and
disclosed before project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The project does not involve dams.
Projects on International   No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        N/A
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Launched in July 2014 and completion expected by September 22, 2014.
IV. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Elizabeth Ninan Dulvy
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards  Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)           Date: 13-Feb-2015
Coordinator:
Practice Manager/    Name: Arun R. Joshi (PMGR)                  Date: 13-Feb-2015
Manager:


