                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA6738
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jan-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID:    P146143
                            Project Name:      Emergency Employment Investment Project (P146143)
                            Task Team          Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          28-Jan-2014                         Estimated   20-Mar-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     MNSSP                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (99%), Public administration- Other social services (1%)
                            Theme(s):         Social safety nets (60%), Improving labor markets (25%), Other social
                                              protection and risk management (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      92.53           Total Bank Financing:                     0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0.00
                              MNA VPU Free-standing Trust Funds                                                             92.53
                              Total                                                                                         92.53
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project objective is to: i) create short-term employment opportunities for the unemployed,
                           unskilled and semi-skilled workers in selected locations in Egypt; ii) contribute to the creation and/
                           or maintenance of community infrastructure and services; iii) improve access to basic infrastructure
                           and community services among target population; and iv) improve the employability of young men


                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                         and women through short-term training or other support services to facilitate transitions to wage and
                         self-employment.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project consists of four components:

                         Component 1: Employment-intensive Small-scale Infrastructure Sub-projects
                         This component will finance labor-intensive small infrastructure employment creation programs.
                         Specifically, the project will support labor-intensive small scale local public works sub-projects
                         which could include, but are not limited to canal weed reduction, Nile River bank protection,
                         upgrading the conditions of rural housing, pavement of rural roads, and school rehabilitation. These
                         sub-projects could be demand-driven, requested by the local government at the governorate level, or
                         supply driven, requested by a central ministry based on needs. Implementation of the sub-projects
                         will be contracted out to private contractors, while ensuring the labor intensity of the contracts.
                         Infrastructure operations and maintenance procedures will be defined and agreed upon with
                         beneficiaries and other stakeholders during the sub-project design phase (e.g. between SFD,
                         Ministries and Governorate).

                         Component 2: Intensive Community Service and Youth Employment Sub-projects
                         This component will support labor-intensive community service sub-projects through the provision
                         of grants to local communities (NGOs and CDAs) for services like but not limited to, sub-project for
                         cleanliness and environmental awareness campaigns in villages and local areas, early childhood
                         education, mother and child health awareness home visits programs, illiteracy eradication activities,
                         and youth engagement in community initiatives in rural and urban areas. A high share of women
                         beneficiaries can be expected, given that social service sub-projects tend to employ unemployed
                         females. These grants will also enable the SFD to target more educated unemployed youth in the
                         provision of social services with the potential to target more urban settings where unemployment of
                         educated youth is a greater concern.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Improving Workers’ Employability
                         This component will finance the piloting of two types of employment support activities mainly aimed
                         at youth in urban and rural areas. It provides a menu of services comprising training, job-search
                         assistance, wage- and training subsidies, access to finance, advisory services and other support as
                         needed to facilitate young people’s transition into wage- and self-employment. The pilot programs
                         will be demand-driven by NGOs – the implementing agencies – based on a core set of interventions
                         that are adapted to the specific needs of youth and employers in the local context.

                         Sub-projects will be implemented by NGOs in urban and rural areas. Beneficiaries will be mainly
                         young men and women in the project’s target provinces who are out of school and out of (full time)
                         work. Young women will be specifically targeted by making female participation an evaluation
                         criterion during the Request for Proposals, and assessing proposed design features to attract female
                         participants (e.g., female-only classes, child care, and parent outreach).

                         Component 4: Project Implementation and Capacity Building
                         The implementation support program for the project includes: (i) training and consultancies to
                         support project management, monitoring and evaluation, financial management and procurement; (ii)
                         financing of public information activities, EU (donor) visibility, communication and social
                         mobilization strategy development and implementation; (iii) technical verification for project
                         outputs, and quality assurance for the design and implementation of the above three project


                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         components; and (iv) capacity building as needed for SFD and governorate staff, as well as for the
                         implementing NGOs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Project activities will be conducted in selected urban and rural areas nationwide. The locations will
                         draw on Egypt’s poverty map and other poverty targeting tools, as well as locations with the highest
                         rates of unemployment figures and concentration of the poor.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (MNSSU)
                         Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (MNSEE)

                          6. Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              An Environmental and Social Screening and
                          BP 4.01                                             Assessment Framework (ESSAF), as well as
                                                                              sectoral Environmental Management Plans
                                                                              (EMPs) have been developed and cleared by the
                                                                              Bank to ensure environmental due diligence for
                                                                              similar sub-projects funded under the Bank-
                                                                              financed ELIIP. It is intended to ensure that, for
                                                                              all activities financed by the project, all efforts are
                                                                              made to avoid and minimize environmental and
                                                                              social impacts.
                                                                              The current ESSAF remains relevant in managing
                                                                              new activities proposed by the EEIP. The
                                                                              ESSAF, the EMPs and Environmental Guidelines
                                                                              were revised accordingly and re-disclosed in-
                                                                              country and in InfoShop prior to appraisal.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No               The project does not plan to undertake any
                                                                              activities affecting natural habitats, and any
                                                                              subprojects that could trigger the Natural Habitats
                                                                              policy (OP 4.04) will be excluded.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No               Not applicable.

                          Pest Management OP 4.09            No               Sub-projects entailing weeding activities shall be
                                                                              manual weeding (i.e., by hand) and will not
                                                                              involve the use of pesticides. As a result, World
                                                                              Bank OP 4.09 is not triggered.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No               The project does not envision conducting any
                          BP 4.11                                             activities impacting physical cultural resources,
                                                                              and any subprojects that could trigger this policy
                                                                              (OP 4.11) will be excluded.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No               Not Applicable.

                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No               The project will support labor intensive small
                          4.12                                                scale local infrastructure public works subprojects


                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                                                 (ie. canal weed reduction/cleaning, river Nile
                                                                                 bank protection, rural housing upgrading,
                                                                                 pavement of rural roads, school rehabilitations).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 Any subprojects that could trigger the involuntary
                                                                                 resettlement policy (OP 4.12) will be excluded
                                                                                 and will be part of the negative list in the
                                                                                 Operational Manual. In other words, sub-projects
                                                                                 cannot be financed that result in direct economic
                                                                                 and social impacts through the: (a) involuntary
                                                                                 taking of land resulting in: (i) relocation or loss
                                                                                 of shelter, (ii) loss of assets or access to assets, or
                                                                                 (iii) loss of income sources or means of
                                                                                 livelihood, whether or not the affected persons
                                                                                 must move to another location; or (b) involuntary
                                                                                 restriction of access to legally designated parks
                                                                                 and protected areas resulting in adverse impacts
                                                                                 on the livelihoods of the displaced persons.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               Not applicable.

                            Projects on International           No               The project will support small scale subprojects at
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 the community level, and no activities that would
                                                                                 affect international waterways are expected to
                                                                                 take place.
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  Not applicable.
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed environmental category is “B.” OP 4.01 is triggered.

                             The Emergency Employment Investment Project (EEIP) provides substantial resources that will
                             directly complement the ongoing World Bank-financed Emergency Labor Intensive Investment
                             Project (ELIIP) and which will, in the interest of sustaining an efficient and rapid response, adopt
                             the approach and proven implementation mechanisms developed under ELIIP, including
                             environmental and social safeguards.

                             The EEIP project will use the same Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
                             Framework (ESSAF), as well as sectoral Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) that have
                             been developed and cleared by the Bank to ensure environmental due diligence for similar sub-
                             projects funded under the ELIIP.

                             The ESSAF addresses, in a sound environmental manner and in line with the World Bank’s
                             safeguard policies, any likely negative environmental impacts potentially resulting from the
                             subproject activities. It includes a screening tool to ensure that the subprojects will not entail the


                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                         triggering of any Bank safeguards policies except for OP4.01 Environmental Assessment. Also,
                         the project through the utilization of the screening tool included in the ESSAF will exclude any
                         category "A" sub-projects from being funded through this project. Category "B" projects will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subject to the national laws and regulations with regard to the preparation of an EIA/EMP to
                         mitigate for any negative environmental impacts. The Bank team, however, through supervision as
                         well as regular monitoring and follow-up activities, will conduct post reviews for a selected
                         sample of the EA documents of the sub-projects. The ESSAF also includes examples of the typical
                         environmental impacts and the relevant mitigation measures of some of the sub-projects that could
                         be potentially funded by the project.

                         The sub-projects of the proposed project are likely to result in a number of positive environmental
                         and socio-economic impacts. That is, all of the sub-projects are expected to generate employment
                         opportunities and improve income generation for many individuals as well as improve the living
                         conditions and livelihoods especially for those representing the low or poorest segments of society
                         in targeted areas and communities. For example, the improvement of solid waste collection in poor
                         areas will lead to positive health and environmental impacts.

                         From a social perspective, the Project’s impact is likely to be positive. With the emphasis on rural
                         areas and the targeting of villages in the lowest ranking of the poverty map, the poorest and most
                         vulnerable groups are likely to see an increase in employment, social and economic opportunities.
                         The youth are likely to be the primary beneficiaries of employment opportunities, as they have
                         higher unemployment rates. Females also will be targeted through supporting community services
                         sub-projects.

                         Gender: The impact on women will be positive, especially from the social services subprojects,
                         where women would be more likely to be among beneficiaries of the services, as well as more
                         likely to be employed to deliver the services. The gender differentiated impacts will be monitored
                         by the monitoring and evaluation framework and will be a special focus of the social
                         accountability measures to allow for adjustment during implementation to improve the impact on
Public Disclosure Copy




                         women. Given that male- under and unemployment especially the youth is a major challenge in
                         Egypt, the project include interventions that will also attract male participants (infrastructure
                         works and employability activities), while at the same time making female participation an
                         evaluation criterion during the Request for Proposals, and assessing proposed design features of
                         sub-projects to ensure it also attract female participants (e.g., female-only classes, child care, and
                         parent outreach).

                         Targeting. Under this program, special emphasis is being given to the poorest communities and
                         vulnerable groups. The project is using two-tier targeting method. First poorer governorates and
                         local areas are identified using Egypt’s poverty map, and then by enforcing self-targeting through
                         the selection of sub-projects which create jobs that are not attractive to the non-poor as well as
                         setting wage rate slightly lower than the prevailed market rate.

                         Social Accountability. This will be taken in consideration through different mechanisms as
                         follows: (i) a grievance and transparency mechanism that allow citizens to provide feedback to the
                         SFD about project implementation and to allow potential beneficiaries who were not included in
                         the program to seek redress; (ii) public information on the availability of employment
                         opportunities created by the project at relevant levels of implementation; (iii) client satisfaction
                         surveys especially for community social services subprojects; (iv) quality assurance surveys



                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           especially for community infrastructure services; and (v) independent verification of results of
                           project implementation using NGOs.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           None.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The SFD will prepare a safeguards screening summary for each sub-project in a format specified
                           in the Operations Manual. This will summarize: (a) the recommended categorization according to
                           World Bank policies; and, (b) the proposed environmental safeguards documentation requirements
                           for the sub-project. The safeguards screening summary will be part of the sub-project
                           identification package that will be submitted to the Bank by the SFD. The Bank will review the
                           screening of sub-projects on a selective basis to verify that the screening tools and choice of
                           documents are being applied appropriately and consistently.

                          In terms of capacity, the SFD has acquired and enhanced its institutional capacity for
                          implementing safeguards policies throughout the implementation of the previous phases of World
                          Bank projects, e.g.: the SFD has been implementing EMPs for (i) the Local Area Development
                          (LAD) Program since 2006, and (ii) Enhancing Access to Finance for Micro and Small Enterprise
                          since 2010. However, quite recently, the SFD has decided to improve the integration of
                          environmental assessment to its projects through upgrading the Environmental Policies Program
                          (EPP) to become the Environmental Department (ED) under the Central Sector for Human and
                          Community Development (CSHCD). This has been issued through a Decree from the SFD
                          Secretary General, in September 2013. This upgrade is expected to be an important step for
Public Disclosure Copy




                          improving the capacity of the SFD in terms of environmental management; however, providing
                          the ED with adequate resources and staffing is vital for its successful operation.

                          Since the establishment of the ED, 27 regional focal points (from SFD staff) have been identified
                          in the SFD offices in Governorates, the regional focal points have been trained on the required
                          environmental and social follow-up procedures of projects to fulfill the requirements of EEAA and
                          EMPs of different projects. Currently the Operational Manual of the ED is being developed
                          including MIS to follow-up status of different projects regarding environmental and social issues,
                          and standard progress reports to be prepared periodically about these projects status. The ED is
                          also in the process of recruiting a full-time technical staff with experience in environmental
                          management to support the ED Director. The finalization of the ED Operational Manual and
                          recruitment of the new staff member are expected to be finalized before the end of 2013. The ED
                          system is expected to be operational with adequate database about current SFD projects by the end
                          of Q1 2014.

                          In addition to the above, the borrower will ensure the following:
                          • The proposed project supports only environmental category “B” or “C” sub-projects as per the
                          World Bank classification f safeguards;
                          • No sub-projects entailing resettlement will be eligible for funding under the Project as per the
                          World Bank policy OP/BP 4.12; and


                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           • No sub-projects that involve the use or pollution of international waterways will be financed
                           under this Project;
                           • Sub-projects entailing weeding activities shall be manual weeding (i.e., by hand) and will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                           involve the use of pesticides. As a result, World Bank OP 4.09 is not triggered; and
                           • Consultation and disclosure requirements will be simplified to meet the special needs of these
                           operations.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The SFD will work in close partnership with the governorates, sectoral ministries at the
                           governorate level, local authorities, NGOs, and CDAs. The SFD will be responsible for
                           implementing and coordinating the activities of this project with the support of its 27 regional
                           offices which monitors project progress and reporting structures. Safeguards documents will be
                           subject to consultation and disclosure (in English and Arabic) in an accessible place, in a timely
                           manner, in a form and language understandable to key stakeholders, prior to the finalization of the
                           said documents. Particular attention will be given to ensure that the project stakeholders receive
                           adequate time and ready access to draft documents before consultation is carried out. This is
                           essentially to ensure that the project stakeholders participate in and contribute to the sub-project
                           planning and implementation, and thereby help minimize any sub-project impacts while maximize
                           the benefits.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   18-Jan-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          13-Jan-2014
                           Comments: Environmental documents were disclosed on the SFD website: http://www.sfdegypt.
                                         org/web/sfd/publications.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Sector       Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (SM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [       ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Afrah Alawi Al-Ahmadi
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (RSA)                      Date: 30-Jan-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Yasser Aabdel-Aleem Awny El-                   Date: 31-Jan-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Gammal (SM)




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
