INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 115
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kenya                      Project ID:  P120014
Project Name: KE Electricity Modernization Project (P120014)
Task Team       Kyran O'Sullivan,Clara Alvarez Rodriguez
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Jan-2015                Estimated    31-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (90%), Other Renewable Energy
(10%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Regulation and
competition policy (25%), Urban services and housing fo r the poor (25%), Rural
services and infrastructure (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     762.00            Total Bank Financing:  250.00
Financing Gap:          300.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          4.50
International Development Association (IDA)                               250.00
IDA Guarantee                                                             200.00
Climate Investment Funds                                                    7.50
Total                                                                     462.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 12


﻿The proposed project development objectives (PDOs) are: (a) to increase access to electricity; (b) to
improve reliability of electricity service; and (c) to strengthen KPLC's financial situation.
3. Project Description
O
U         1.     The Project is composed of three financing instruments through (i) IDA credit of US$250
million; (ii) IDA Guarantee of US$ 200 million; and (iii) SREP grant of US$ 7.5 million.
o
Component A: Improvement in Service Delivery and Reliability (estimated cost $50 million IDA
Credit).
2.     Sub- Component Al (estimated cost US$10 million). Upgrade of the Supervisory Control
and Data Acquisition/Energy Management System (SCADA/EMS). This component will finance
upgrades of the SCADA/EMS by incorporating key existing substations to the system and installing
additional switchgear in medium voltage distribution networks to enhance flexibility in operations.
3.     Sub- Component A2 (estimated cost US$20 million). Distribution system enhanced
flexibility. The component aims at achieving 90 percent automation of the networks in Nairobi by
installing a total of 1,000 load break switches in assets operating at 11, 50 and 66 kV, with associated
Remote Terminal Units and communications features enabling remote control and operations.
4.     Sub-component A3 (estimated cost US$20 million). Enhanced maintenance practices to
improve quality in electricity supply. In order to further reduce interruptions in electricity service, the
Kenya Power and Lighting Company (KPLC) will implement live-line maintenance. This requires
specific equipment, tools and intensive training of staff in charge of the works.
5.     Component B: Revenue Protection Program (RPP) (estimated cost US$40 million). This
component will finance implementation by KPLC of a revenue protection program, based on the
application of advanced metering infrastructure (AMI), and the adoption of organizational
arrangements.
6.     Component C: Electrification Program (estimated cost US$160 million). This component has
peri-urban and off-grid electrification sub-components.
7.     Sub-component C1. Peri-urban electrification (estimated cost US$153.5 million). This
a        Component will finance the design, materials and construction works required to electrify all
households and businesses in some high density peri-urban areas (measured through the ratio number
of prospective users/km2) located close to existing electricity networks.
8.     Sub-Component C2: Off-grid electrification (estimated cost US$11 million). This component
will finance (i) renewable energy mini-grids by targeting and removing the principal constraints to
engage the private sector to partner with the public sector to deliver electricity services powered by
renewable energy sources to consumers in towns in remote areas. This will comprise the construction
or extension of mini-grids and solar PV electrification (and wind turbines).
9.     Component D: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (estimated cost US$7.5 million).
This component will finance consultancy services, training actions and other activities to support,
among others: Preparation of the National Electrification Strategy; national technical specifications
and standardization; regulations for enforcing quality on electricity service delivery; consultancy
services, training actions and other activities to support the implementation of the project.
Page 2 of 12


﻿IDA Guarantee
10.    IDA Guarantee (US$200 million IDA Guarantee). The project will provide a $200 million
IDA Guarantee to enhance KPLC's credit quality in order to raise new commercial debt. This new
O
U         debt will be used to restructure/replace KPLC's existing commercial loans and thus reduce the
company's financing costs, create savings that will provide the company with liquidity it currently
does not have, and enable KPLC to continue investing in the quality and coverage of its services and
the development of the power system in the country.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
11.    Minimal adverse social risks are anticipated under this project and no resettlement is
expected under any component of this project. All new infrastructure investments in Component A
(Improvement in Service Delivery and Reliability) and Component B (Revenue Protection) will be at
existing electricity network infrastructure (i.e., at existing KPLC substations and lines). There will be
no land acquisition for these components. In Sub-Component A3 (live-line maintenance), the project
will provide special safety training for maintenance teams, and the provision of specialized tools and
equipment to ensure safety of maintenance teams and bystanders during live maintenance works.
12.    Sub-Component C1 Peri-Urban Electrification. This sub-component will be implemented by
KPLC in up to 50 locations across the country targeting 125,000 households. The majority of low
and medium voltage lines will mainly be constructed along road reserves and existing rights of ways.
Anticipated social impacts will be minimal and mostly involve KPLC compensation for crops and or
trees which could be damaged during contruction.
13.    Sub-Component C2 (off-grid electrification through construction of mini-grids). This sub-
component will be implemented by REA and will support the implementation of off-grid
electrification solutions in areas whose connection to the national grid is financially not viable in the
short and medium term. Electrification of those areas will be implemented through mini grids
supplied to hybrid generation systems, combining renewable resources (solar or wind) and thermal
units running on diesel. This sub-component will use a PPP approach. The selection of project areas
is based on the number of potential users and their demand, supported by an ongoing market
sounding, a demand survey and pre-feasibility studies being carried out by REA. Typically the
schemes will be implemented in villages of 150-400 prospective users and approximate demand of
250-500kVA.
14.    The mini-grid infrastructure in sub-component C2 will have low to moderate negative
impacts on the environment, depending on locations and the nature of the investments. These impacts
would result from the installation of solar panels (requiring a plan for disposal of batteries), and
small wind turbines (which may have an impact on avifauna). A screening process will be followed
to ensure that potential negative impacts can be appropriately mitigated, and that sub-projects are not
located in critical natural habitats including National Parks and Protected Areas. The impacts and
relevant mitigation measures will be described in the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) for component C2 that has been prepared by the KPLC and that will be
disclosed prior to appraisal.
15.    Although the sub-projects are not expected to traverse areas of cultural or historical
importance, Operational Policy (OP) 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) is triggered as a precaution.
Chance find procedures will be included in contracts and in the environmental documents.
Page 3 of 12


﻿16.    These sub-project investments may require the acquisition of land for the mini grids,
however the proposed mini-grid generation facilities (turbines, solar panels) will have a relatively
small footprint and siting of such facilities can be located in places that avoid the need for
O
)        resettlement. In this regard, the project will trigger OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement) in the case of
sub-component C2 as this component will require land acquisition for the hybrid generation facilities.
17.    Since not all sub-project sites in Component C2 can be identified in advance, a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared that will be disclosed prior to project appraisal. Based on
the RPF guidance, each subproject will be screened, and if RAPs are found to be necessary, these
will be prepared, cleared, disclosed and implemented prior to the commencement of civil works, in
accordance with World Bank OP 4.12. Should such a need materialize requiring land acquisition and
necessitating the movement of persons and /or structures then a RAP will be developed to be guided
by the RPF. REA has a good track record with regard to implementation of the social safeguards
including under the Kenya Electricity Expansion Project.
18.    The project will trigger Operational Policy OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) for Sub-component
C2 and a VMGF has been prepared. The OP 4.10 is triggered when it is likely that groups that meet
criteria of OP 4.10 "are present in, or have collective attachment to, the project areal." The VMGF,
ESMF and RPF for Component C2 will include: (i) screening to determine presence of Vulnerable
and Marginalized Groups (Indigenous Peoples per OP 4.10 criteria) in the project areas and, if
present, (ii) measures to ensure they benefit from the project activities through the preparation of a
Vulnerable and Marginalized Group Plan (VMGP). In sub-component C1, the sub-projects will be
located in urban and peri-urban areas, and so it is unlikely that groups meeting criteria of indigenous
groups will be affected.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSURR)
Noreen Beg (GENDR)
o
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project is proposed as category B Partial
OP/BP 4.01                              Assessment - assigned to projects that are likely to
have limited and reversible environmental impacts,
that can be readily mitigated. There are no significant
and/or irreversible adverse environmental issues
anticipated from the investment sub-components to
be financed under the Project, as the nature of civil
works is limited in the most part to the construction
of medium voltage and low voltage lines to connect
new customers; the installation of switchgear in
existing substations (Sub-Component Al); and the
construction of mini-grids in remote areas (Sub-
Component C2).
The proposed mini-grid extensions/creations in rural
areas using renewable energy, will have a positive
impact on the environment overall, by improving the
Page 4 of 12


﻿supply of electricity in the rural locations where the
Project is implemented hence potentially reducing
the use of fossil fuels for lighting by households. The
increase in electricity access in thee locations is
expected to have important health benefits and
educational benefits (through the provision of
electricity to clinics and schools). However, the
physical interventions resulting from the
implementation of investments in rural areas could
have low to moderate negative impacts on the
environment, depending on locations and the nature
of the investments. These impacts would result from
the installation of solar panels (requiring a plan for
disposal of batteries), and small wind turbines (which
may have an impact on avifauna). A screening
process will be followed to ensure that potential
negative impacts can be appropriately mitigated, and
that sub-projects are not located in critical natural
habitats, and -if it is unavoidable that they traverse
National Parks and Protected Areas - that appropriate
mitigation actions be taken. The impacts and relevant
mitigation measures will be described in the
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) for Component C2.
A standard EMP has been prepared by KPLC for the
equipment work at substations under sub-component
Al. This EMP primarily addresses safety measures
and waste disposal measures for construction
materials and obsolete equipment.
ESMFs have been prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed for Components C1 and C2. The ESMFs
contain an environmental social screening process,
and includes environmental guidelines for
contractors. If it is determined thorough the
screening process that any sub-projects would
require a full environmental assessment, NEMA
approval will be sought before commencement of
detailed design to ensure that good practices are
included in the technical design. The ESMFs will
serve as the environmental safeguards document in
cases where a full environmental assessment is not
deemed necessary based on the findings of the
screening. The ESMFs also requires that all
construction materials (in particular wooden poles
treated with creosote) are sourced from firms that
Page 5 of 12


﻿have undergone a satisfactory environmental impact
assessment/audit and have received NEMA approval.
Consultations with stakeholders has been undertaken
during the preparation of environmental documents.
Minutes of stakeholder meetings, including measures
proposed to address grievances have been included
as an Annex to the ESMFs.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         Given the urban and peri-urban locations of the C1
sub-component peri-urban electrification, impacts to
natural habitats will be minimal.
For the sub-projects in Component C2 located in
rural areas, REA will liaise with KWS to assess if the
installations are in the vicinity of important wildlife
habitats or wildlife corridors, and to propose
mitigation measures if so. Should KWS indicate an
impact on critical habitats, REA will avoid these
areas or provide some natural barriers to enable
wildlife to freely and safely bypass the construction
area.
Bird collisions will be avoided by reducing height of
turbines as feasible, (should any small wind-power
projects be adopted under the off-grid electrification
component) and not placing them in the migration
routes of important bird species or in Important Bird
Areas (IBAs). Nature Kenya, the Ornithology
Department of the Museums of Kenya and KWS
could provide guidance in this area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Although there will be a need for replacement of
some trees that may be removed along existing
Rights of Way in Components C1 and C2, no natural
forest will be affected in urban areas and the scale of
deforestation/reforestation will be moderate. In rural
areas in Component C2, sub-projects will be
screened to ensure that projects are not in or traverse
natural forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project does not include purchase or use of
pesticides. Any clearing of vegetation will be
undertaken manually.
Page 6 of 12


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) is triggered as
OP/BP 4.11                              a precaution, although the sub-projects are not
expected to traverse areas of cultural or historical
importance. Chance find procedures are explained in
the ESMF and will be included in construction
contracts and EMPs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         The project will trigger Operational Policy OP 4.10
4.10                                    (Indigenous Peoples) for Sub-component C 2: Off-
grid electrification. The O.P. 4.10 is being triggered
for the Off-Grid component which will be
implemented in up to six communities/villages that
are not so remote in rural areas (mostly islands) at
Siaya, Homa Bay, Kwale, Tana River, and Kilifi. An
initial screening indicates that there may be groups
that meet the O.P. 4.10 criteria in the Coast (Boni,
Watta, Banjul, Sanye, and Mjikende). The sub
project investments under KEMP Component C2
(Off-Grid) might impact on these communities of
VMGs. A Vulnerable and Marginalized Framework
(VMGF) has been prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed to guide the preparation of plans to
mitigate any negative effects and to enhance benefits
of the KEMP sub projects investments that may
affect Vulnerable and Marginalised Groups (VMGs)
in the sub project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       The investments proposed under sub component C1
BP 4.12                                 will focus on the upgrading of existing infrastructure
within existing rights of ways. No new high voltage
(HV) lines or sub-stations will be constructed. Only
short lengths of medium voltage lines and low
voltage (LV) lines will be constructed to connect
households. The LV lines do not require land
acquisition and/or involuntary resettlement of
households as would HV transmission lines.
Component C1 Peri- Urban Electrification will be
implemented in up to 50 locations across the country
targeting 125,000 households. No resettlement is
envisaged under this sub-component. The anticipated
social impacts will be minimal and might involve
KPLC compensation for crops and or/trees which
could be damaged during way leave acquisition.
Since not all sub-project sites in Component and C2
can be identified in advance, a Resettlement Policy
Framework has been prepared that will be disclosed
prior to project appraisal. Based on the RPF
guidance, each sub-project in Component C2 will be
Page 7 of 12


﻿screened, and if RAPs are found to be necessary,
these will be prepared, cleared, disclosed and
implemented prior to the commencement of civil
works, in accordance with World Bank OP 4.12
(Involuntary Resettlement).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No          N/A
Projects on International  No          N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No       N/A
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Given the urban and peri-urban locations of the sub-projects in Components A, B and Cl, impact
on natural habitats is expected to be minimal. Although there may be a need for replacement of
trees that may be removed along Rights of Ways (roads) no natural forest will be affected. Any
trees removed from Rights of Way will be replaced. In Component C2, the physical interventions
resulting from the implementation of investments in rural areas could have low to moderate
negative impacts on the environment, depending on locations and the nature of the investments.
These impacts would result from the installation of solar panels (requiring a plan for disposal of
batteries), and small wind turbines (which may have an impact on avifauna). A screening process
will be followed to ensure that potential negative impacts can be appropriately mitigated, and that
sub-projects are not located in critical natural habitats, and -if it is unavoidable that they traverse
National Parks and Protected Areas- that appropriate mitigation actions be taken. The impacts and
O
U           relevant mitigation measures are described in the project's Environmental and Social Management
Frameworks (ESMFs) for Components C1 and C2 that will be disclosed prior to appraisal.
The investments under Component C1 no new high voltage (HV) lines will be required. Medium
voltage (MV) and low voltage (LV) lines will be constructed in peri-urban areas. The MV and LV
lines do not require land acquisition and/or involuntary resettlement of households as would HV
transmission lines. The construction of lines will take place along existing Rights of way (RoW) i.
e., along existing roads.
The off grid electrification component C2 will however require acquisition of land for the hybrid
generation facilities. Although resettlement will be minimized to the extent possible, Resettlement
Action Plans (RAPs) may be required. Should such a need materialize requiring land acquisition
and necessitating the movement of persons and /or structures then RAPs will be developed to be
guided by the RPF for Component C2.
Since not all sub-project sites can be identified in advance in Component C2, a Resettlement
Policy Framework has been prepared that will be disclosed prior to project appraisal. Based on the
RPF guidance, each subproject in Component C2 will be screened, and if RAPs are found to be
necessary, these will be prepared, cleared, disclosed and implemented prior to the commencement
Page 8 of 12


﻿of civil works, in accordance with World Bank OP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).
Component C2 which will be implemented in rural areas in three regions of the country (Western,
Coast and Central). The project will be implemented nationally. At the time of preparation of this
O
VMGF (a) the locations of where the off-grid electrification subcomponents will be implemented
and the site where the infrastructure will be constructed at these locations have not been finalized
(further pre-feasibility work is required in order to confirm the locations and sites). Six locations
have been proposed. These locations include those where vulnerable and marginalised groups that
meet the criteria of OP 4.10 may be found. These are Siaya County (Mageta Island); Homa Bay
County (Ngodhe Island); Homa Bay County (Takawiri Island); Kwale County (Shimoni); Tana
River Island County (Chardende); and Kilifi County (Kadaina Island).
VMGs that may be present in these counties include, Mjikenda/Watha, Sanye, Watha, Boni,
Bajuni, and Watha.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The VMGF will outline the processes and principles of: (a) screening to determine if a proposed
sub-project investment will be undertaken in the vicinity of vulnerable and marginalized
communities; and the (b) the preparation of a VMGP including the social assessment process,
consultation and stakeholder engagement, disclosure procedures, communication and grievances
redress mechanism. A detailed VMGP will be prepared for each sub project once project location
is identified and screening conducted and determination via screening is made that VMGs are
present in the project investment area. The VMGF will provide for the screening and review of
component C2 investments in a manner consistent with this policy and the VMGF
recommendations will be integrated into the project design of each sub project investment.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
O
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A review was undertaken of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIA) prepared for sub-stations
and an underground distribution cable financed under the Kenya Energy Sector Recovery Project.
These EIAs were prepared as per Kenyan environmental regulations and the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) documentation prepared by the Bank to be used as a
guideline in assessing environmental compliance and screening of sub-projects. The EIAs were
generally of good quality, though it should be noted that, going forward as a standard practice,
timely and informed consultation with stakeholders will be undertaken early in the project
preparation process, and adequately documented. Any grievances from stakeholders will be
recorded and responded to in a timely manner.
In 2014, an independently commissioned review was undertaken of KPLC's Safety, Health and
Environment (SHE) Department's performance in preparing environmental documentation and
RAPs, and monitoring EMPs and RAPs for World Bank funded projects. The review
recommended capacity enhancement measures.
These measures will be put into place prior to the start of civil works on the Project.
Page 9 of 12


﻿*      Additional qualified and experienced staff has already been brought on board to assist
with the department's heavy workload (two environmentalists and one socio-economist).
*     The purchase of equipment for baseline environmental data capture (water quality, air
O
quality, noise) and analysis has commenced.
*     The adoption of the suggested stakeholder involvement and public engagement
procedures, and harmonization with the Property Department of KPLC on land take activities, to
promote prior consultation on RAPs and compensation matters, (is underway).
* The PIUs of REA and KPLC for KEMP will include both environmental and social
specialists.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with local stakeholders were undertaken prior to finalization and publication of the
environmental documents. Minutes of the stakeholder meetings, including grievance redress
mechanisms, are included as Annexes in the safeguard instrument documents.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    02-Jan-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    02-Feb-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    02-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 10 of 12


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes[X]  No[  NA
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes[X]  No[    NA
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 11 of 12


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kyran O'Sullivan,Clara Alvarez Rodriguez
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                Date: 22-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


