INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1025
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Feb-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Feb-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kenya                       Project ID:  P146797
Project Name: Kenya GPE Primary Education Development Project (P146797)
Task Team       Nalin Jena
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Jun-2014                 Estimated    30-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Primary education (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (60%), Education for the knowledge economy (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      88.40             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
0
Borrower                                                                      0.00
Education for All Supervising Entity                                         88.40
Total                                                                        88.40
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objectives are to improve early grade mathematics competency and to
strengthen management systems at school and national levels.
3. Project Description
Component 1 will support national roll out of the early grade mathematics (EGM) methodology,
which was piloted in Kenya under the Primary Research Initiative in Mathematics and Reading
Page 1 of 6


﻿(PRIMR) with the support of USAID and DFID. The methodology will be introduced to about
28,000 schools (with 20% Project schools with double streams), 62,000 teachers, 28,000 head
teachers, 200 Primary Teacher Training Center (PTTC) educators, principals and board members
from 22 public PTTCs, and approximately 6 million pupils in Grades 1 and 2. The overall goal
O
U        being to help teachers improve students' ability to master basic numeracy skills, the component will
finance the implementation of a comprehensive program to increase teacher competency, provide
adequate instructional materials, and strengthen classroom pedagogical support.
Component 2 will be a program for improving delivering of education through strengthening the
management and accountability at school level, to be piloted in a selected number of schools. The
integrated set of interventions include: (i) provision of school specific analysis of KCPE result to
inform planning at the school level; (ii) appraisal of teacher competency in knowledge, pedagogical
practice and engagement; (iii) support and capacity building for school improvement planning, with
enhanced participation of stakeholders; (iv) enhanced financing to schools linked to achievement of
management and accountability milestones; (v) strengthening school audit; and (vi) monitoring of
pilot results.
Component 3 will include (i) strengthening the data/EMIS system in primary education to make data
more available, reliable and integrated; (ii) enhancing the system for monitoring student learning
achievement; and (iv) enhancing the capacity to develop policies on equity, efficiency and quality at
the national level.
Component 4 covers key project management functions including coordination, communication and
result monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be across Kenya and will particularly address needs in vulnerable and marginalized
areas (including arid and semi-arid lands).
0
Note: The CoK defines a marginalized community as:
a)     "A community that, because of its relatively small population or for any other reason, has
been unable to fully participate in the integrated social and economic life of Kenya as a whole;
b)A traditional community that, out of a need or desire to preserve its unique culture and identity
from assimilation, has remained outside the integrated social and economic life of Kenya as a whole;
c)     An indigenous community that has retained and maintained a traditional lifestyle and
livelihood based on a hunter or gatherer economy; or
d)Pastoral persons and communities, whether they are (i) nomadic; or (ii) a settled community that,
because of its relative geographic isolation, has experienced only marginal participation in the
integrated social and economic life of Kenya as a whole" (Article 260; emphasis added).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSURR)
Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan (GCCGT)
6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment   Yes          The project envisions procurement of IT related
OP/BP 4.01                              equipment (tablets and smartphones) for data
Page 2 of 6


﻿recording and dissemination and this may lead to
generation of electronic waste (E-Waste) which is
harmful to the environment if disposed
inappropriately. Therefore, an Environmental and
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been
developed for management of E-waste emanating
from electronic and electrical equipment procured. In
addition, the school grants may be used in the
rehabilitation of sanitary facilities (pit latrines).
Construction of and or rehabilitation of sanitary
facilities within the targeted schools will however
not involve acquisition of new land to warrant
displacement. Therefore, an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
prepared, consulted upon and disclosed and will help
mitigate and manage potential impacts of sub
projects (construction and or rehabilitation of
sanitary facilities which cannot be identified at this
stage in terms of location) and provide guidance on
methodologies, measures and procedures to facilitate
environmental management (risk management and
impacts) related to works financed under the project
as well as provide guidance on.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The project has no adverse impacts on natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project is not expected to affect the management
of forests and neither will it support forests nor
logging options.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project will not involve use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The project will not involve or have any adverse
OP/BP 4.11                               impact on the physical cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         The project covers all primary schools in Kenya
4.10                                    triggering OP4. 10. A Vulnerable and Marginalized
Groups Framework (VMGF) has been prepared as a
result of the fact that implementation of this project
will take a national approach with specific targets on
ASAL areas where Kenya's marginalized and
vulnerable communities exist. No major or
significant adverse impacts are envisaged as a result
of the project on the culture, traditions and social
dynamics of the communities categorized as
vulnerable and marginalized. Consultations with
selected communities during the preparation of the
VMGF have been organized capturing their
perceptions and opinion on the fact that the project
Page 3 of 6


﻿will be beneficial to vulnerable and marginalized
communities and may eventually play a pivotal role
in eliminating certain negative cultural practices like
early marriages and female genital mutilation among
others commonly practiced in these areas and which
have impacted negatively on education of the girl
child.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No        The project will not involve land acquisition leading
BP 4.12                                  to involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access
to resources and livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           N/A
Projects on International   No           N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        N/A
BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project envisions procurement of IT related equipment (tablets and smartphones) for data
recording and dissemination and this will lead to generation of electronic waste (E-Waste) which
is harmful to the environment if disposed inappropriately.
The project also supports school grants, which may be used to finance the rehabilitation of sanitary
facilities (pit latrines). Construction of and or rehabilitation of sanitary facilities within the
targeted schools will however not involve acquisition of new land to warrant displacement.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no long term impacts anticipated in the project areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared and will help
mitigate and manage potential impacts of sub projects (construction and or rehabilitation of
sanitary facilities which cannot be identified at this stage in terms of location) and provide
guidance on methodologies, measures and procedures to facilitate environmental management
(risk management and impacts) related to works financed under the project and whose specific
locations are unknown. The ESMF will also include specific measures and procedures for
mitigating impacts associated with E-Waste, which will be generated in this program as a result of
procurement of tablets and smartphones. A Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups Framework
(VMGF) has been preparation as a result of the fact that implementation of this project will take a
Page 4 of 6


﻿national approach with specific targets on ASAL areas where Kenya's marginalized and
vulnerable communities exist. No major or significant adverse impacts are envisaged as a result of
the project on the culture, traditions and social dynamics of the communities categorized as
vulnerable and marginalized.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
Key stakeholders include the schools and communities where the project will be operating. An
ESMP will be prepared to address the e-waste issues and to provide guidance to implementing
agencies on proper disposal of electronic equipment. Consultations with selected communities
during the preparation of the VMGF have been organized capturing their perceptions and opinion
on the fact that the project will be beneficial to vulnerable and marginalized communities and may
eventually play a pivotal role in eliminating certain negative cultural practices like early marriages
and female genital mutilation among others commonly practiced in these areas and which have
impacted negatively on education of the girl child.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Feb-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    18-Feb-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              3 1-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Kenya                                                    18-Feb-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
Page 5 of 6


﻿If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nalin Jena
Approved By
Regional Safeguards   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)         Date: 20-Feb-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/     Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)               Date: 20-Feb-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


