INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA6483
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Dec-2014
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Argentina                   Project ID:  P133288
Project Name: Argentina Renewable Energy Project for Rural Areas (P133288)
Task Team       Lucia Spinelli
Leader:
Estimated        10-Nov-2014                Estimated    17-Mar-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Hydropower (5%), Other Renewable Energy (75%), Transmission and
Distribution of Electricity (15%), General energy sector (5%)
Theme(s):       Social Inclusion (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     240.09             Total Bank Financing:   200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                     10.85
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       200.00
Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                     5.74
Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                           23.50
Total                                                                       240.09
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective is to provide and enhance access to modern energy services in rural areas
of Argentina.
Page 1 of 14


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed Project would provide key support to Argentina's plans to achieve universal access to
modern energy services and to improve the quality of life of the rural and isolated population. The
Project will also support capacity building and strengthening activities at the national level. The
operation builds upon the activities, lessons learned, best practices and experience obtained from the
implementation of PERMER I as well as from projects in other countries. The proposed Project will
be demand driven, but the PCU will work to ensure that all relevant stakeholders - including
a        Provinces that have not participated in past projects - can benefit from the operation by providing
tailored assistance through the capacity building activities being financed. The Project is comprised
of four components:
Component 1 - Renewable electricity service provision (US$215.61 million, of which US$183.40
million: IBRD). This component will finance the acquisition and installation of stand-alone solar
(PV) or wind systems, Pico PV (systems with a capacity below 35 watts), and the construction and/or
upgrade of minigrids for groups of consumers that may include public institutions and population
clusters, among others (these minigrids may include mini-hydro. The Project will not finance the
acquisition of diesel-powered units, although existing ones may be kept as backup, and the operation
could finance their integration with renewable technologies). The technologies to be installed and
financed through the Project would support the provision of electricity services for residential and
public users for multiple purposes, including: (a) electricity for lighting, communication and other
basic household needs (such as food refrigeration and storage) for isolated individual households;
dispersed public services buildings; and rural and isolated population clusters through minigrids; (b)
electricity for potable water pumping in: individual households; dispersed public services facilities;
and rural and isolated population clusters, and; (c) electricity for productive uses for individual
purposes or collective subprojects.
Component 2 - Solar thermal energy service provision (US$9.67 million, of which US$7.9 million:
IBRD). This component will finance the acquisition and installation of solar water heaters, solar
space heating systems, cookers and ovens. The component will only target dispersed public facilities
and public buildings located in isolated areas and in rural population clusters (even if they already
count with a basic energy service).
Component 3 - Project deployment support (US$6.71 million, of which US$5.70 million: IBRD).
This component will finance activities to support the design, implementation and execution of
subprojects, including environmental and social aspects, as well as the development of tasks to
enhance renewable energy deployment in the country. The component will finance - inter alia -
market studies to determine potential energy demand and technologies (at both the urban and rural
levels), monitoring and evaluation tasks (including the deployment of new technologies to remotely
measure electricity consumption and use as well as subprojects performance), communication
strategies and outreach activities, studies to support Argentina's renewable energy goals,
dissemination of lessons learned, best practices and relevant experiences, and capacity building for
the weakest stakeholders to ensure their participation, among others. It would also support the
development of pilot studies for technologies that have not yet been fully deployed in Argentina, for
example solar space heating systems.
Component 4 - Project management (US$8.10 million, of which US$3.00 million: IBRD). This
component will finance the incremental costs of the Project, strengthening existing structures,
operation and maintenance of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems (equipment and surveys
Page 2 of 14


﻿will be financed by Component 3, but M&E data will be prepared by the PCU), training and travel
costs for Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) staff and provincial counterparts, equipment for PCU and
for provincial units, and other operational expenses.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is national in scope; therefore all Argentine Provinces constitute the target area for
investment subprojects. The natural environment of these provinces is very varied, as it includes
ecosystems ranging from forests to desert and from the Andes Mountains to the large rivers of the
Rio de la Plata valley. The Project will focus on mainly two types of rural zones: a) those with small
populations located in extremely isolated areas, for which stand-alone generation will be provided
and, b) small concentrated communities in isolated areas that are of sufficient size to warrant
provision of electricity through mini-grids. Specific subprojects are not likely to be identified before
appraisal and therefore the specific sites, environmental and social conditions, and impacts of each
subproject are not likely to be known. In light of this, an ESMF has been prepared, (updating the
ESMF prepared for PERMER I) that includes a screening process for sub-projects. In the event that
any sub-projects are confirmed for inclusion in the Project prior to appraisal, draft EIAs/EMPs and
RAPs will be prepared (prior to appraisal).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Fernando J. Brunstein (GENDR)
Noreen Beg (GENDR)
Lilian Pedersen (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes         The Project will have a largely positive impact on
BP 4.01                                    the environment, by improving the supply of
energy in rural areas of Argentina's provinces,
thereby reducing the use of fossil fuels for
Q)                                                   domestic consumption, and the use of firewood
(in the case of institutional buildings, i.e., schools
and hospitals).
The scope, targets and boundaries of PERMER II
would be significantly expanded to include
provinces not covered by PERMER I. In addition,
some of the proposed interventions may be new
or different in nature from those supported under
PERMER I. The safeguard documents prepared
for PERMER I, specifically the ESMF, have been
updated to reflect this. The updated ESMF was
disclosed - in Spanish - on October 24, 2014 at
the following website: https://www.se.gob.ar/
contenidos/archivos/permer/
MaGAS_PERMER II.pdf.
Components 1 (renewable electricity service
provision) and 2 (solar thermal energy service
Page 3 of 14


﻿provision) of the Project will have low to
moderate environmental impacts. These impacts
would result from the installation of solar panels
(requiring a plan for disposal of batteries), the
installation of small wind turbines for individual
use (300-600 wp), the retrofitting of existing
diesel generation facilities to hybrid solar/diesel
back-up systems, the construction of mini hydro
(ranging from 100 kW to 4 MW) run-of-river
generation facilities, and the construction of low-
impact infrastructure (such as low voltage
electricity distribution lines).The installation of
solar cookstoves and heaters is also part of the
Project.
Expected potential negative environmental
impacts will be primarily during the construction
phase of civil work. Cumulative environmental
impacts are not expected to be significant, as the
Project is nationwide but relatively limited in
scope. The impacts and relevant mitigation
measures have been described in the Project's
updated Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). Appropriate mitigation
measures will be followed to limit the impact on
local fauna, avi-fauna and to protect indigenous
plant and tree species, and preserve riverine
ecosystems in the case of the mini-hydro
schemes.
The Project is expected to result in positive social
outcomes, through its support to improve the
quality of life for isolated populations in
Argentina's provinces through the provision of
electric and thermal energy, safe water supply for
families, and the opportunity to undertake
commercially productive activities and enhance
the secure and timely provision of social services
(e.g., security of electricity supply for
refrigeration of vaccines).
The Project is classified as Category B - Partial
Assessment - assigned to projects that are likely
to have limited and reversible environmental
impacts, that can be readily mitigated. The ESMF
considered, among others, the following issues:
Page 4 of 14


﻿i)     Updated environmental and
social baseline conditions;
ii)    A description of the full range of
subprojects proposed under PERMER II;
iii)   Updated legal and institutional
provisions (for example, new PCUs and
respective SETs in new provinces; capacity
building for the Energy Secretariat (SE) and,
where applicable, the designation of new entities
responsible, at the provincial level, for managing
environmental and social issues during operation
and maintenance (e.g. management of waste
generated by the maintenance and repair of
equipment, including battery disposal
management);
iv)    A screening process for
subproj ects;
v)     A description of environmental
management tools and mitigation measures
applicable to the subprojects (including those
specific subprojects if location has already been
identified prior to appraisal as mentioned earlier-
e.g. mini grids and mitigation measures to be
applied during the design of the subprojects,
considering the lessons learned from PERMER I
and included in that project's ICR); and
vi)    Results of public consultations on
the updated draft ESMF.
The Secretariat of Energy has undertaken public
consultations on the ESMF with local and
provincial government representatives,
representatives of stakeholders in local
communities, and local NGOs. The ESMF
documents the results of the consultations and has
taken into account and addressed stakeholder
concerns and comments.
In addition to the ESMF, the Borrower has
prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF), a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), a Good Practices Guide
(GPG), and a Communication Strategy (CS).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes          This policy is triggered because many subprojects
will be located in or close to natural habitats and/
or protected areas. For example, in the case of
retrofitting existing diesel generation facilities to
Page 5 of 14


﻿hybrid solar/diesel back-up systems, subprojects
may be located within National Parks and
Reserves, at government offices and lodges
located within the Parks or Reserves. While the
Project will not support or lead to the conversion
of natural habitats, and the ESMF will explicitly
forbid any Project activities inducing significant
conversion or degradation of critical natural
habitats, this policy is triggered to ensure that
minor construction works have EMPs that will
protect biodiversity and water resources. The
most significant impacts will result from the
construction of low-voltage distribution lines and
construction of related infrastructure, and
appropriate mitigation measures will be followed
to limit the impact on local fauna, birdlife and to
protect indigenous plant and tree species, and
preserve riverine ecosystems in the case of mini-
hydro schemes.
The ESMF contains appropriate screening criteria
to ensure that impacts on natural and critical
natural habitats are properly evaluated. , and that
no subprojects will be approved in locales which
involve significant conversion of natural habitats.
Any investments undertaken in designated
protected areas will have site-specific EMPs
specifying mitigation measures.
Forests OP/BP 4.36              No           While some mini-hydro schemes may be located
within forests, the ESMF explicitly forbids any
Project activities that would lead to the significant
degradation and conversion of critical forest areas
and forest ecosystems. Although the distribution
lines for some mini-grids may traverse natural
forests, and some construction will take place for
the mini-hydro schemes in rivers that may run
through forest areas, impacts are likely to be
small scale and are very unlikely to affect the
rights and welfare of forest-dependent
communities. On the contrary, the provision of
secure energy would lessen dependence on
firewood, thus reducing deforestation and
reducing the pressure on forest biodiversity
Project investments will not affect the
management of forests, or the use of forests for
livelihoods, and will not support investments such
as plantations or other industrial uses.
Page 6 of 14


﻿The ESMF incorporates a screening mechanism
to ensure that no subprojects will be included
which affect the management of forests or the
rights and welfare of forest dependent
communities , and to ensure that any impacts on
forests be mitigated through measures defined as
part of the broader approach on natural habitat
protection under OP 4.04.
Pest Management OP 4.09         No           The Project will not finance any activities that
would result in procurement or significant use of
pesticides. There will be no pesticide use in
construction of works. Any land clearing for
rehabilitation of existing buildings or for
placement of distribution poles will be undertaken
manually.
Minor use of pesticides to control pests in
construction areas or in workers' campsites are
addressed in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  Yes         During the PERMER I project it was verified that
BP 4.11                                      many subprojects were located in the vicinity of
sites of ancient indigenous settlements, and
numerous utensils and tools of historical and
archaeological importance were found during the
progress of works. Considering that PERMER II
will operate in the same areas, this policy is
triggered. A chance finds procedure will be
inserted into construction contracts and has been
included in the ESMF, and the local and national
Cultural Patrimony, Archeology Departments,
and/or Museums authorities will be notified when
chance finds are made.
The ESMF includes specific screening provisions
for evaluating potential impacts on cultural
resources and will provide specific guidance on
the chance finds procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   Yes          Based on the PERMER I experience and
considering targeted areas are primarily rural
areas, it is possible that members of one or more
of Argentina's indigenous peoples could be
present within the Project's geographical
influence area. In order to guarantee the inclusion
of such groups in Project benefits, or otherwise to
avoid that Project activities affecting them in an
adverse way, the Project would trigger OP/BP
Page 7 of 14


﻿4.10. The Borrower is preparing an Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF), based on
the current IPPF for PERMER I, to strengthen
and coordinate overall attention to indigenous
peoples' participation.
The IPPF will include an analysis of the lessons
learned from the participation of Indigenous
Peoples in PERMER I. At the moment, available
information allows to conclude that more than
13,000 indigenous peoples benefited from
individual SHS systems in: Salta (over 5,000
members of the Diaguitas Calchaquies, Tupi,
Guaranies and Kollas groups), Tucumdn /over
1,700 Diaguitas Calchaquies), Chaco (roughly
2,000 Wichi and Tobas), Mendoza
(approximately 1,000 Mapuches and Huarpes),
Neuqu6n (1,200 Mapuches), and Jujuy (1,700
Quechuas, Kollas, Atacama, Ocloyas and
Omaguaca).
The PERMER I team conducted an identification
and consultation process of indigenous
populations in different provinces. These included
both inhabitants of indigenous communities as
well as those that identify themselves as
indigenous but are integrated into non-indigenous
communities. The communication and
organizational factors of the different
communities and different peoples was a key
factor to consider when designing communication
activities and determining beneficiaries. Given
the nature of the operation (which provided
individual solar systems), the Project was very
well received since it is considered by the
community as an improvement in the living
conditions and opportunities for development.
Finally, the specific subproject Environmental
Management Plans to be developed under the
Project would include pre-screening. In the case
that IP are present in a specific subproject's area
of influence, a site-specific Indigenous Peoples
Plan (IPP) would be developed based on the IPPF
guidelines. IPPF would be submitted to
Indigenous People organization consulting
process.
Page 8 of 14


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes          Subprojects financed by PERMER II (such as
4.12                                         mini-grids, hydropower, small dams or farming
activities) are likely to require land easement and/
or acquisition, including potential investment that
might entail resettlement as defined by OP 4.12
(loss of assets, physical displacement, or
livelihood losses). The Borrower will prepare a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), based on
the PERMER I experience, to ensure that analysis
of alternatives and appropriate compensation and
support to potentially affected persons are
incorporated into the subproject design. Given
that due to the nature of the subprojects potential
cases of voluntary land donations might take
place, the ESMF will include robust criteria to
clearly document these.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No           The mini-hydro electricity generation facilities
that are under consideration (ranging from 100
kW to 4 MW) will be run-of-river, and for those
that require a small weir or pondage to provide
water for the penstock, the dam height will not
exceed 10 meters. For these small dams, the task
team will agree on appropriate safety measures
with the Borrower, will ensure the involvement of
qualified engineers, and will confirm that the
environmental assessment (EAs) for each sub-
project have determined that there would be no
risk or negligible risk of significant adverse
impacts due to potential failure of the structure to
local communities and assets, including assets to
be financed as part of the proposed Project. Based
on such determination, potential adverse impacts
will be addressed through OP/BP 4.01,
Environmental Assessment and not OP/BP 4.37,
and measures will be included in the ESMF and
in EMPs.
Projects on International       Yes          While the exact location of subprojects is still
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                         being determined, it is likely that Component A
of the Project (Electricity Service Provision) will
include the construction and/or upgrade of mini
grids for remote rural areas with renewable
technologies. These renewable technologies will
include micro/mini/small-hydro run-of-river
electricity generation facilities (ranging from 100
kW to 4 MW), some of which may require a
small weir or pondage to provide water for the
penstock. Several of these subprojects that are
Page 9 of 14


﻿being considered for funding are located on
waterways in rural areas that merge with and/or
form part of the Parand/Paraguay River system
which originates in Brazil and flows into Bolivia
and Paraguay (the Paraguay River) and Paraguay
and Argentina (the Parand River). The Paraguay
discharges its water in the Parana and further
downstream it merges with the Uruguay River to
form the La Plata River, a river that flows from
Argentina to Uruguay. In the case of Chile,
Several of the sub-projects to be considered for
funding are located on waterways in rural areas of
Argentina that share rivers with Chile - for
example the Negro, Colorado, Chico and Deseado
rivers. These river systems comprise international
waterways as defined under the World Bank's
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International
Waterways - paragraph 1. Therefore, the policy
OP/BP 7.50 - Projects on International
Waterways is triggered. The Borrower has
requested that the Bank issue the Notification to
Riparian States on its behalf. This has been
undertaken. Brazil and Bolivia were the only
countries that responded, and did not raised any
major issues.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No          No subprojects will be located in disputed areas.
7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no large-scale, significant, or irreversible environmental impacts associated with this
Project. The Project will have a largely positive impact on the environment, by improving the
supply of energy in rural areas of Argentina's provinces, thereby reducing the use of fossil fuels
for domestic consumption, and the use of firewood (in the case of institutional buildings, i.e.,
schools and hospitals). It is also expected to result in positive social outcomes, enhancing welfare
for isolated populations in Argentina's provinces through the provision of electric and thermal
energy and safe water supply for families; the opportunity to undertake commercially productive
activities; and the secure and timely provision of social services (e.g., security of electricity supply
for refrigeration of vaccines).
Physical interventions resulting from the implementation of investments in rural areas may have
low to moderate negative impacts on the environment, depending on their locations. The most
significant impacts will result from the construction of low-voltage distribution lines and
construction of related infrastructure, and the construction of mini-hydro schemes. Appropriate
mitigation measures will be followed to limit the impact on local fauna, avi-fauna and to protect
Page 10 of 14


﻿indigenous plant and tree species, and preserve riverine ecosystems in the case of mini-hydro
schemes.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Long term indirect impacts are positive as the use of renewable energy and the expansion of
electricity access will reduce dependence on firewood, and will lead to a reduction in use of off-
grid diesel generation, and kerosene for cooking and lighting.
In an indirect way, by optimizing cooking, hygiene and heating devices, the Project will improve
the sustainable use of resources and empower women. The available of modern energy services
will help them free-up time that could be used to search for new job opportunities and education,
and thus improve their quality of life. The availability of electricity for the production of
handicrafts - and other productive activities - could also benefit women by potentially expanding
their incomes.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Without a program of rural connections to the grid or appropriate off-grid solutions, the
Government would not be able to advance its program to bring the benefits of electricity to lower
income, rural consumers.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The implementation arrangements under the Project will be the same as those for the recently
closed AR Renewable Energy Rural Markets. The implementation of the Project will be carried
out through existing management structures, at both the national and provincial level. The
implementing agency will be the Energy Secretariat (SE, as per its acronym in Spanish) through
its Project Coordination Unit (PCU). The PCU will be responsible for coordinating the various
activities of the Project with the other units in Provincial Government Agencies. The social and
environmental team (SET) of the PCU will be responsible for identifying and disseminating
guidelines for the implementation of actions to ensure compliance with Bank Operational Policies
related to safeguards, and to ensure compliance with Government of Argentina rules and
regulations. This will be based upon the application of the updated Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). The same team will be responsible for the application of the
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) as well the Resettlement Planning Framework
(RPF), the Good Practices Guide (GPG), and the Communication Strategy (CS). There is currently
one officer in the SE responsible for environmental and social safeguard compliance. It is
recommended that this capacity be enhanced and reinforced through the hiring of at least two
additional staff members, supplemented by training.
The Borrower's performance can be assessed analyzing the experiences from the implementation
of PERMER I. The ICR of PERMER I - Report No 1336, June 26, 2013) states that
"Environmental safeguard compliance was rated satisfactory throughout the whole implementation
of the PERMER I project. However, an assessment undertaken by the Bank in early 2011
concluded that some subprojects, particularly mini-grids, could have environmental and social
impacts broader than what was foreseen at the design stage. Consequently, the supervision of
ongoing subprojects was strengthened -including a more rigorous review of Environmental Impact
Assessments (EIAs) - and data was systematized. No significant negative environmental impacts
were detected (ICR, pp. 10- 11)."
Page 11 of 14


﻿At the provincial level, the institutional capacity is variable. The findings of the aforementioned
Argentina Safeguards GAP analysis will be used to identify those provinces that will need more
support from the central Project Coordination Unit. Most EIAs/EMPs are outsourced by the
O
Q)         provinces, so it will be important to undertake regular quality control assessments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
O
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Secretariat of Energy has conducted public consultations on the ESMF with local and
provincial government representatives; representatives of stakeholders in local communities; and
local NGOs. These consultations were held on February 14 and July 14, 2014. Minutes of
stakeholder meetings, including measures proposed to address grievances, have been included as
an Annex to the environmental safeguard instruments.
Regarding indigenous peoples, the counterpart has conducted consultations of an IPPF with the
CPI (Consejo de Participaci6n Indigena, Indigenous Participation Council), on August 14 and will
incorporate their advice in the final document to be disclosed in SE's website and the Bank
Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              29-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-Oct-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                24-Oct-2014
Comments: The EA can be downloaded from the following website: https://www.se.gob.ar/
o                      contenidos/archivos/permer/MaGAS PERMER II.pdf
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                14-Nov-2014
Comments: The framework can be downloaded from the following website: https://www.se.gob.
ar/contenidos/archivos/permer/MaGAS-Anexo%202%20(MPR).pdf
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Nov-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Argentina                                                14-Nov-2014
Comments: This framework can be downloaded from the following website: https://www.se.gob.
ar/contenidos/archivos/permer/MAGAS-Anexo%203(MPPI).pdf
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 12 of 14


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
Page 13 of 14


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader:    Name: Lucia Spinelli
Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (PMGR)       Date: 11-Dec-2014
Manager:
Page 14 of 14


