                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA8533
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Aug-2014
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Aug-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Guinea                             Project ID:    P146474
                            Project Name:     Stepping Up Skills Project (P146474)
                            Task Team         Nathalie Lahire
                            Leader:
                            Estimated         26-Jun-2014                        Estimated   30-Sep-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEDDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (50%), Vocational training (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Education for the knowledge
                                              economy (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:                20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                20.00
                              Total                                                                                    20.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of this project is to boost the employability and employment outcomes of Guinean
                           youth in targeted skills programs.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Guinean tertiary education and TVET systems are dominated by programs that do not meet the

                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         needs of the labor market. Inappropriate orientation of training is one of the causes of programs’ lack
                         of relevance to business requirements. The system lacks scientific technical and professional training
                         opportunities. Tertiary education graduates rarely develop entrepreneurial skills, as most of them
Public Disclosure Copy




                         aspire to enter the public service. Challenges include overstaffing, poor linkages between universities
                         and businesses, an overabundance of theoretical courses, dilapidated laboratories and lack of
                         practical activities. These factors result in a very high unemployment rate among young graduates,
                         despite many years of study.

                         Component 1: Set up of a Competitive Innovation Fund to support short term professional programs
                         linked to growth sectors (US$10 million)

                         The project will establish a competitive Innovation Fund contributing to reforms by incentivizing and
                         supporting innovative approaches to improve skills, employability, and self-employment. The fund
                         will create opportunities to design and test new training program models with a view to improving
                         quality and relevance. Public tertiary education institutions may submit proposals for short-term
                         professional programs developing key skills meeting labor market needs, with an emphasis on
                         practical training. The Fund will be established between the central Ministry and institutions through
                         performance agreements with defined measurable outcome indicators. Initially, the fund will be set
                         up for tertiary education institutions, and in year 3, TVET institutions will be invited to participate in
                         the Fund, using the lessons learnt for tertiary intuitions and ensuring adequacy with the proposed
                         tertiary programs linked to economic sectors.

                         Each institution will be encouraged to identify key areas in which to develop new professional
                         training programs. The relevant department will prepare a project proposal to be endorsed by the
                         institution’s decision-makers before being submitted to the Ministry for consideration. Selected
                         project proposals will be reviewed closely and adjusted jointly by the submitting institution and
                         Ministry experts if necessary, before the two parties sign a three-year contract. To be eligible for a
                         grant from the competitive fund, institutions must propose short-term (2-3 years) professional
                         programs with a strong focus on practical training and learning modules developed in close
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collaboration with the private sector. At least 40 percent of training hours must be delivered by
                         professionals, and the program must require and facilitate an internship for credit. Cooperation
                         between training and businesses will thus be ensured and responding to their immediate skills needs.

                         The Fund will follow best-practice principles critical for long-term success and sustainability. These
                         include (a) security of income: ensure sustainable and adequate volume of fund’s income (b)
                         autonomy and control: secure autonomy for fund’s management and its control over budget
                         allocations (c) stakeholder ownership: foster ownership through substantial representation of major
                         stakeholders of labor market (d) activities will be aligned to national training needs only, and (e)
                         decision-making transparency to ensure allocation is open, consistent, and competitive.

                         For sustainability and vibrancy, the Fund will use a public private partnership (PPP) approach that
                         leverages external and non-donor financing to create a well-diversified capital structure and augment
                         limited IDA/donor funds. The Fund aims to exploit three methods of non-donor external and internal
                         funding: (a) public resources: government's budgetary as well as non-budgetary means to augment
                         the fund (i.e public investment program ; (b) private resources, through grants or equity based
                         investments made by corporations, subsidiaries, or parent holding companies that have active or
                         potential business interests in Guinea. For instance, several mining corporations active in Guinea
                         have stated interest in contributing to education and skills growth (c) revenue generation is another
                         potential source of income for the fund. Revenue generation activities can include but not be limited

                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                         to splitting of earnings generated at the level of financial institutions (for e.g. through fees to recover
                         unit costs which could be an option down the road).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Fund’s governance will be through a Steering Committee, composed of 10 members, 5 of whom
                         will be professionals (areas to be determined) will be responsible for reviewing and selecting
                         proposals to finance. The IDA project, technical and financial partners, and private sector partners
                         will support the fund in Year 1. Beginning in Year 2, the Government will contribute 25 percent
                         from public budget or non-budgetary resources (such as levies), and gradually increase its share to
                         reach 100 percent in Year 4. The Fund will be set up as an autonomous not-for-profit entity under the
                         Ministry of Higher Education. A professional Fund Manager will manage the fund, reporting directly
                         to the Steering Committee. The Fund Manager will be have a core staff team (procurement experts,
                         financial analysts) supporting daily functions.

                         The Fund will also support self-employment/business start-up activities with IFC as the leading
                         implementation partner. The project is exploring the idea of conducting an access to finance
                         diagnostic for self-entrepreneurs, to determine need and feasibility to set up a small seed grant
                         facility for educational institutions who wish to encourage graduates to set up their own business.

                         The project would finance:
                         •       TA for the set-up of the competitive innovation fund and the accompanying procedures
                         manual.
                         •       Training for teachers and technical personnel.
                         •       Re-engineering, equipment, and light rehabilitation.


                         Component 2: Education-to-employment intervention (US$4.6 million)

                         The E2E program’s central approach is based on development of skills for job roles identified by
                         industry, based on standardized occupational standards that ensure minimum employability.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Objectives and corresponding indicators are:

                         Objectives of e2e         - Indicator
                         Building a critical mass of skills - Number of candidates trained
                         Make skills training relevant to industry - Training content linked to job roles and occupational
                         standards
                         Increase employability - Assessment shows increase in Employability Index
                         Feedback into education system reform - Curriculum incorporates e2e training modules
                         Reduce cost of talent recruitment and training - Firms indicate benefits from e2e labor matching
                         Increase in placements with industry - Number of jobs and internships

                         The education-to-employment intervention (E2E) would provide training and certification to
                         unemployed graduates to increase their employability and quickly connect them to jobs. The E2E
                         intervention, to be piloted in select high-potential sectors (mining, tourism, telecommunications),
                         would bridge the education-employment gap using industry-based standards for skills training. E2E
                         program will scan best practices observed in similar programs in other countries, including Egypt,
                         India, Nigeria, USA, and Australia, and incorporate elements suitable for Guinea’s context.
                         Moreover, the employers survey suggests that significant synergies exist between skills demanded in
                         mining, and in related sectors (construction, infrastructure). E2E will build on these synergies and

                                                                        Page 3 of 11
                         develop core and foundational skills that are fungible across industries and sectors.

                         Core elements of the E2E program would include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.      development of industry-led competency/occupational standards in two key sectors;
                         2.      an industry-based assessment, training, and certification instrument;
                         3.      partnership with leading private sector companies in a particular sector to create jointly
                         endorsed, industry wide certification frameworks
                         4.      a network of accredited training providers with a corps of certified trainers recruited from
                         industry; and
                         5.      an integrated job information management portal.

                         The intervention would involve:
                         a.       Requirement gathering from industry sectors building on Employers Survey, identification of
                         prevalent training programs/mechanisms in firms in Guinea, selection of industry champions for
                         anchoring E2E, and development of a ‘live’ database of companies willing to commit as future
                         potential employers,
                         b.       Selection of a competency framework for (a) foundational skills certification (cognitive,
                         computer, communications, entrepreneurship training (Business Edge) in partnership with IFC to
                         promote self - employment) and (b) identification of domains for advanced skills certification (e.g. in
                         mining, tourism, telecom, other trades),
                         c.       Development of industry-endorsed assessment and certification tool, linked to the
                         competency framework. Certification will follow a flexible vocational model. Certification will
                         signal a minimum expected level of skills gained. Certification will indicate completion of training
                         and attainment of minimum standards (pass/fail). Certification will have the following
                         characteristics: (a) it will be consistent nationwide, (b) it will be accepted and recognized by
                         industry, (c) the underlying standards will be subject to periodic review (alternate years) to reflect
                         changing demand structure for skills.
                         d.       Devel opment of m odular curriculum and content derived from private sector’s existing
                         training initiatives.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         e.       Set up of a robust Labor Market Information System. The LMIS (upgrade version of
                         l’AGUIPE) will contain a live, continuously updated database of trained candidates and potential
                         employers (SMEs, large firms). Each candidate will have an individual profile page. Candidates will
                         be matched with employers based on their skills profile. The LMIS will contain information on
                         certifications that the candidate has obtained.


                         This component will be governed by a committee and sectoral councils including private sector
                         partners, professional associations, sector-specific labor unions, and line ministries. The committee
                         will be supported by an executive secretariat comprising a coordinator and a communications
                         specialist. This program may be integrated as a separate window of the competitive fund in
                         component 1.

                         Only accredited training providers would be considered for funding. Criteria for accreditation would
                         include capacity to provide training delivered by professionals meeting occupational standards in an
                         environment facilitating practical training. Funding to institutions would be provided on a contract
                         agreement with payments made based on enrollment.

                         The project would thus finance technical assistance for
                         a.     the development of professional standards in the priority sectors covered, the development of

                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         training modules and assessment/certification tools. and
                         b.       the establishment of an information system/database to provide the AGUIPE (agency for the
                         promotion of employment) and employers have to give priority to these certified graduates, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                             1. employers who participated in the development of occupational standards,
                             2. certified graduates.

                         The project would also finance the costs associated with the training as per the contract agreements.
                         The E2E component is a targeted, fixed-term intervention specifically for unemployed graduates.
                         Once the target number of trainees is reached in the selected sectors and xx graduates find
                         employment, the training and certification model will be broadly incorporated into professional
                         training curriculum throughout the country.

                         Using a randomized control approach, an impact evaluation will be introduced to assess the
                         effectiveness of the training program improving employment. Following an expression of interest,
                         the sample of eligible eligibility criteria (i.e. years since graduated < 5 years, applied within the
                         timeframe trainees will be drawn randomly from a pool of applicants, possibly stratified by sector,
                         and assigned by cohort. Given the policy relevance of recruitment strategy and its interaction effect
                         with skills training, two types of recruitment approaches will be evaluated in conjunction with the
                         training program. Therefore, four groups will be defined:

                         1.       Control: trainees not receiving any treatment and assigned to cohort 3 or thereafter.
                         2.       Training only
                         3.       Training and recruitment approach through AGUIPE
                         4.       Training and recruitment approach 2 (tailored information system database with additional
                         efforts to match with certified employers)

                         To inform the evaluation, extensive data will be collected including pre and post-test to assess
                         knowledge gained through training, employment outcomes, salaries, and duration in employment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: System Strengthening and Support for Reforms (US$2 million)

                         Improving management and governance is a critical prerequisite to achieve the main goals of
                         developing high-quality and relevant programs, establishing closer links with enterprises, and
                         strengthening the efficiency of the sector. To this end, the project would aim to improve the
                         management of the tertiary education system in alignment with the current reforms for increased
                         autonomy of tertiary education institutions.

                         The TVET ministry (MEETFP) benefits from substantial financial support from development
                         partners but does not yet have a strategic plan laying out its vision and objectives. To this end, the
                         proposed project would provide technical support to develop a strategy in alignment with tertiary
                         vocational training.

                         The TVET student body has increased, though less than that of higher education, due to insufficient
                         training availability. The surplus of learners in higher education is partly attributable to the shortage
                         in this branch. The Government intends to develop and diversify supply by creating ERAM and other
                         institutions, but the hiring freeze during the past x years, aging teaching staff, and slowdown of
                         trainer-of-trainer schools has impeded its efforts. Without the necessary human resources, a training
                         development and diversification strategy has little promise. Although the new database developed
                         with IDA additional financing offers a starting point for a better analysis of available human

                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         resources, it is not enough. A training development and diversification strategy must be accompanied
                         by capacity-building in the following areas:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i)       What training programs, in which (high-growth) sectors, with what expected staffing level/
                         participation level?
                         ii)      What human resources are needed to develop these programs, and under what conditions?
                         iii)     What are recruitment and training needs in the short and medium terms? Can recruitment and
                         training be implemented by existing structures or do they require capacity-building?

                         The project could support the Government in refining its sub-sector policy through:
                         i)       technical support to perform a diagnostic to establish a realistic strategy and operationalize it
                         in a recruitment plan (number of teaching staff, proportion, discipline), and training plan that is
                         realistic in the short and medium term;
                         ii)      logistical and technical capacity-building in sector planning and management
                         iii)     technical support to develop a recruitment and training plan for ETFP teaching staff
                         following the decisions made above (i and ii)

                         The MESRS has made important strides in laying out its strategy with the support of the President
                         for the advanced of the agenda on providing autonomy to institutions in accordance with
                         international practices. Decrees 62 and 63/PRG/SGG, approved by the President on April 3, 2013,
                         stipulating the governance of public tertiary education and scientific research and private institutions,
                         have clearly endorsed the autonomous status of training institutions in the administrative, financial,
                         educational, and scientific realms, allowing institutions to define their own vision, goals, strategies,
                         and activities based on accountability mechanism to their leaders. These decrees involve a radical
                         change in practices and in the Ministry’s functional relationship with institutions. This implies a need
                         to rebalance the Ministry’s powers with the new responsibilities of institutions under their new
                         mandates.

                         The project would support:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Recruitment of a consultant to carry out the organizational diagnostic;
                         •        Technical support for the review of the major management functions in MHESR, as well as
                         standard profiles, based on the recommendations of the organizational diagnostic and training;
                         •        If necessary, logistical support for the new national evaluation and accreditation bureau for
                         tertiary education and research, and technical support in the development of its standards and
                         procedures.

                         The Decree states that the institutions are directed by a Board of Directors, an Establishment Board
                         and a Rector. The powers of the Board, a majority of whose members are from the business world
                         are considerable. The present framework could constitute an obstacle to the immediate
                         implementation of certain provisions of the decrees, namely recruitment and payroll management. A
                         transitional phase focusing on the delegation of these powers could accompany the first milestone of
                         autonomy. In this regard, a draft transitional procedures manual is being developed by an MESRS-
                         led team.

                         The project would support:
                         •       Investment in the preparatory phase for the preparation and analysis and alignment of texts
                         by an inter-ministerial commission (Finance, Budget, Public Service, Unions etc)
                         •       Technical and financial support for the development and implementation of a training plan
                         for senior and middle level staff from institutions whose mandates are particularly affected by the

                                                                       Page 6 of 11
                         new regulatory framework for the autonomy.

                         With regard to improving tertiary education management, the project would support:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Purchase of compatible software to enhance the transmission of data and information from
                         institutions to MESRS.
                         •        Capacity-building for education services to strengthen management of the License Master
                         Doctorat (LMD) system offering more choices for students, different academic paths, etc., and
                         student monitoring which could require creating a financial aid and scholarships agency.
                         •        Set up of a fiduciary team (FM and procurement) well-versed in Bank procedures to fulfill
                         the fiduciary responsibilities of the project.
                         •        Support for monitoring and evaluation to monitor the strategy and project.

                         Improving tertiary education faculty performance: Given current capacity and conditions of Guinean
                         graduate schools, will require partnerships with foreign universities, preferably in the sub-region,
                         would be a necessity. Under these agreements, the student would alternate between the Guinean and
                         partner institution, culminating in a joint degree. To encourage graduates to return to Guinea and
                         quickly enter the CAMES (Conseil africain et malgache pour l’enseignement supérieur) system, a
                         start-up fund would be provided to initiate research and develop a scientific product.

                         The project would finance:
                         •        Technical support for the definition of university partnership frameworks (technical
                         assistance and study tour);
                         •        Financial support for training and costs incurred by post graduate students during training
                         (travel, research costs, etc).;
                         •        A small start-up fund for graduates upon completion of training; and
                         •        Technical support to conduct an analysis for a medium-term strategy to improve motivation
                         of teachers and researchers.

                         Financing reforms, with a focus on scholarships: Following the survey of higher education students’
Public Disclosure Copy




                         living conditions supported by the World Bank, 92.3 percent of students would welcome financial
                         aid/scholarship reform (see summary of results in Annex 3). There is a general consensus on the need
                         to review the grant allocation system. The Government has worked on a number of proposals for
                         allocation reforms to be considered at the policy level. Technical support has been requested for the
                         establishment of the Agency of scholarships. This support could be envisaged in the project only if
                         the government has a clear timetable for reform.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location will be nationwide

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Upulee Iresha Dasanayake (AFCF1)

                          6. Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes           The project is proposed as an EA Category B. It
                          BP 4.01                                            will primarily finance technical assistance,
                                                                             capacity building activities, and re-engineering,
                                                                             equipment, and light rehabilitation of facilities


                                                                     Page 7 of 11
                                                                             made available by the Recipient. It is not
                                                                             expected to have any significant direct,
                                                                             irreversible negative environmental or social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             impacts. Given the limited number and low-risk
                                                                             topology of works to be supported, the
                                                                             Environmental Assessment safeguard policy (OP?
                                                                             BP 4.01) has been triggered and an
                                                                             Environmental and Social Management
                                                                             Framework (ESMF) has been prepared, reviewed,
                                                                             cleared and disclosed in-country and in the World
                                                                             Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal. The ESMF is
                                                                             designed to meet the World Bank Environmental
                                                                             Assessment requirements under OP/BP 4.01 for
                                                                             civil works contracts with small, localized
                                                                             impacts. The ESMF outlines the safeguard
                                                                             procedures to be followed when conducting the
                                                                             re-engineering, equipment, and light
                                                                             rehabilitation activities proposed under the
                                                                             project.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No             The project does not affect or involve natural
                                                                             habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36                No             The project does not affect or involve forests or
                                                                             forestry.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09           No             The project does not involve pest management.

                            Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No             The project does not affect or involve physical
                            BP 4.11                                          cultural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No             There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                             area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No             This policy is not triggered as the potential
                            4.12                                             rehabilitation supported by the project will take
                                                                             place in existing training institutions. There are
                                                                             no encroachers or squatters in or near the stations.
                                                                             Therefore, the project will not require the
                                                                             preparation of a resettlement framework.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No             n/a

                            Projects on International        No              n/a
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No              n/a
                            7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The impacts of the proposed project on Guinea are expected to be overwhelmingly positive as it
                           responds to the pressing issue of youth unemployment in the country by improving the skills and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the employability of youth. Project activities are not expected to have any significant direct
                           negative environmental or social impacts. The project will primarily finance technical assistance,
                           capacity building activities, and re-engineering, equipment, and light rehabilitation of facilities
                           made available by the Recipient. The minor potential impacts may include inter alia: increased
                           noise, dust, solid and liquid waste, increased vehicular and foot traffic, etc, due to building
                           rehabilitation. The project has trigged one safeguards policy: OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
                           Assessment. An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared,
                           reviewed, and cleared for public disclosure in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop. The
                           ESMF was disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop on May 06, 2014 and in-country on May 19,
                           2014. The ESMF provides guidelines to prepare ESMPs as necessary to mitigate potential
                           negative impacts associated with the minor works supported under the project. The general
                           environmental management clauses for civil works rehabilitation will be inserted into the bidding
                           documents and contracts. Detailed Environmental Assessments or Environmental Management
                           Plans, if necessary, would be carried out for all project activities that will trigger them and
                           disclosed in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop before specific rehabilitation civil works
                           start.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The potential environmental and social impacts are likely to be small-scale, site-specific and thus
                           easily mitigated. There are no indirect or long term adverse impacts expected during project
                           implementation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower capacity for safeguards monitoring and implementation is limited. Institutions in
                           charge of environment (Ministry of Energy and Environment) and social affairs (Ministry of
                           Social Affairs and of Women and Children Promotion) are few, often understaffed and with little
                           equipment. As of now, they cannot be considered as familiar with the Bank and Bank-funded
                           projects and procedures. To counteract this, a safeguards specialist is included in the Bank team to
                           provide guidance to the Executive Secretariat and the TTL as the project evolves.

                           As mentioned above, although the direct impacts expected to arise as a result of project activities
                           are likely to be extremely limited in scale and reversible, the borrower has nevertheless prepared
                           an ESMF for the project's re-engineering, equipment and rehabilitation activities under component
                           1. The ESMF outlines Bank screening procedures to identify, assess, evaluate, mitigate and
                           monitor the impact of the minor works associated with the project. These assessments will involve
                           consultations with key stakeholders and will inform the design of specific ESMPs as necessary.
                           Once the plans have been drafted according to the guidelines provided in the ESMF, public
                           consultations will be held and community systems to handle grievances will be established. All
                           key stakeholders will be sensitized and trained on the mitigation measures.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                           The project will target three groups of beneficiaries, broadly: (a) Private sector and SMEs
                           (individual firms and federations); Private sector employers, both SMEs and larger corporations
                           who can potentially employ a large number of Guinean youth; (b) Training institutions; and (c)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Individual unemployed youth – including current graduates, labor market candidates, as well as
                           youth ‘trapped’ out of labor market due to prolonged unemployment—i.e. exceeding 2 years—or
                           socio-economic/gender-related constraints. Other key stakeholders include the local communities
                           (urban and rural), tertiary education and TVET students, teachers, school administrators, and
                           ministries for higher education, TVET and employment.

                           The safeguards instrument governing the project, the ESMF, includes institutional arrangements,
                           and outlines the roles and responsibilities for the various stakeholder groups involved, for
                           screening, reviewing, as well as implementation and monitoring of mitigation measures.

                           The preparation of the ESMF involved public consultation with the government ministries and a
                           diverse group of stakeholders from the groups mentioned above. The ESMF, prepared through this
                           highly participatory process was disclosed in-country and through the Bank’s InfoShop prior
                           project appraisal. Any subsequent ESMPs will similarly be subject to a discussion and validation
                           with representative groups of these key stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      18-Apr-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-May-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Guinea                                                           19-May-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [     ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader: Name: Nathalie Lahire
                            Approved By
                            Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                    Date: 07-Aug-2014
                            Advisor:
                            Sector Manager:     Name: Peter Nicolas Materu (SM)                      Date: 25-Aug-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
