                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC4995

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2014
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Argentina                        Project ID:      P133288
                            Project Name:      Argentina Renewable Energy Project for Rural Areas (P133288)
                            Task Team          Lucia Spinelli
                            Leader:
                            Estimated          10-Feb-2014                      Estimated        10-Jul-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     LCSEG                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       275.11             Total Bank Financing:             200.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     75.11
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       200.00
                              Total                                                                       275.11
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective for the proposed project is to increase and improve access to sustainable
                           modern energy services in rural areas of Argentina, supporting the Government of Argentina’s
                           (GoA) goal of achieving universal Access.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project (USD $ 200 million IBRD plus co-financing for USD $ 38.75 million from the
                           GoA) provides key support to Argentina’s plans to achieve universal access to modern energy
                         services. The Project would build upon the activities conducted under PERMER I, the lessons
                         learned, best practices and experiences obtained from its implementation, as well as from activities in
                         other countries. However, this new operation would also represent an evolution from PERMER I, as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         its scope, targets and boundaries would be dramatically expanded. As in PERMER I, the proposed
                         operation would continue financing the acquisition of goods to expand the provision of electricity to
                         households and institutions (mainly for lighting, communication, and water pumping); as well as for
                         thermal applications (water heating, cooking and heating). In addition, the proposed Project would
                         also finance goods, their installation (as needed) and works to improve access in rural areas with
                         currently underserved populations, with access to inefficient and/or unreliable electricity services (as
                         little as a few hours a day depending on access to fuels). The proposed Project would considerably
                         increase the number of households to be served with modern energy services, substantially expand
                         the development of thermal and water pumping applications (combined, these represented less than
                         2% of funding in PERMER I) and provide electrification of health centers. The resources of the
                         proposed Project (PERMER II) would be available for all provinces.

                         The proposed operation would also incorporate the development of commercially productive
                         activities dependent on electricity provision. This new activity will required a close coordination
                         between SE and provincial productive authorities and a careful monitoring of subprojects to assess
                         the impact of electricity provision on the income generation capacity of targeted rural population.
                         Finally, capacity building activities to strengthen the design of subprojects and to support the
                         implementation of all components as well as for enhancing the country’s ability to increase
                         renewable energy use will be financed In order to improve PERMER’s monitoring capacity and to
                         better assess the use and the impact of the solar home systems, a remote monitoring mechanism that
                         allows measurement of electricity provision and consumption, will be connected in a sample of
                         systems. This innovation will allow PERMER to have a better understanding of panel and battery
                         performance and of users’ behavior.

                         The proposed lending instrument would be Investment Project Financing for US $200 million. The
                         operation could represent at least one third of the external financing Argentina needs if it is to meet
Public Disclosure Copy




                         its universal access to modern energy services commitment.

                         The Project would continue relying on the implementation arrangements developed under PERMER
                         I. This would mean that the Secretariat of Energy would continue functioning as the overall
                         coordinator of the Project, and will be responsible, in most cases, for the bidding processes. The
                         Provinces would be responsible for identifying the demand, designing the subprojects, supervising
                         the implementation in their own territories and assuring that an acceptable operation and
                         maintenance mechanism is in place. Under these “joint but differentiated responsibilities”
                         arrangements, the federal government – through the SE – would coordinate the participation of sub-
                         national entities through institutional agreements. In the case of the Provinces, activities would be
                         developed by local energy authorities and provincial regulators. Finally, the private sector would
                         participate as concessionaires of subprojects and as possible co-financier of hydro mini-grids.

                         The proposed operation also incorporates relevant lessons learned from the implementation of
                         PERMER I. The original design of PERMER I envisioned that procurement of goods would be done
                         in a decentralized manner, through each participating Province; and that electricity would be
                         provided only by private concessionaires, without taking into account other actors, such as public
                         electric utilities and cooperatives. The economic crisis that hit Argentina shortly after the Project was
                         approved, led to changes to PERMER I’s design and implementation, including: i) incorporating
                         public electric utilities and cooperatives as service providers and operators; ii) increasing public-
                         sector support; iii) adding new actors such as other national institutions and provincial agencies; and
                         iv) allowing more time for the Project to be implemented. In addition, and in order to expedite and
                         make more efficient the acquisition of goods and services, PERMER I was also restructured to allow
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for centralized procurement activities.

                         The proposed new operation will build upon these updated arrangements, and will incorporate the
                         lessons learned in the implementation completion report for PERMER I. These lessons include:

                         •        A large-scale renewable energy system project is a medium to long-term effort that requires
                         a design flexible enough to adapt to the changing conditions that may arise. The project’s experience
                         also casts doubts on the effectiveness of short-term instruments in addressing long-term rural
                         development challenges, which calls for longer implementation schedules.
                         •        Large-scale decentralized renewable energy operations face unique challenges associated
                         with the market dispersion, the large number of players involved, limited knowledge of the terrain,
                         and complex communications that require a delivery model tailored to these needs. Specific lessons
                         made evident by the project are: a) the importance of dissemination; b) the need to promote the use
                         of local resources; and c) that the sustainability of the operation is more a logistical challenge rather
                         than a technical task.

                         The project is proposed to be implemented over a six year period and comprise four components,
                         supporting the acquisition and installation of goods and services to: (A) increase and improve the
                         provision of electricity services; (B) augment the provision of solar thermal energy; (C) support the
                         design, implementation and execution of subprojects; and (D) Project management. The Project
                         would be implemented by SE, through the existing PERMER implementing unit.

                         Further information on the four components can be found below:

                         A – Electricity service provision. This component will finance the acquisition and installation of
                         stand-alone solar (PV) or wind systems and the construction and/or upgrade of mini grids with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         renewable technologies (for groups of consumers that may include public institutions and population
                         clusters, among others). This component would benefit nearly 560,000 people. IBRD funding would
                         amount to USD $189,950,000, while the GoA would provide around USD $36, 000,000. Planned
                         activities would support the provision of electricity services for residential and public users for
                         multiple purposes:

                         •        Electricity for lighting, entertainment and communication services (among others) for:
                         isolated individual households; dispersed public services institutions; and rural and isolated clusters
                         through mini-grids.
                         •        Electricity for potable water pumping in: individual households; dispersed public services
                         institutions; and rural and isolated clusters.
                         •        Electricity for productive uses for individual purposes or collective subprojects.

                         B – Solar thermal energy provision. This component will finance the acquisition and installation of
                         mostly solar water heaters as well as other solar thermal applications for which markets are still in an
                         early stage (this includes solar heating systems, cookers and solar ovens). The specific technologies
                         and items to be acquired and/or installed would be further refined during preparation, based on
                         existing markets and the needs of targeted beneficiaries. The component will help provide solar
                         thermal energy in public institutions only, based on some relevant experiences from PERMER I. It is
                         expected that this component could benefit almost 290,000 people. IBRD funding would reach USD
                         $4,930,000, while GoA’s co-financing would be near USD $1,250,000.

                         C – Activities to support the design, implementation and execution of subprojects and for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of renewable energy technologies. With funding of about USD $3,300,000 (IBRD), this
                         component would finance activities such as: market studies to determine potential energy demand
                         and technologies, monitoring and evaluation tasks, communication strategies and outreach activities,
                         studies to support Argentina’s renewable energy goals, dissemination of lessons learned, best
                         practices and relevant experiences, among others.

                         D – Project management. This component would finance the incremental costs of the Project,
                         strengthening existing structures, operation and maintenance of monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
                         systems – which would take into account the methodologies being developed by the Bank and the
                         International Energy Agency under the Sustainable Energy for All Global Tracking Framework –,
                         training and travel costs for PIU members, equipment, etc. IBRD funding would reach USD
                         $1,820,000 (IBRD), while GoA’s co-financing would be near USD $1,100,000.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is national in scope, therefore all Argentine Provinces constitute the target area for
                         investment subprojects. The natural environment of these provinces is very varied, as it includes
                         ecosystems ranging from forests to desert and from the Andes Mountains to the large rivers of the
                         Rio de la Plata valley. The project would focus on two types of rural zones: a) those with small
                         populations located in extremely isolated locales, for which stand-alone generation will be provided
                         and, b) small concentrated communities in isolated locales that are of sufficient size to warrant
                         provision of mini-grids. Specific subprojects are not likely to be identified before appraisal and
                         therefore the specific sites, environmental and social conditions, and impacts of each subproject are
                         not likely to be known. In light of this, an ESMF will be prepared, (updating the existing version of
                         ESMF prepared for PERMER I) that will include a screening process for sub-projects, and an
                         indicative list of potential sub-projects will be provided. In the event that any sub-projects are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         confirmed for inclusion in the project prior to appraisal, draft EIAs/EMPs and RAPs will be prepared
                         (prior to appraisal).
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The implementation arrangements under the Project will be the same as those for the recently closed
                         AR Renewable Energy Rural Markets (P006043, or PERMER I). The implementation of the Project
                         will be carried out through existing management structures, at both the national and provincial level.
                         The implementing agency will be the Energy Secretariat (SE, as per its acronym in Spanish) through
                         its Project Coordination Unit (PCU). The PCU will be responsible for coordinating the various
                         activities of the Project with the other units in Provincial Government Agencies. With regard to
                         safeguard related issues, the social and environmental team (SET) of the PCU will be responsible for
                         identifying and disseminating guidelines for the implementation of actions to ensure compliance with
                         Bank Operational Policies related to safeguards, and to ensure compliance with Government of
                         Argentina rules and regulations. This will be based upon the continued application of the updated
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The same team will be responsible for
                         the application of the Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) as well the Resettlement
                         Planning Framework (RPF), the Good Practices Guide (GPG), and the Communication Strategy
                         (CS). It is planned that capacity building process for the SE is to be followed, and it is recommended
                         that both an environmental and social specialist be hired, thus enhancing the capacity of the
                         Borrower. There is currently one officer in the SE responsible for environmental and social safeguard
                           compliance. She has attended training in Bank Operational Policies, also attended a workshop for OP
                           4.12 held in Chile, and is in the process of obtaining a Masters in Environmental Management.
                           Experience gained during the implementation of the recently closed project will be taken into
Public Disclosure Copy




                           account in the preparation of this operation.

                           At the provincial level, the institutional capacity is heterogeneous. The Argentina safeguards GAP
                           analysis focused on legal frameworks rather than capacities by sector. The project will design a
                           protocol to gather information on provincial capacity at the energy sector. That information will be
                           used as a screening mechanism to help identify those provinces that will need more support from the
                           central Project Coordination Unit. It is important to mention that, in general, most of the EIA studies
                           are outsourced by the provinces.

                           The Borrower’s performance can be further assessed analyzing the experiences from the
                           implementation of PERMER. Relevant lessons learned are presented below (based on ICR of
                           PERMER I – Report N° 1336, June 26, 2013)

                           “Environmental safeguard compliance was rated satisfactory throughout the whole implementation
                           of the PERMER I project. However, an assessment undertaken by the Bank in early 2011 concluded
                           that some sub-projects, particularly mini-grids, could have environmental and social impacts broader
                           than what was foreseen at the design stage. Consequently, the supervision of ongoing sub-projects
                           was strengthened –including a more rigorous review of Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs)—
                           and data was systematized. No significant negative environmental impacts were detected (ICR, pp.
                           10-11).

                           In regards to social safeguards, originally the PERMER I project did not trigger any of them.
                           However, Bank supervision missions concluded that the project was likely to have a broader impact
                           than originally expected and should have triggered additional safeguards (i.e. indigenous people,
                           involuntary resettlement). Consequently, the Additional Financing triggered OP 4.10 on Indigenous
                           Peoples, and the Bank proceeded to intensify its supervision and dialogue on these subjects with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           support of local specialists. Considering that in several provinces some beneficiaries belong to
                           indigenous peoples, a framework for the management of indigenous populations was developed in
                           order to guarantee an open consultation process tailored to the characteristics of their culture (ICR,
                           pp. 11).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Fernando J. Brunstein (LCSEN)
                           Noreen Beg (LCSEN)
                           Lilian Pedersen (LCSSO)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              The project will have a largely positive impact
                           BP 4.01                                               on the environment , by improving the supply of
                                                                                 energy in rural areas of Argentina’s provinces,
                                                                                 thereby reducing the use of fossil fuels for
                                                                                 domestic consumption, and the use of firewood
                                                                                 (in the case of institutional buildings, i.e.,
                         schools and hospitals).

                         The scope, targets and boundaries of PERMER
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II would be significantly expanded to include
                         provinces not covered by PERMER I. In
                         addition, some of the proposed interventions
                         may be new or different in nature from those
                         supported under PERMER I. The safeguard
                         documents prepared for PERMER I, specifically
                         the ESMF, will be updated to reflect this.

                         Components A (provision of Electric Energy)
                         and B (Thermal Energy Provision) of the
                         Project, will have no significant environmental
                         impacts. These impacts would result from the
                         installation of solar panels (requiring a plan for
                         disposal of batteries), the installation of small
                         wind turbines for individual use (300-600 wp),
                         the retrofitting of existing diesel generation
                         facilities to hybrid solar/diesel back-up systems,
                         the construction of mini hydro ( ranging from
                         100 kW to 4 MW) run-of-river generation
                         facilities, and the construction of low-impact
                         infrastructure (such as low voltage electricity
                         distribution lines).The installation of solar
                         cookstoves and heaters is also part of the
                         Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected potential negative environmental
                         impacts will be primarily during the
                         construction phase of civil work. Cumulative
                         environmental impacts are not expected to be
                         significant, as the project is nationwide but
                         relatively limited in scope. The impacts and
                         relevant mitigation measures will be described
                         in the Project’s updated Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF).
                         Appropriate mitigation measures will be
                         followed to limit the impact on local fauna, avi-
                         fauna and to protect indigenous plant and tree
                         species, and preserve riverine ecosystems in the
                         case of the mini-hydro schemes.

                         The project is expected to result in positive
                         social outcomes, through its support to improve
                         the quality of life for isolated populations in
                         Argentina’s provinces through the provision of
                         electric and thermal energy, safe water supply
                         for families, and the opportunity to undertake
                         commercially productive activities and enhance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the secure and timely provision of social
                         services (e.g., security of electricity supply for
                         refrigeration of vaccines).

                         The Project is classified as Category B, this is, a
                         Project with environmental impacts that are
                         easily identified and mitigated-requiring a
                         partial environmental assessment in accordance
                         with the World Bank's Environmental and
                         Social Safeguards Policies.

                         The Borrower will prepare an Environmental
                         and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                         an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
                         (IPPF), a Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (RPF), a Good Practices Guide (GPG), and a
                         Communication Strategy (CS).

                         As previously mentioned, the ESMF will be
                         updated using as a basis the ESMF prepared for
                         PERMER I. This updating process will
                         consider, among others, the following issues:

                         i)       Reflect the new environmental and
                         social baseline conditions;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ii)      Incorporate the full range of subprojects
                         proposed under PERMER II;
                         iii)     Ensure that it contains the latest legal
                         and institutional provisions (for example, new
                         PCUs and respective SETs in new provinces;
                         capacity building for the Energy Secretariat
                         (SE) and, if applicable, for new provinces new
                         entities responsible, at the provincial level, for
                         managing environmental and social issues
                         during operation and maintenance (e.g.
                         management of waste generated by the
                         maintenance and repair of equipment, including
                         battery disposal management);
                         iv)      Include a screening process for sub-
                         projects;
                         v)       Update the environmental management
                         tools and mitigation measures applicable to the
                         new sub-projects (including those specific
                         subprojects if location has already been
                                                             identified prior to appraisal as mentioned
                                                             earlier– e.g. mini grids and mitigation measures
                                                             to be applied during the design of the sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             projects, considering the lessons learned from
                                                             PERMER I and included in that project’s ICR);
                                                             vi)      Include the results of public
                                                             consultations on the updated draft ESMF(see
                                                             below);

                                                             In addition, the team will again evaluate the
                                                             adequacy of the previous ESMF through
                                                             verification and accountability of previous sub-
                                                             projects (from PERMER I), and will take into
                                                             consideration findings from the Gap Analysis
                                                             that was approved in 2013.

                                                             The Energy Secretariat as the Borrower will
                                                             carry out public consultations on the draft
                                                             ESMF with local and provincial government
                                                             representatives, representatives of stakeholders
                                                             in local communities, and local NGOs. The
                                                             ESMF will document the results of the
                                                             consultations and will take into account and
                                                             address stakeholder concerns. Sub-project
                                                             EMPs will be prepared for this project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered because many sub-
                                                             projects will be located in or close to natural
                                                             habitats and/or protected areas. For example, in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             the case of retrofitting existing diesel generation
                                                             facilities to hybrid solar/diesel back-up systems,
                                                             sub-projects may be located within National
                                                             Parks and Reserves, at government offices and
                                                             lodges located within the Parks or Reserves.
                                                             While the project will not support or lead to the
                                                             conversion of natural habitats, and the ESMF
                                                             will explicitly forbid any project activities
                                                             inducing significant conversion or degradation
                                                             of critical natural habitats, this policy is
                                                             triggered to ensure that minor construction
                                                             works have EMPs that will protect biodiversity
                                                             and water resources. The most significant
                                                             impacts will result from the construction of low-
                                                             voltage distribution lines and construction of
                                                             related infrastructure, and appropriate mitigation
                                                             measures will be followed to limit the impact on
                                                             local fauna, birdlife and to protect indigenous
                                                             plant and tree species, and preserve riverine
                                                         ecosystems in the case of mini-hydro schemes.

                                                         The team will work to ensure that the ESMF has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         appropriate screening criteria to ensure that
                                                         impacts on natural and critical natural habitats
                                                         are properly evaluated. Furthermore, the ESMF
                                                         will be clear in rejecting subprojects which
                                                         involve significant conversion of natural
                                                         habitats. In addition, it will ensure that any
                                                         investments undertaken in designated protected
                                                         areas are consistent with approved management
                                                         plans where feasible.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        TBD   While some mini-hydro schemes may be
                                                         located within forests, the ESMF will explicitly
                                                         forbid any project activities that would lead to
                                                         the significant degradation and conversion of
                                                         critical forest areas and forest ecosystems.
                                                         However, considering that the project may
                                                         traverse natural forests, and that some
                                                         construction will take place for the mini-hydro
                                                         schemes in rivers that may run through forest
                                                         areas, this safeguard policy may be triggered.

                                                         This policy will remain TBD until the full scope
                                                         of project activities are defined since it is
                                                         unlikely that project investments would affect
                                                         the management of forests, the use of forests for
                                                         livelihoods or would support investments such
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         as plantations or other industrial uses.

                                                         The ESMF will address the potential impact of
                                                         the project on forests and/or the rights and
                                                         welfare of local communities, and suggest
                                                         appropriate mitigation measures. Consequently,
                                                         the team will make sure the ESMF incorporates
                                                         screening mechanisms to ensure that no sub-
                                                         projects which affect the management of forests
                                                         or the welfare of forest dependent communities
                                                         be eligible and to ensure that any impacts on
                                                         forests be mitigated through measures defined
                                                         as part of the broader approach on natural
                                                         habitats.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   No    The project will not finance any activities that
                                                         would result in procurement or significant use
                                                         of pesticides. There will be no pesticide use in
                                                         construction of works. Any land clearing for
                                                         rehabilitation of existing buildings or for
                                                                 placement of distribution poles will be
                                                                 undertaken manually.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 Minor use of pesticides to control pests in
                                                                 construction areas or in workers’ lodgment sites
                                                                 will be addressed in the new ESMF.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   During the PERMER I project it was verified
                         BP 4.11                                 that many sub-projects were located at on sites
                                                                 of ancient indigenous settlements, and
                                                                 numerous utensils and tools of historical and
                                                                 archaeological importance were found during
                                                                 the progress of works. Considering that
                                                                 PERMER II will operate in the same areas, this
                                                                 policy is triggered. A chance finds procedure
                                                                 will be inserted into construction contracts and
                                                                 included in the ESMF, and the local and
                                                                 national Cultural Patrimony, Archeology
                                                                 Departments, and/or Museums authorities will
                                                                 be notified when chance finds are made.

                                                                 The ESMF will include specific screening
                                                                 provisions for evaluating potential impacts on
                                                                 cultural resources and will provide specific
                                                                 guidance on the chance finds procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   Based on the PERMER I experience and
                                                                 considering targeted areas are primarily rural
                                                                 areas, it is possible that members of one or more
                                                                 of Argentina’s indigenous peoples could be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 present within the project's geographical
                                                                 influence area. In order to guarantee the
                                                                 inclusion of such groups in project benefits, or
                                                                 otherwise to avoid that project activities
                                                                 affecting them in an adverse way, the project
                                                                 would trigger OP/BP 4.10. The Borrower is
                                                                 preparing an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                                 Framework (IPPF), based on the current IPPF
                                                                 for PERMER I, to strengthen and coordinate
                                                                 overall attention to indigenous peoples’
                                                                 participation.

                                                                 The IPPF will include an analysis of the lessons
                                                                 learned from the participation of Indigenous
                                                                 Peoples in PERMER I. At the moment,
                                                                 available information allows to conclude that
                                                                 more than 13,000 indigenous peoples benefited
                                                                 from individual SHS systems in: Salta (over
                                                                 5,000 members of the Diaguitas Calchaquíes,
                                                                Tupi, Guaraníes and Kollas groups), Tucumán /
                                                                over 1,700 Diaguitas Calchaquíes), Chaco
                                                                (roughly 2,000 Wichi and Tobas), Mendoza
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                (approximately 1,000 Mapuches and Huarpes),
                                                                Neuquén (1,200 Mapuches), and Jujuy (1,700
                                                                Quechuas, Kollas, Atacama, Ocloyas and
                                                                Omaguaca).

                                                                The PERMER I team conducted an
                                                                identification and consultation process of
                                                                indigenous populations in different provinces.
                                                                These included both inhabitants of indigenous
                                                                communities as well as those that identify
                                                                themselves as indigenous but are integrated into
                                                                non-indigenous communities. The
                                                                communication and organizational factors of the
                                                                different communities and different peoples was
                                                                a key factor to consider when designing
                                                                communication activities and determining
                                                                beneficiaries. Given the nature of the operation
                                                                (which provided individual solar systems), the
                                                                project was very well received since it is
                                                                considered by the community as an
                                                                improvement in the living conditions and
                                                                opportunities for development.

                                                                Finally, the specific sub-project Environmental
                                                                Management Plans to be developed under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                project would include pre-screening. In the case
                                                                that IP are present in a specific subproject's area
                                                                of influence, a site-specific Indigenous Peoples
                                                                Plan (IPP) would be developed based on the
                                                                IPPF guidelines. IPPF would be submitted to
                                                                Indigenous People organization consulting
                                                                process.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Subprojects financed by PERMER II (such as
                         4.12                                   mini-grids, hydropower, small dams or farming
                                                                activities) are likely to require land easement
                                                                and/or acquisition, including potential
                                                                investment that might entail resettlement as
                                                                defined by OP 4.12 (loss of assets, physical
                                                                displacement, or livelihood losses). The
                                                                Borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy
                                                                Framework (RPF), based on the PERMER I
                                                                experience, to ensure that analysis of
                                                                alternatives and appropriate compensation and
                                                                support to potentially affected persons are
                                                                                                                                 incorporated into the subproject design. Given
                                                                                                                                 that due to the nature of the sub-projects
                                                                                                                                 potential cases of voluntary land donations
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 might take place, the ESMF will include robust
                                                                                                                                 criteria to clearly document these.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                         No                            The mini-hydro electricity generation facilities
                                                                                                                                 that are under consideration (ranging from 100
                                                                                                                                 kW to 4 MW) will be run-of-river, and for those
                                                                                                                                 that require a small weir or pondage to provide
                                                                                                                                 water for the penstock, the dam height will not
                                                                                                                                 exceed 10 meters. For these small dams, the
                                                                                                                                 task team will agree on appropriate safety
                                                                                                                                 measures with the Borrower, will ensure the
                                                                                                                                 involvement of qualified engineers, and will
                                                                                                                                 confirm that the EMPs for each sub- project
                                                                                                                                 have determined that there would be no risk of
                                                                                                                                 significant adverse impacts due to potential
                                                                                                                                 failure of the structure on local communities and
                                                                                                                                 assets, including assets to be financed as part of
                                                                                                                                 the proposed project. Based on such
                                                                                                                                 determination, potential adverse impacts will be
                                                                                                                                 addressed through OP/BP 4.01, Environmental
                                                                                                                                 Assessment and not OP/BP 4.37, and measures
                                                                                                                                 will be included in the ESMF and in EMPs.
                                 Projects on International                                         TBD                           While the exact location of sub-projects is still
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                            being determined, it is likely that the project
                                                                                                                                 will include run of river hydro electricity
                                                                                                                                 generation facilities located on rivers that are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                 tributaries of rivers that flow into international
                                                                                                                                 waterways. In such instances, this policy will be
                                                                                                                                 triggered. The Project Team will confer with the
                                                                                                                                 Borrower as to whether they wish to provide
                                                                                                                                 Notification to Riparian States, or if it is the
                                                                                                                                 Borrower’s preference to exclude these sub-
                                                                                                                                 projects from PERMER II. This will be
                                                                                                                                 determined prior to appraisal.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                                                             No subprojects will be located in disputed areas.
                                 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Nov-2013
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      ESMF, IPPF and RPF would be ready by January 31st, 2014 (prior to appraisal).
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader:   Name: Lucia Spinelli

                         Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Regional Safeguards Name: Glenn S. Morgan (RSA)          Date: 24-Jan-2014
                         Coordinator:
                         Sector Manager:     Name: Malcolm Cosgrove-Davies (SM)   Date: 04-Feb-2014
Public Disclosure Copy
