                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC2634

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2013
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Nov-2013
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Ethiopia                         Project ID:      P131118
                            Project Name:       Road Sector Support Project (P131118)
                            Task Team           Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi
                            Leader:
                            Estimated           10-Dec-2013                      Estimated        27-Feb-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      AFTTR                            Lending          Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (75%), General transportation
                                                sector (25%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural services and infrastructure (75%), Trade facilitation and market access
                                                (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    383.00                      Total Bank Financing:        315.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                             68.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                   315.00
                              Total                                                                         383.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) of the Roads Sector Support Project is to
                           enhance inter connectivity of selected regional states and improve access to areas with high potential
                           for agriculture based export production.

                           The proposed project contributes to the overarching goal of transformation of Ethiopia's Economy by
                         improving the quality of roads serving areas producing exportable agricultural products. The project
                         will also help in facilitating domestic trade as well as connecting food deficit and surplus areas.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project aims at addressing critical sectoral issues by building on the following strategic
                         directions: (a) Supporting the objective of enhancing domestic trade, facilitating exports of
                         agricultural products, and strengthening social and economic cohesion among selected regional states
                         through upgrading critical link roads; (b) Ensuring sustainability of the road network and instilling
                         efficiency in road investment by enhancing the use of innovative approaches, including asset
                         management systems and OPRC arrangements; and (c) Supporting the national Road Safety
                         campaign through provision of Technical Assistance and equipment, as well as addressing critical
                         institutional issues affecting the performance of the road sectors, including contract management
                         capacity, work site safety and environment.

                         Based on consultations with the Client conducted during the identification mission the proposed
                         project will encapsulate the following components:

                         Component 1: Upgrading of Critical Link Road (US$297 million), including : The upgrading of the
                         Nekempte – Bure road (258 km) to paved road standard , which links the Oromia and Amhara region
                         and help enhancing agricultural production as well as export and domestic trade, through OPRC
                         arrangement (Design, Construction and Maintenance) with Double Bituminous Surface Treatment
                         (DBST).

                         Component 2: Support to Enhancing Road Asset Management Practice (US$65 million) This will
                         cater for the maintenance of a total of 604 km road and strengthening road asset management
                         capacity, including:

                         Sub-component 2 (a): Overlay, resealing and maintenance of 416 km of paved road (Awash – Jijiga-
                         Togochale and Dredawa-Dengego road) by introducing road asset management contract - through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Output and Performance Based Maintenance Contracting (OPMC).

                         Sub-component 2 (b): Re- gravelling and maintenance of 188 km of unpaved roads (Dire Dawa-
                         Hurso-Erer; Adele-Girawa and Harar-Jarso- Bombas) through Output and Performance Based
                         maintenance Contract (OPMC). The duration of the OPMC will be five years and include
                         interventions improving Road Safety and preserving road side environment. The project will also
                         finance monitoring and supervision of the road asset management contracts.

                         Sub-component 2 (c): Strengthening road asset management capacity by focusing on Road Asset
                         Management Systems implementation and training on cost effective maintenance.

                         Component 3: Support to Road Safety and Institutional Development (US$24 million). This
                         component caters for:

                         Sub-component 3 (a): Support to the National Road Safety Council’s campaign through
                         programmatic Road Safety capacity building, including: (a) training safety professionals and
                         provision of Technical Assistance (TA); (b) sensitization of policy makers and the population; (c)
                         establishing computerized national road safety database (road crash investigation and data
                         management system) under the Federal Traffic Police; (d) provision of equipment for traffic safety
                         regulation enforcement; and (e) developing a national road safety audit manual.
                         Sub-component 3 (b): Establishing the institutional base for OPRC, through upgrading the Design
                         and Build Directorate of ERA to OPRC Directorate, and enhancing the awareness of domestic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contractors, as well as the banking and insurance industry on OPRC risk management. This includes:
                         (i) provision of TA to build the capacity for OPRC design and management; (ii) preparation of
                         OPRC design and administration manual; (iii) training domestic contractors; and (iv) sensitization of
                         bankers and insurers, and training on risk management.

                         Sub-component 3 (c): Capacity building support to the contract department, and construction sites
                         environmental and safety management Institutional Development: This sub-component will support
                         institutional development and capacity building initiatives to enhance the performance of ERA. It
                         will focus on contract management (conventional contracts), enhancing construction site safety
                         monitoring (developing practical guidelines for construction site safety improvement and capacity
                         building for monitoring enforcement of construction site safety requirements), environmental
                         management, and transparency, and will build on initiatives started under the ongoing road projects.
                         This sub-component will also cater for undertaking gender and transport study to help better
                         mainstream gender in road projects through preparation of a gender action plan.

                         Sub-component 3 (d): Support to preparation of Follow-on Operations and development of
                         expressways, through financing studies, design and bidding document preparation for potential roads
                         for upgrading and rehabilitation, as well as road asset management contracts. For sustainability
                         purpose the Road Fund has to be engaged from the outset to strategize how road Fund resources
                         could co-finance OPRC arrangements.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The specific roads to be rehabilitated are:

                         Nekemte-Bure, 258 km
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nekemte-Bure road is a link road connecting two regional sates. Nekempte town is located in
                         Oromia National Regional State (ONRS), on the Addis Ababa-Nekemte-Asosa Trunk Road, part of
                         which (the Gedo-Nekempte section) is currently under upgrading, while Bure is located in Amhara
                         National Regional State (ANRS) on the Debre Markos-Bahir Dar Trunk Road. The project road
                         starts at Nekempte town, 335 km west of Addis and terminates at Bure town after approximately 258
                         kms heading north/north-east direction and crossing the Blue Nile River after approximately 190 kms
                         from Nekemte. The end of the project is at the outskirt of Bure town, at the junction with Addis -
                         Debre Marcos-Bahir Dar trunk road. The Project Road is classified as Link road with gavel surface
                         and carriageway width of 4 to 7 meters. The current condition of the road can be categorized as fair
                         to good with predominantly good riding quality and drainage facilities functioned well. The Abay
                         bridge, which is located around 190 km from Nekempte, is in good condition and may not require
                         any further improvement.

                         The road passes predominately through a rolling terrain with a quarter of the road passes in
                         mountainous and flat sections. There are about 19 seasonal streams and rivers that crosses the road
                         along the road ultimately joining the Abay River.

                         There is one-realignment along the project road at Gida Ayana, about 103 km from Nekemte which
                         involves a stretch of about 6 kms linking Gendo town at km 103 to the Gida-Ayana town. In addition
                         the road passes through 8 small settlements and three towns (Anger Gutan, Gendo and Gida Ayana)
                         between Nekemte and Bure town. Properties within the 30m Right of Way (ROW) zone will be
                         acquired and population re-settled, particularly in the town section and settlement areas. In addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project impact will be in locations where land is required for ancillary works, (ie quarry sites,
                         haul roads, borrow pits, camps and detour roads). The social survey indicates that upgrading of the
                         road will affect a total of 1655 household. In addition, the size of farmland that will be affected by
                         the project is estimated to be 9.8 hectares.

                         The project, when completed, is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts in the
                         long term, as it will facilitate economic and social development thereby promoting improvement in
                         livelihood of the population in the project influence area; it will also improve drainage and seasonal
                         river crossings, thus reducing runoff from the road. Although project is intended for design and build
                         road project, as the road mainly follows the existing route and the alignment is largely defined, a
                         separate Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), Social Assessment (SA) studies and Resettlement
                         Policy Framework (RPF) were done and shared with the Bank, cleared, and disclosed in country and
                         in the Bank InfoShop in October 29, 2013. At both stages of the ESIA, RPF and SIA development,
                         public consultations took place in in the project area and are documented in the reports.

                         The road project involves widening and raising the level of the road, within the existing right-of-way.
                         No significant adverse environmental and social impacts were identified during in the ESIA that
                         would hinder the proposed upgrading of the road to bitumen standard.

                         Asset management of 534 km of road network

                         The asset management will involve mainly maintenance and overlay works to be conducted on the
                         existing road formation and no safeguard issues will be encountered, except the routine management
                         of borrow pits, quarry sites, spoil areas and waste disposal sites. The ESSAF will provide guidance
                         for the preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMPs).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         ERA in the regions will be responsible to supervise the implementation of the RAP, EMP and
                         applications of ESIA and RPF. ERA will develop contract documentation (bidding document’s) that
                         will include preparation of Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) that are responsive
                         to the findings of the ESIA’s and RAPs, and will ensure that all prohibitions and mitigation measures
                         that are identified in the ESIAs are complied with.

                         The Environment and Social Management Team (ESMT) is responsible for setting and implementing
                         ERA’s environmental guidelines in support of and in line with the national level requirements,
                         playing the role of advisory, coordination and supervision aspects that are pertinent to the road
                         environmental impacts and implication assessment, and co-ordination with the respective ERA
                         district offices. The ESMT is currently staffed with six professionals: one Environmentalist (Team
                         Leader), one Senior Ecologist, two Sociologists, one Hydrologist and one Geologist. There are also
                         two professionals assigned exclusively for HIV/AIDS prevention and control at ERA workplaces.
                         ESMT has been playing a good role in enforcing the implementation of mitigation measures.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (AFTCS)
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (AFTN3)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/      Yes          This policy is triggered due to the potential
                           BP 4.01                                        environmental and social impacts of the planned
                                                                          construction of Nekemte–Bure road. An
                                                                          Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                                                          and RPF will be prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                                          disclosed for the road section. Environmental
                                                                          Management Plans in this and subsequent
                                                                          ESIAs will be instrumental to avoid and/or
                                                                          mitigate negative environmental and social
                                                                          impacts.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No           Although there are no registered or known
                                                                          natural habitats in the project area, no adverse
                                                                          impact is anticipated due to the project
                                                                          intervention. Any potential impacts of the
                                                                          proposed operation on natural habitats are
                                                                          addressed in the environmental instrument
                                                                          (ESIA), which describes mitigation measures to
                                                                          be included in the contractor bid document and
                                                                          to be implemented during construction and
                                                                          operation phase.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No           Although there are no registered or known
                                                                          forests in the project area, no adverse impact is
                                                                          anticipated on the flora and fauna due to the
                                                                          project intervention. Any potential impacts of
                                                                          the proposed operation on flora and fauna are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          addressed in the environmental instrument
                                                                          (ESIA), which describes mitigation measures to
                                                                          be included in the contractor bid document and
                                                                          to be implemented during construction and
                                                                          operation phase.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No           The Nekemte-Bure road project does not
                                                                          involve activities that require pesticide use.
                                                                          Neither direct purchase of pesticides nor
                                                                          financing activities that use pesticides will be
                                                                          supported by the project. Therefore this policy
                                                                          is not triggered.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes          Some road works and ancillary activities may be
                           BP 4.11                                        located in the area of influence of some sites.
                                                                          The project ESIAs includes procedure for
                                                                          identification and management of chance finds.
                                                                          If existence of physical/cultural resources is
                                                                          confirmed, the ESIA will be updated with the
                                                                          Physical/Cultural management plan. In any
                                                                case, “Chance Find? procedures will be
                                                                included in the contract documents.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10    No    The communities living along the proposed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                asphalt road were screened for sociocultural and
                                                                bio-physical characteristics and were found not
                                                                to meet the four criteria of OP4.10 of (a) self-
                                                                identification as members of a distinct
                                                                indigenous cultural group and recognition of
                                                                this identity by others; (b) collective attachment
                                                                to geographically distinct habitats or ancestral
                                                                territories in the project area and to the natural
                                                                resources in these habitats and territories; (c)
                                                                customary cultural, economic, social, or
                                                                political institutions that are separate from those
                                                                of the dominant society and culture; and (d) an
                                                                indigenous language, often different from the
                                                                official language of the country or region. Since
                                                                the application of OP 4.10 in Ethiopia is project
                                                                based, the policy will not be triggered. A Social
                                                                Impact Assessment will be prepared, consulted
                                                                upon, and disclosed before appraisal.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP   Yes   Since the project interventions will involve
                         4.12                                   acquisition of land and economic displacement;
                                                                and the exact location is not certain, but it is
                                                                estimated that about 1,600 persons may be
                                                                impacted; more than 250 houses are expected to
                                                                be demolished; and the size of farmland that
                                                                will be affected due to the widening of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                ROW is about 9.8 hectares. Therefore, a
                                                                Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                prepared and disclosed to ensure that
                                                                appropriate measures are in place to address any
                                                                issues which might arise from potential land
                                                                acquisition, economic displacement and or
                                                                restriction of access to communal natural
                                                                resources under the Project. A detailed
                                                                Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                                                                prepared, cleared and disclosed before the
                                                                commencement of civil works.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No    The project will not finance construction or
                                                                rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                policy.
                         Projects on International        No    Project does not affect any international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waterways, thus the policy is not triggered.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    The project is not taking place in a disputed area
                         7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 09-Sep-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESIA, RPF, as well as the SIA have been disclosed in country and the InfoShop on October
                                      29, 2013.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader:                            Name: Tesfamichael Nahusenay Mi

                                 Approved By:
                                 Regional Safeguards Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (RSA)                                                                                          Date: 18-Nov-2013
                                 Coordinator:
                                 Sector Manager:     Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (SM)                                                                                            Date: 18-Nov-2013
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
